---
title: 'National Assembly - 15 September 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-09-15
---

WEDNESDAY, 15 SEPTEMBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

The SPEAKER: The moment of silence for prayer or meditation does not
include the little ones. Welcome to the gallery! [Laughter.]

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

 A REVIEW OF PROGRESS MADE IN MEETING INTERNATIONAL COMMITMENTS IN THE AREA
  OF DEMOCRACY AND HUMAN RIGHTS, WITH A FOCUS ON AREAS FOR FUTURE EFFORTS.

               (Debate on International Day of Democracy 2010)


Mr S J NJIKELANA: Speaker, the august House, and the gallery at large,
today we are celebrating International Democracy Day, and I would like to
share with you my views and experiences around how Africa has made efforts
in advancing democracy.

We definitely have to take pride in celebrating this eventful day in view
of our history in ridding ourselves of colonialism and facing neoliberalism
these days as well as all schools of thought and practices that tend to
impinge on or even undermine democracy.

Africa’s efforts in advancing democracy and human rights can be articulated
very aptly through initially the Organisation of African Unity, OAU,
historically, and the African Union, AU, currently. But, obviously, I would
also like to include the role and initiatives taken up by the Pan-African
Parliament in the efforts of advancing democracy and human rights in our
continent.

One of the outstanding efforts that have been taken up by the African Union
is the African Peer Review Mechanism. This mechanism focuses on the African
countries supervising themselves — if I can use simple language — or to
ensure peer review for advancing democracy and ensuring that human rights
are respected. That is obviously also seen in the initiative of the African
Renaissance, as well as Nepad, not to mention the various charters that
have been adopted by the African Union.

I would like to make specific reference to the African Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Governance, which unfortunately our country has
not yet ratified. This charter, amongst other fundamental issues that it
raises, ensures that all African countries respect and abide by democratic
values.
It also, in the way it has been crafted, ensures that African countries
dare not change governance through military means. It emphasises that if
there are any changes that are supposed to take place in any government, it
should be through appropriate democratic means - and that is free and fair
elections.

Let me go further and state the fact that we also need to acknowledge that
civil society in Africa has done a fair job because it has been able, where
possible, to work with governments to advance democratic value and human
rights.

However, it is also fair to indicate that, unfortunately in some of our
African countries, relations between civil society, especially active civil
society organisations, and those respective governments are not necessarily
of the best.

I trust and hope that as parliamentarians, as we interact through
structures such as the Pan-African Parliament, we will obviously ensure
that there is respect, recognition and even encouragement of the
participation of civil society in our efforts to advance democracy and
respect for human rights.

The role of Africa in the global efforts of fighting for democracy and
respect for human rights can be seen in Africa’s participation in various
international bodies. One can mention a few: the United Nations, the Non-
Aligned Movement, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and so forth. It is fair to
say that in all these various international bodies Africa’s participation
has been informed and guided by its charters, and that is an effort worth
encouraging.

Let me come to the role of the ANC-led government, particularly in
advancing democracy and human rights in Africa. It is fair to say that once
again, if you look at the charter that I have referred to, namely the
African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance, you would find that
quite a number of the issues that are raised in that charter resonate with
our Bill of Rights and our Constitution. That then definitely illustrates
that South Africa has been able to influence such charters. In fact, to be
quite fair, South Africa was central in crafting that charter.

Beyond such noble efforts in advancing democracy and human rights, I think
it is also appropriate that we share as to what then the future holds for
us. How do we focus on areas that still need improvement?

The first area that I would like to present to this august House is that
there is a need for us as public representatives to strengthen links
between Parliament and our citizens. It is very fundamental because we have
a historical and constitutional duty to do so.

Furthermore, linked to that is the transformation of the Pan-African
Parliament, which is still a consultative body, into a full legislative
body. I also trust that, once again, this august House will support the
delegates from this House in their efforts to ensure that when the Pan-
African Parliament becomes a fully legislative body, it will be able to
capably ensure that democracy is deepened in Africa and that human rights
are respected and upheld.

Lastly, quite a number of members in the past have been raising the issue
of having a Nepad desk here in Parliament, and I would like to reinforce
that by proposing that it is high time that our Parliament explores the
formation of an AU desk here in Parliament and, amongst other things,
ensures that democracy is deepened in Africa and human rights are upheld. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S MOKGALAPA: Thank you, hon Speaker. Today marks the 16th anniversary of
celebrating the International Day of Democracy since the Inter-
Parliamentary Union adopted the universal declaration on democracy that
affirms the principles of democracy and exercises in democratic government
and the global scope of democracy. The UN proclaimed this day in November
2007. This day is to serve as a reminder that the need to promote and
protect democracy is as urgent now as ever.

In this regard, Parliament is the central institution in democracy. This is
also relevant for South Africa as we celebrate 16 years of our democracy
with significant milestones for our Constitution that safeguards and
guarantees the Bill of Rights and ensures that regular free and fair
elections are held.

However, since the advent of our democracy and our participation in world
politics, our international relations have left much to be desired. Our
track record in the UN General Assembly has been controversial and
disappointing. Our voting patterns on topical issues, for example, Myanmar
and Burma, and our stance on the Dalai Lama has shocked the world.

Our participation in the United Nations Security Council has also been
marked by controversy and failure to influence change. Our blockades of the
issue of Zimbabwe are some of our legacies in this august world body. Our
continued relationship with rogue states in Africa like Guinea Bissau and
the DRC, where according to a UN report human rights abuses are still
happening, is a source of shame.

South Africa cannot be an island of democracy in a sea of undemocratic
states. If we enjoy our democracy, then why are we not sharing the fruits
with our neighbours, Zimbabwe and Swaziland, where political persecution is
still permitted and we are watching blindly, doing nothing?

On a parliamentary question to the Minister concerning Swaziland, the
response was that the South African government has made no representations
to the Swaziland government concerning the political situation and has no
intention of doing so. This continues to be the same with our failed, quiet
diplomacy in the case of Zimbabwe that yielded no result for 10 years to
bring about democracy in Zimbabwe. Our democracy is not sustainable if our
neighbours are not free.

Mr Speaker, we need to go back to our constitutional imperatives and our
foreign policy principles that focus on the promotion of human rights and
democracy. The question here is: Why, up to now, have we not ratified these
important treaties? I refer to the charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance adopted in Addis Ababa in 2007, the International Convention on
the Protection of all Migrant Workers and the Convention against Torture?

We are defaulting on our noble principles and international commitments to
promote human rights, democracy and international law when we support the
AU stance not to honour the ICC warrant issued against Mr Al Bashir.

The challenges of democracy in Africa still continue today as we mark this
day. There is lack of respect for human rights; intolerance;
unconstitutional changes of governments; and a lack of adherence to the
rule of law. We need to ensure that we encourage and instil respect for
international law in Africa and ensure that civil society exercises,
protects, claims and creates its rights.

On the domestic front, we need to ensure that our international commitments
make a tangible difference to the lives of the poor by attempting to reach
the Millennium Development Goals of halving poverty by 2015, as we have
become the most unequal society in the world. We need to encourage vibrant
civil society to participate in our democratic process and provide quality
education for our young people.

In conclusion, looking forward to the future we need to strengthen our
democratic institutions domestically and speak out against neighbours who
are violators of these rights. We need to affirm our position as champions
of democracy and human rights.

South Africa has a moral obligation in consolidating the African agenda,
not only through brotherhood and sisterhood, but through making sure that
human rights and democracy are promoted and protected and through respect
for international law in the region and on the continent.

We must work hard on changing our tainted image in the international arena
and continue to honour our international commitments by staying true to our
constitutional values and ensuring that we report timeously on progress
made with this commitment. We must also make sure that our democracy is
sustainable through civil society participation. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Hon Speaker, this is an important debate. I think all of
us today are happy that we are celebrating International Democracy Day.
However, as we celebrate today and as the people of South Africa, we can
also say that we celebrate because, indeed, the South African government
has done a lot in the field of democracy in the country.

When we look at the work that has already been done on the continent, we
can rightfully say that we are celebrating because much has been done in
the field of democracy. As we celebrate we must make those points clear.
However, the celebration must not only be a feel-good celebration for all
of us.

As we celebrate we must also say that we have a task as South African
people on the continent. We have already started on that task in terms the
African Peer Review Mechanism that was put in place. It is also being
realised in terms of the work that has been done to ensure that the African
Peer Review Mechanism is actually being realised and implemented. Whether
it is in the area of Nepad or any other, we must always drive that process
and make sure that we achieve those results.

As we celebrate, we must be debating and looking at the bigger question
that we must confront in terms of the continent. Where there are human
rights issues in some areas which are not necessarily practised, it is our
responsibility to ensure that we continue to lead and make sure that human
rights are being realised.

On this continent, whether it is an issue of Sudan, Darfur or Swaziland, we
must make sure that as a country with people that take pride in the
Constitution, we remain in the forefront to achieve whatever we set out to
achieve.

The big issues that we must confront on this continent when it comes to the
people are the issues of hunger, health, youth and child abuse,
particularly as they are made slaves and soldiers in the conflict areas.
This remains our responsibility, and we cannot fail, as South Africa and as
the people of South Africa, to make sure that we lead on this front.

In conclusion, the issue about the continent and poverty remains a bigger
issue, and as we celebrate, we must ask ourselves how we are going to
confront it. The issue of the Gini coefficient continues to put us on the
map of unaffordability.

This, therefore, remains a challenge and as we celebrate, we must pause and
say that we are determined to continue to make sure that we drive this
programme. After all, the state is a state in the protection of the people.
Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Speaker, we recall the tradition of
the majority’s prerogative to choose its leaders, to choose its government
and the extent to which it can exercise state power, bequeathed to world
politics through Greece - Athens, to be precise.

Parliament, which is now known as a speaking place, was handed down to us
through the ages as the embodiment and expression of the general will, a
pursuit of the virtues of social political and economic justice for all
citizens.

In his address to the meeting of the institutions supporting democracy,
referred to as Chapter 9 institutions, the Speaker of the National
Assembly, the hon Sisulu, among other things, called for Parliament to
strengthen these institutions. In my view, strong, dedicated, experienced
and assertive parliamentarians will achieve this and much more.

We are here, morally and otherwise contracted by the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa, to deliver a better life for all our people and
beyond. However, a weak, unassertive Member of Parliament makes a weak
institution of Parliament, which then becomes the soft underbelly of our
democracy and a threat to our sovereignty.

The crisis of the constitution in 17th century England saw a frantic
political battle by the English parliament to strike a balance between the
prerogatives of the king and the fundamental rights of the subjects. The
Englishmen believed this would bring harmony and political stability to the
polity, for the good of all governed. Subsequently the English parliament
moved swiftly to democratise the body politic. Unfortunately, I must say
these noble efforts were not adequate to avoid the 1688 English Revolution.

For 16 years the Republic fared relatively well and even President Zuma
recently expressed optimism in the progress made by South Africa on some of
the Millennium Development Goals. It is also a word of encouragement and
support to leaders of other African countries.

Internationally, South Africa is navigating the tempestuous seas of
globalising economies and geopolitical power, where the world democracies
like the United States, European Union, India, etc, and the world
autocracies such as Russia, China, etc, including the theocracy in Iran,
are battling for greater regional influence and international power.

A lot remains to be done on the part of South Africa to bring political
stability and an internationally acceptable climate of democracy and human
rights to Zimbabwe, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Swaziland and Darfur,
and also to the Middle East.

In conclusion, I believe this Parliament, as the voice of the people and
the custodian of our democracy, should take heed that of late the poor have
started to become restless. They are seriously questioning the relevance of
our Constitution and the meaning of democracy in the midst of their poverty
and suffering. Some have come to believe, like Aristotle, that our
widespread state of poverty and underdevelopment is now being perpetuated
by a defective democracy. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Speaker, today is a day to celebrate democracy. It is a
day to recognise how democracy has enhanced the lives of citizens around
the world who are fortunate enough to live in democratic countries. It is
also a time to show solidarity with those people in the world who are still
fighting, sometimes in tremendous adversity, to instil democracy in their
own countries.

In South Africa we can take pride in the birth of our own democracy 16
years ago and the freedom from the racial oppression that it brought about.
As we do that, we need to ask ourselves some serious questions about the
current state of our democracy and the challenges that it currently faces.

Although the structure of our democracy is in place, it risks being
hollowed out through the gradual closing down of spaces in which true
democratic debate can take place.

The Protection of Information Bill and the proposed media tribunal are just
two examples in which transparency and free expression are being threatened
by the ANC. Parliament, as the ultimate expression of our democracy, also
needs to be reformed in line with the recommendations put forward by the
Independent Review Panel.

In addition, the influence of money continues to eat away at our democratic
structures as conflicts of interests regarding Ministers, and even the
ruling party itself, make a mockery of good governance principles.

If we were serious about strengthening our democracy, then we would use
this day to commit to finally putting in place the long overdue legislation
to regulate the private funding of political parties. It is what our
democracy and the voters deserve. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs B N DLULANE: Speaker, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers present, and
hon members, our fourth democratic Parliament was installed on the basis of
both its constitutional obligations and the ANC Election Manifesto which
promised that, “working together we can do more”. Informed by the 52nd
National Conference of the ANC, our internationalist perspective is
informed by human solidarity, enhancing democracy, equity and social and
economic justice.

This informs our practice here in Parliament, in terms of our international
activities, and it locates the operations of the ANC squarely in the
national effort to ensure that all of us, bound together by common
patriotism, will rise together with a singular sense of purpose in pursuit
of the agenda outlined by the President in his state of the nation address
in February this year.

In rising to this challenge we should never miss the opportunity to look
back and learn from our successes and setbacks in our endeavours to remain
focused on our goal for a better life for all. We must also frankly assess
our capacity against the weight of rising expectations.

Speaker, this Parliament has participated in these structures and continues
to do so in various forums. The Regional Women’s Parliamentary Forum was
established as an organ of the Southern African Development Community
Parliamentary Forum, SADC-PF, with the purpose of providing a framework to
follow up on the political commitments regarding the participation and
representation of women in decision-making positions. The caucus comprises
the chairpersons of the national women’s parliamentary caucuses and was
launched in 2002.

In July 2009 I, on behalf of this Parliament, formed part of a delegation
of an advocacy mission to observe the elections in Botswana together with
fellow women parliamentarians from Zambia and Namibia. The observations,
findings and recommendations of the mission were submitted to the regional
caucus and the SADC-PF.
The 27th plenary session of SADC-PF was held this year. As Chairperson of
the Multiparty Women’s Caucus, I represented this Parliament and presented
a report on the establishment and functioning of the women’s caucus in
Parliament.

The Inter-Parliamentary Union, IPU, established the Co-ordinating Committee
of Women Parliamentarians in April 1990 to present all of the IPU’s women
members. The co-ordinating committee aims to promote an increase in the
number of women parliamentarians as delegates to the inter-parliamentary
meetings and greater participation of women Members of Parliament in all
senior posts of the union.

This structure has achieved a lot in respect of the improvement of the
status of women and with regard to contributions made by women in the IPU
structures.

The structures I have mentioned above have been created to ensure that
democracy, fairness, transparency and the rule of law are maintained. It is
for us as Members of Parliament to educate ourselves about what these
organisations aim to achieve and what our contributions are supposed to be
in furthering the aims of these structures.

The Multiparty Women’s Caucus in this Parliament is currently involved in
discussions on the strategic programme that would guide its work. Among the
activities being considered, the women’s caucus is also looking at the
discussion on the SADC Protocol on Gender and Equality; training of women
Members of Parliament on budgeting; and creating networks with women’s
forums in other legislatures within the country and internationally, and
also civil society movements focusing on women issues.

The Multiparty Women’s Caucus believes that these are the responsibilities
that women parliamentarians have to carry in order to ensure democracy,
irrespective of party affiliation.

We will spare no effort in strengthening the progressive forums of the
South, notably the Non-Aligned Movement; the Group of 77 plus China and the
Africa-South America Summit; and the New Africa-Asia Strategic Partnership.
These forums have demonstrated to us — some even during the difficult years
of apartheid — that they can be trusted allies and partners in our struggle
for a better life.

As I’m standing here, I know that South Africans, especially the leaders of
the ANC, our former Speakers, Comrades Baleka Mbethe and Gwen Mahlangu,
have been champions in these structures. They even led them representing
South Africa as members of the ruling party.

We continue to build on the long history of our bond of friendship and
solidarity between us and countries of the South. We will continue to learn
from their experience, especially how, in spite of the colonial history
that they share with us, they managed to transform into the tigers that
some of them are today.

We will also continue to strengthen people-to-people contact and cultural
exchanges between us and the South, and use our bilateral relations and
structures such as the India, Brazil, South Africa Dialogue Forum, Ibsa, to
intensify exchanges between us in areas of mutual benefit. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, before I invite the next speaker, I want to point
out that the gallery is full today, and I would like to welcome all those
who have joined us.

I also want to point out that the public in the gallery have come to listen
to today’s debate on democracy, but the debate is being drowned out by the
noise from the gallery. May I please appeal to all of you to speak with no
voice. Remain silent until the speakers are done.

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Mr Speaker, hon members of the Cabinet present here, hon
members and members of the public in the gallery, South Africa is signatory
to and an active participant in a high number of international forums and
initiatives. This is the result of our unique diplomatic position since the
peaceful transition to democracy, and also because of our unique experience
with some of the most difficult challenges facing mankind today.
Looking to the future and where our focus should be, I would like to
highlight three areas of importance. Firstly, South Africa’s continued
leadership role in Africa, especially in peacekeeping and negotiation, must
be strengthened. At the moment our leadership is often characterised by
commitments that are not backed up by the correct capacity and skills. More
than ever, the ability of the SA National Defence Force to properly fulfil
the peacekeeping duties that are assigned to it requires urgent attention.

Secondly, South Africa must continue to build a global consensus on
environmental treaties, recognising that the sustainable, respectful
treatment of the environment is a prerequisite for human rights. Currently
South Africa is particularly well placed to influence the debate, since the
next round of negotiations after Copenhagen is scheduled to take place on
our shores in 2011. This presents us with the opportunity to demonstrate
our prowess at negotiating by securing an international consensus that will
see our children inheriting a planet that is still capable of sustaining
human life.

Thirdly, South Africa finds itself in a contradictory position when it
comes to the issue of the arms proliferation. On the one hand we are the
only nation in the world to have voluntarily dismantled all nuclear weapons
programmes. Potentially, this makes us the foremost arbiters for non-
nuclear proliferation.

Unfortunately, on the other hand, even after the advent of democracy, our
record of trading in conventional weapons is very questionable. The
proliferation of arms in the world is a direct threat to building an
international culture of human rights. It is vital that South Africa clears
up this contradiction in its behaviour.

In conclusion, I would like to appeal for greater consistency in favour of
human rights from our representatives on the United Nations Security
Council. As a democracy, it does great harm to our reputation when we are
seen to be supportive of governments that abuse and violate human rights. I
thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Speaker, uppermost in our minds, at this time, must be
the Millennium Development Goals. This is especially so as two-thirds of
the deadline has already passed and Goal 4, which commits us to reducing
child mortality by two-thirds, is proving to be extremely problematic.
Instead of going down, child mortality statistics are, in fact, going up.

If you are expecting a baby either in the O R Tambo district or the Eastern
Cape generally, there is a terrifying likelihood that your baby will die at
birth. At present half of all babies do.

A nurse working at an Eastern Cape hospital over the past five years said
she had never come across babies dying at such an alarming rate. In
addition, countless more won’t make it through their first year.

Tragically, while the situation in the Eastern Cape is particularly
shocking, the reality is not far different for the majority of people
throughout South Africa. Gross understaffing, unpaid debts, poor infection
control, slack administration, lack of finances, pathetic management skills
in our hospitals, dysfunctional referral systems, dismal ambulance
services, inefficient primary health, lack of control over spending and
blatant corruption leave little wonder that we are living this nightmare.

Who will care about democracy if we continue to bury our sons and daughters
along with our hopes and dreams for their future? The ACDP welcomes efforts
to ensure that all HIV-positive children under one year old are now being
put on antiretroviral theraphy, ART, regardless of their CD4 counts.

While the department has introduced new and better guidelines for the
prevention of mother-to-child transmission, MTCT, more needs to be done to
ensure it reaches those who are affected and at risk.

While the tragically high number of baby deaths in hospitals is linked to
overcrowding at hospitals as the needs of people with HIV/Aids place
hospitals under enormous pressure, budgets are not the only concern;
attitude, training, discipline and good practice are just as critical.
Public-private initiatives are not being pursued with enough urgency and
determination.

The ACDP calls on government to access and utilise private expertise to
deliver the services with and on behalf of the state. If we do not get this
right as other countries have, moves to implement a National Health
Insurance will only further exacerbate the situation. I thank you.

Mr M C MANANA: Chairperson, hon members of the House, distinguished guests,
my speech in this debate on the International Day of Democracy will
underscore the democratic values, human rights and international co-
operation under the India-Brazil-South Africa Dialogue Forum and our
Parliament’s relationship with the European Union, EU.

This will be done against the background of the ANC’s policy on
international relations and human solidarity. It is most appropriate that
we are celebrating the International Day of Democracy in the month in
which, here in South Africa, we are celebrating our national heritage.

At the core of our national heritage, as a people, is a long struggle for
democracy, recognition and respect for diverse cultures, languages and
traditions bounded by our ideals of a unitary South African nation that is
democratic, nonracist, nonsexist and based on equity.

At the heart of this heritage is the leadership role that the ANC, as one
of the oldest liberation movements on the continent, has played as it
approaches its centenary celebrations. Since its formation, the ANC’s
mission is the struggle for democracy and human rights as understood within
the context of the national democratic revolution. We recognise that the
achievements of political freedom and democracy in 1994 did not
automatically translate into economic democracy and justice.

There exists in our country huge socioeconomic disparities and inequalities
which subject the majority of our people to a life of poverty where
political freedom, in the final analysis, loses it significance. These
disparities and inequalities are a characteristic feature of our current
globalised world.

It is these global inequalities and economic injustice that inform our
continued struggle for a better life for all and a vision of a better
Africa and a just world, as is articulated in the policies of the ANC.

It is these policies and vision that informs the ANC government’s policies
on international relations and, as such, our understanding of the
significance of celebrating democracy and human rights. As South Africans,
coming out of a long struggle, we have an opportunity and privilege to
celebrate our democratic achievement and gains. We must also use this
democratic space to advance our struggle to deepen beyond mere political
democracy.

We need to take this beyond the confines of our national borders and build
international human solidarity. The recognition of this internationalism
around democracy and human rights is fully expressed in the strategy and
tactics of the ANC. They encompass the fact that the achievement of
democracy in 1994 provided South Africans with an opportunity to build
democracy, a culture of human rights and a value system based on human
solidarity, and to work with African and global progressive forces to
advance human development in our country, on the continent and across the
globe.

The ANC government’s approach to international relations and to democracy
and human rights must therefore be underpinned by these ideals. It must be
informed by our principles of a better life for all and a vision of a
better Africa and a just world. It is on the basis of this understanding
that we must place a priority on establishing and building our relations
with other countries of the South.

The building of South-South relations should not only be seen in terms of
economic and national self-interest, but as part of advancing our common
ideals of building a world based on economic democracy and justice. It is
also about our commitment to rid the world of inequalities and poverty, and
by so doing, deepening democracy and human rights.

India-Brazil-South Africa, Ibsa, is a trilateral, developmental initiative
that promotes South-South dialogue, co-operation and common positions on
issues of international importance; facilitates trade and investment
opportunities between the three countries; supports the alleviation of
poverty and social development in developing countries; and promotes the
trilateral exchange of information, international best practice
technologies and skills amongst the three countries.

The South Africa-European Union, SA-EU, trade relations represent a
bilateral interaction on South-North co-operation that has seen growth in
South Africa’s export, but also reinforces a system of global dominance in
trade relations that has a negative impact on African countries as
illustrated in the EU’s relations with developing blocs.

There is another inconsistency in the application of human rights in the EU
support for a genocide warrant of arrest issued by the International
Criminal Court, ICC, against the President of Sudan. The African Union has
taken a position of nonco-operation with the warrant for war crimes and
crimes against humanity issued by the ICC on President Omar Al-Bashir and
made an appeal to the UN to delay the case against him.

Hon Mokgalapa, South Africa supports the AU’s decision precisely because
there is a provision in terms of article 15 of the Rome Statute that allows
for a deferral. We are saying: Let us defer the matter so that we are able
to ensure that the people of Southern Sudan are able to realise the
referendum next year. That is what we are saying.

We could easily have subjected President de Klerk and his government to the
same process in 1990, but instead we negotiated with him, and look at where
we are today! That is the point. [Applause.]

You cannot prosecute Al-Bashir whilst he still has a very big role to play
in terms of realising this particular referendum. You cannot do that.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, you should address the Chair, not any other person
in the House. Just address the Chair. [Applause.]

Mr M C MANANA: I thought I should clarify that, Chair. But also ...
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Do not clarify it. Address the Chair. [Laughter.]

Mr M C MANANA: Through you Chair, on the issue of Myanmar, hon Mokgalapa
... [Laughter.] ... should not misinform this House about our vote in the
UN. He must refer to the records. We said that this matter should not be
dealt with at the level of the UN Security Council; instead, it should go
to the Human Rights Commission in the UN. That is what we said. [Applause.]

It is within this context that our people’s Parliament remains an
embodiment of the society based on democratic values, social justice and
fundamental human rights. If people want to speak about human rights in
Africa, they must not be selective. Here is Western Sahara, violating human
rights, why are you not mentioning that? I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs I C DITSHETELO: Speaker, democracy is an ideal that speaks to members
of society having control over rules and policies, treating each other as
equals and being treated as equals. As a country we have impressively laid
out a legal framework guaranteeing people’s rights, but there are further
questions that we need to ask ourselves to determine whether the ideal of
democracy has been realised.

The following questions are asked: Are our governing institutions
representative of and accountable to the people? Do we have an active civil
society and are we empowering it without manipulation? Do our political
parties articulate the views and aspirations of the people?

We have taken tremendous strides as a young democracy, but we also cannot
afford to be complacent because the equality ideal is so far from being
realised and without it democracy remains a distant ideal. Thank you, Mr
Speaker. [Applause.]

Mrs D A SCHÄFER: Speaker, the biggest commitment, both nationally and
internationally, to democracy and human rights that we have made as a
country is agreeing to and passing into law the Constitution in 1996. At
that stage we committed ourselves to upholding a democratic system of
government, and our Constitution was lauded all over the world as being one
of the most liberal in the area of human rights.

Today we need to look at the progress we have made in upholding that
commitment. I am afraid that there are alarm bells ringing louder and
louder which indicates that the significant achievement of bringing about
democratic government in our country is under threat.

Firstly, in a democratic government the goal is to open up windows of
opportunity for everyone. However, we have succeeded in opening the gates
of opportunism for some only — think of Travelgate, Oilgate and Armsgate,
to name but a few.

Secondly, undisputed essentials of a democracy are freedom of speech and
expression and a free press. Recent events have shown that the current
government has de facto rewritten section 16 of the Bill of Rights to read
as follows: Everyone has the right to freedom of expression, except if you
happen to make gestures at the President that his blue light brigade
regards as inappropriate, or if you happen to expose alleged underhand
dealings of the National Police Commissioner. At the same time the right to
privacy, and not to have one’s home searched and the privacy of one’s
communications infringed, must also give way in the above circumstances.

Freedom of the media enshrined in section 16(1)(a) of the Bill of Rights is
regarded as an unnecessary evil when it is used to expose the myriad
examples of corruption, lack of service delivery and grossly wasteful
expenditure of so many in our government. Of course, it is very difficult
to tell exactly what our President really feels about the matter, as his
statements differ depending on his audience.

In this very House, last week, the President tried to justify the ANC’s
insistence that media censorship is necessary and that the law of
defamation is not sufficient to protect the poor people in this country who
cannot afford to take the media to court. Then at a meeting with media
representatives last Friday, he said that the government is committed to a
free press as enshrined in our Constitution, but that we need to guard
against “foreign spies”.
In Monday’s newspapers we see that the ANC is concerned that whistleblowers
are undermining them. We can understand the President’s paranoia regarding
spies, given what is going on in his own party, but we would love the
President to give us examples of these countless poor people who are
defamed and need this drastic government intervention.

Mr Speaker, we are not fooled. The media tribunal is to protect the ANC and
its cronies, and no-one else. [Laughter.] And here’s a novel thought: If
the ANC conducted itself in a way that was beyond reproach, there would be
nothing to expose, now would there?

Thirdly, other essential pillars of democratic government are the
independence of the judiciary and the separation of powers. When a
political party has to take court action resulting from a judge conducting
a political witch-hunt at the behest of the most senior member of a
provincial executive, then we are treading on dangerous ground — even more
so when that member of the executive is held in such high esteem by the
ruling party that he now represents our country as an ambassador in one of
the most influential countries of the world.

When a premier has to go to court to enforce her constitutional right to be
part of a committee discussing the alleged interference of a High Court
judge in a Constitutional Court case, we are quite justified in assuming
that the said commission is taking into account considerations that are not
based on judicial principles. And this is the very commission that is
supposed to be choosing independent judges!

Of course, the fact that the premier won both court actions is a positive
sign that there are still judges who are independent, but it appears that
they are becoming fewer and fewer.

A vital part of an independent judicial system is the impartiality of the
National Director of Public Prosecutions and its ability to exercise its
constitutional mandate without fear, favour or prejudice. The ousting of
Vusi Pikoli as the National Director of Public Prosecutions, NDPP, in
favour of a man who has proven himself unfit in every respect other than
having the distinguished qualification of being a supporter of Jacob Zuma,
goes to show just how far the President will go to protect himself and his
cronies from criminal charges, and the disdain with which he regards our
democracy when it does not suit his purposes.

Fourthly, the ongoing assault on property rights enshrined in the
Constitution is causing untold damage to our democracy, not to mention our
economy, and the more uncertainty there is, the less productivity and the
less external investment we shall see. It is a lose-lose situation.

So, Mr Speaker, at the moment we are unfortunately in serious danger of
losing all the ground we have gained since the advent of democracy. It is
the responsibility of each one of us to stand up for the democratic
principles for which so many fought for so long and which can so quickly be
destroyed by the short-sighted actions of people whose own interests are
their only priority. If we do not do this, we will not have a future worth
thinking about. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Speaker, hon Ministers, hon
members and members of the public in the gallery, firstly, I just want to
say that it seems as if members who are participating internationally,
particularly those from the opposition, really do not understand why they
should be part and parcel of those bilaterals that we are having.

I also want to highlight the issue of Zimbabwe that was raised by hon
Mokgalapa. The hon member was part and parcel of the delegation that went
to Botswana last year to celebrate the very same day. He had a platform to
speak in that conference and didn’t mention what he was saying today.

In fact, the way he was discussing the issues, nobody believed that he had
come from an opposition party. Judging by the way he was stating the
issues, it was clear that he was either a member of the ANC or a member of
South Africa. [Interjections.]

I’m not dreaming. I know that he has to please certain members of the
opposition today. [Interjections.] [Applause.] But I also want to indicate
from the outset that whenever we attend these international forums, nobody
speaks like a member of an opposition party because we have agreed that
when we go, we go as a South African delegation. [Interjections.]

I was very surprised today because some of the members of the opposition
came and knocked at my office with the understanding that I am the one who
decides on the delegation. Unfortunately I am not. I just request the
members from their Chief Whips. It is their Chief Whips who allocate the
members to the delegation, so they must never again come to my office to
ask me to negotiate on their behalf so that they can be part of the
delegation. [Interjections.]

I think the hon members from the opposition must understand the sovereignty
of each and every country. As South Africa, we can share views and ideas on
how we achieved democracy and it’s up to those countries to decide on how
they should achieve the same in their own countries. In terms of the
diplomacy in Zimbabwe, today Zimbabwe has a government of unity.

In 1994 when the ANC was voted in by the people of this country, even
though it got an absolute majority, we catered for other political parties
to be part of the Government of National Unity so that, at the end of the
day, they can understand whom we are talking about when we talk about the
majority of this country. Today they are here in the opposition benches
because the ANC has allowed them to be recognised as opposition members.
[Interjections.] If it was not for the ANC, you would not even be opening
your mouths this time. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, order, hon members!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): In terms of the diplomacy in
Zimbabwe, today I can say there is peace in Zimbabwe because the three
political parties are working together. [Interjections.] Yes, you can say
it is rubbish. However, the member from the DA who serves in the SADC
Parliamentary Forum cannot say that because he was part and parcel of the
SADC Parliamentary Forum that was addressed by President Robert Mugabe.
Later it was addressed by Prime Minister Tsvangirai. All of them were
saying that they are very happy about the way South Africa, particularly
the ANC, has led them to that government of unity. [Applause.]

It is surprising because some of the members used to say nobody wants to go
to Zimbabwe. But when we were going to Zimbabwe and Zambia, all the flights
were fully booked. Even the hotels were fully booked, and there were a lot
of members who were there touring in Zimbabwe and Zambia. But today you
come here and I do not know on whose behalf you are speaking.
[Interjections.]

Let me advise the hon Greyling that ...

Mr S B FARROW: Speaker, would the hon member take a question about
Zimbabwe?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): After I have finished I will take
the question.

Hon members, I want to remind hon Greyling regarding the issue of the
report by the independent experts. I think the hon member must not assign
the responsibility to the executive. That report is supposed to be
discussed by this Parliament, and the members of this Parliament have to
implement the recommendations from that report.

It is the responsibility of this House to do the oversight over the
executive, therefore what he must understand is that whenever one points a
finger at other people, the other fingers are pointing at him or herself.
[Interjections.]

With regard to the issue of the media tribunal, the ANC has come up with a
proposal that this issue must be investigated. I don’t know where you got
the information that we have already decided, because we said we need to
investigate. [Interjections.]

I think people must understand the policies of the ANC and how we debate
issues in the ANC. Everybody has a right to say something in the ANC,
unlike in other political parties. [Interjections.] That’s the unfortunate
part of it.

In terms of the subject that we were dealing with today, I just want to
mention the achievements, because of my time limit, that we have attained
as Parliament. One, we were able to have International Women’s Day and
Africa Day celebrations. As Parliament we were also able to hold a joint
Parliamentary Group on International Relations, PGIR, and focus group
workshops where members reported on what they have been discussing in those
international forums.

We also had a training workshop on the SADC Parliamentary Forum, SADC-PF,
election observation mission. We also had a women’s parliament on
millennium development goals which is part and parcel of the international
programme. We also had bilaterals with various countries during the Inter-
Parliamentary Union, IPU, and SADC-PF.

These bilaterals are part and parcel of promoting human rights and
democracy. I believe that in future we will continue to formally establish
parliament-to-parliament relations in order to make sure that the continent
and the world finally achieve peace and stability.

I also want to highlight the issue of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, IPU,
and the United Nations. As Parliament we participate in that structure and
we have members that attended the IPU-UN forum. In that forum the
International Monetary Fund, IMF, and the World Bank gave a briefing on
their intentions on the transformation of these institutions.

I also want to highlight the way that the members who attended that forum
deliberated on the matter, including hon George from the DA. Members from
other countries proposed to the Speaker that they want to come to South
Africa to learn how we are dealing with issues of oversight.
[Interjections.] That is why we have always received a lot of members from
various countries who have come to learn about what we are doing in South
Africa.

I want to thank all members who participated in these international forums
for working together as a South African delegation. I also thank the South
African embassies for their warm welcome and hospitality which they gave to
our delegates. I want to say to this House, before I sit down, that there
is a member that I have not seen smiling in this House. But when we were in
Thailand, it was a first for me to see that at least the member has teeth!
[Laughter.]
Today matters related to trade, peace and security, climate change and
human rights, to name a few, need to be addressed by our Parliament so that
we do not diminish the gains made in achieving social cohesion and good
governance.

I am not going to name and shame that person because the Speaker knows
exactly who that member is. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Speaker, I
rise on a point of order in terms of Rule 66.

In the course of this debate, the hon Mrs Schäfer, referring to the
National Director of Public Prosecutions, indicated that he is not fit to
hold office. Now, in terms of Rule 66, no member of this House may reflect
upon the honour or competence of a judge of a superior court or the holder
of any other office whose removal is dependent upon this House, except upon
a substantive motion. I request that she withdraws those comments.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I will check the Hansard and I will come back with
a ruling on that matter.

Debate concluded.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY
                               SOCIAL SERVICES
                                  Cluster 2

MINISTERS:

 Position regarding (i) commitment to principle of no work, no pay and (ii)
     impact of educators’ strike on operations of education departments

186.  Mr J R B Lorimer (DA) asked the Minister of Basic Education:

      (1)   Whether, with reference to  the  recent  educators  strike,  she
            remains committed to the principle of no work, no pay;  if  not,
            why not; if so, how will this be enforced;

     (2)   what impact has the strike had on the operations of both the
            national and provincial departments?               NO3101E

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Speaker, the question is about the recent
strikes and whether a “no work, no pay” rule will be enforced. The answer
is that the “no work, no pay” rule is a policy of government and is
administered by the Minister for the Public Service and Administration. We
are aware that the Minister will implement the policy through Treasury. It,
therefore, is not dependent upon me; it is government policy. It will be
implemented.

To answer the question of whether the strike has had any effect on
departments, I should say yes. Indeed, it has affected the national and
provincial departments in different ways. In some provinces we had an 80%
shutdown, while in others we had a 20% shutdown; so it did affect them, but
the situation differed from province to province. In areas where there was
a total semishutdown of the head offices and no operations could take
place, the districts had to operate from somewhere and this resulted in
valuable school days being lost.

The national department only closed the section which deals with matric
certificates; all other sections were working. We closed that section
deliberately because we did not want to risk anybody interfering with the
matric certificates. Thank you.

Mr J R B LORIMER: Mr Speaker, apart from the South African Democratic
Teachers’ Union’s, opposition to “no work, no pay”, that union continues to
hold education hostage through intimidation.

I want to read you five points from a statement by a teacher at
Johannesburg’s Northview High School, after Sadtu representatives
Tshabalala and Mokgomane addressed the staff yesterday afternoon:

   Now, Sadtu said principals of model C schools deliberately employ
   foreigners, namely Zimbabweans, because they will not strike. They said
   Sadtu will deal with Zimbabweans. No district officials are to be allowed
   onto school property, certainly not to check files.


   Staff are not accountable to officials. If the Northview principal is not
   in agreement, Sadtu will come and take over the running of the school.
   Teachers have only to do seven hours of work. For any work over and above
   that they should be paid extra. Everyone is to give full marks to
   themselves for the Integrated Quality Management System and the heads of
   department, must sign, otherwise Sadtu will deal with them.

Will the Minister investigate this and all other cases of Sadtu
intimidation, and how and when will these incidents be investigated? Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, let me just direct myself to
the question and not to the other stories, because I have not heard about
them.

We investigate any complaint referred to us. So bring the complaint and we
will investigate it as soon we get it. I can’t work on the basis of rumours
or things that I hear from the air. Bring that complaint; we will
investigate it. Definitely! [Applause.]

Mr D C SMILES: Chairperson, I would like to ask the hon Minister whether
she will please give us her opinion of Sadtu and their behaviour during the
strike, as it is quite clear that Sadtu is responsible for the violence and
intimidation that has done so much to worsen the impact of the strike. I
would like to refer once again to the letter that was read by my colleague,
outlining what has happened at Northview. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, the member wants my personal
opinion of Sadtu. My personal opinion is that Sadtu is a strong
organisation. We have the advantage of having very strong organisations in
the public sector. Communication moves quickly, so there are strong points
around it. So from where I stand, I do appreciate all teacher
organisations, including Sadtu, the role they play and the co-operation we
get from them on an ongoing basis. I appreciate Naptosa and all of them
because we do have very constructive working relationships. So that is my
answer to the question.

However, when it comes to violence by strikers – not necessarily Sadtu, by
anybody – we condemn it. I have condemned it. I will condemn it from Sadtu
and from Naptosa, so I don’t have to say that I condemn Sadtu. I condemn
all violent acts in the public sector.

But you want to know what I think about Sadtu? Like all other unions, Sadtu
plays a valuable role in the Public Service. [Applause.]

Ms F I CHOHAN: Chairperson, Madam Minister, there have, however, been
reports that some individuals within the department have been engaging in
activities to destroy records that reflect the attendance of workers during
the strike. In the light of these reports, clearly some delays can be
expected with regard to the issue of the docking of pay.

Are the Minister and the department able to give an assurance to this House
that the docking of pay will not be delayed beyond the end of this year?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, salaries are being docked every
time we get the information. We have been informed by the Public Service
that, to date, 26 000 members have already had their salaries docked. So it
does not have to wait for anything.

As soon as information is completed it is finalised and then the docking
starts. So it will start when the documents have been gleaned and verified
and we are sure that we are docking from the right person for the right
days. The docking starts any time. It has already started.

Mrs M T KUBAYI: Chairperson, on a point of order: I note that it is at the
discretion of the Chairperson to select speakers. But can I say that, based
on the convention of the House and how we have been doing things, you
cannot allow three members of the DA to ask questions on the same question
and not give other parties an opportunity. Can we request that you give
other parties an opportunity?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, I am aware of the
convention. I was simply following the list because I was not in at that
time. I am following the list which is in front of me. The next one on my
list is hon A M Motshekga. [Interjections.]

Ms F I CHOHAN: Chairperson, I think the point that is being made is that
the DA has already been afforded two opportunities on this particular
question, and if you would kindly cast your eyes around the House, you will
see various members waving their papers ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): The hon A M Mpontshane.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: You have already recognised
hon Smiles. I don’t understand how you can go back on your ruling.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): I know, but if he had taken the
opportunity first, then I think we need to be fair to other members.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, with due respect, you have recognised hon
Smiles.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): I did, and I also recognised my
mistake. Could you take your seat, hon member? There are more questions
coming.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, we did not think that you had made a mistake; we
were actually applauding your decision! [Laughter.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, during the recent talks which the hon
Minister had with teacher union representatives, the unions linked the
policy of “no work, no pay” to the department’s recovery plan. In other
words, teachers’ willingness to teach during the September holidays was
conditional. Either they get overtime payment for the time worked over the
holidays, or the department offsets the overtime payments which unions want
against deductions for “no work, no pay”. What is the position in this
regard?

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, babuMpontshane, that was the
initial issue that we suspected unions wanted — that the recovery plan was
to recover their salaries, whereas for us the recovery plan was about the
recovery of lost time.

I did meet with them. We agreed that the recovery plan is going to be
informed by the needs. We agreed at national level that for the September
holidays, for instance, we will only focus on matriculants because that is
where we think there is an urgent need. We will not have a decision from
the national level to have a recovery plan from Grade R to Grade 12. The
recovery plan is informed by what our needs are.

We will then look at what we need in the primary phases. We have agreed
that we want to focus on numeracy and literacy. Therefore we will only
employ teachers on the basis of those needs and in an attempt to close the
deficit.

So, in short, I am saying we have clarified the situation and I think there
is a common understanding that the recovery plan is going to be based on
and informed by needs. It is not going to be informed by teachers’ need to
get their salaries back. I had a meeting with the MECs and I think we have
a common understanding that the two things should be delinked.

 Position regarding (i) monitoring of schools during recent strike and (ii)
                 incidents of physical violence and arrests

219.  Mr D A Kganare (Cope) asked the Minister of Basic Education:

      Whether, in the course of the recent strike, her department
      continuously monitored all schools to ensure that both the learners
      and non-striking educators remained safe; if not, why not; if so, (a)
      how many incidents of physical violence were reported and (b) how many
      culprits were arrested?           NO3143E

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, the question is whether we
continuously monitored the safety of learners during the strike; and the
answer is yes, indeed.
The department, working quite closely with the Department of Police,
intelligence, army and all the related departments, even justice, were
constantly monitoring the schools. So, government had set up a national
strike council and there were also provincial strike councils.

There was a joint operation as well as provincial operations both at
national and provincial level, which worked together with the Department of
Defence, National Intelligence and the SAPS. They did gather information of
where areas were volatile and sent in forces to ensure that those areas
that were not safe would be reported. In addition, there was also
monitoring on the functionality of schools with particular emphasis on
attendance and safety.

The questioner also wanted to know as to what were the incidents that were
reported in the information received by the department. Because information
on violence was collected by the police most of the information lies with
the Department of Police.

All what we did was to report where we knew there were threats and the
police would deal with those matters. This is incomplete, because most of
the information lies with the police.

In the Western Cape we did get a report that there was an incident of
violence. We also got a report from North West that there were incidents of
violence, but I am aware that there were more incidents of intimidation and
violence. The information on all of those were collected by the police
because they were treated as criminal activities and therefore the
department would not have been involved in areas where there was violence
and intimidation. Those were treated as criminal activities and the police
are dealing with those matters.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Minister, let me appeal to you
not to press the button there, because you are making my work difficult
here. I will call upon you when you answer the supplementary question,
otherwise leave the button alone. Is there any supplementary question?

Mr D A KGANARE: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, it is a well-known
fact that when there is industrial action the labour movement will do
everything within its power to put pressure on the employer to make sure
that its demands are met. And this will, amongst other things, result in
some intimidation.

On the other hand, it is a responsibility of the employers to make sure
that productivity continues and that they take certain precautionary
measures. Freedom of association by implication entails the right not to
associate, so my question is what proactive measures did the department
take to ensure that those who did not want to go on strike are allowed to
go to work so that they do not get punished by not being paid when they did
want to go to work?
The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, hon Kganare, we announced
that we had not closed the schools, so we did imply that anybody who wanted
to go to work should go to work.

Schools were not closed. People who wanted to go to school would have been
able to go to school, but in incidents where we picked up violence, where
members felt that they were unable to risk their lives, there were measures
put in place to enable them to report and work with the districts for
purposes of safety.

So, we did all we could and the schools were open. That is why schools that
were not threatened by serious violence were able to continue. And those
that were unable to continue because there were incidents that made them
felt unsafe therefore did not attend school.

They did communicate with the district, that would then make sure from the
police that it was indeed not viable for them to attend schools. So, there
were measures put in place to do exactly what you understand was supposed
to have happened.

Ms N GINA: Chairperson, in some cases, Minister, the acts of intimidation
and that of physical violence were reported and in some cases it was
reported within the school premises. So, I think from this strike action we
have learned some lessons — that in some of our schools we need to
intensify the security.
What plans do you have in your department to make sure that all our schools
are safe and that the security is being intensified so that we can be sure
that schools are places of safety?

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, the question of school safety
is a broader issue than the strike. I think the hon member would be quite
aware that on an ongoing basis, as a department, we are incrementally
increasing security in our schools to make sure that we protect our
learners both from internal and external threats.

We fence schools, put up CCTV cameras and take all sorts of necessary
measures that we require to make sure that indeed schools are safe. The
fact that there were strikes again was an internal security matter, and
again we did put measures in place. However, they are not necessarily for
strikes, which are a rare occurrence.

I mean, the last time we had strikes was in 2007, but the security is meant
to protect them on a daily basis. And we do have a programme of schools
safety, as I say, both against physical harm and other forms of activities
that may harm our learners and teachers. We have a programme.

Dr W G JAMES: Chairperson, it may come as a measure of relief to the hon
Nzimande that this is the first occasion that I have the honour to address
Minister Motshekga as the Minister of Basic Education as the official
opposition spokesperson on basic education.

The question that I would like to ask is whether the department, through
the various vehicles that she has, including Minmec, would provide
resources to schools to provide for counselling for individuals who were
intimidated and harmed during the strike?

I visited a school this morning, as a matter of fact, in Durban, Lindelani,
and there were clear indications that many individuals were harmed during
the strike. Therefore, I believe that it is the responsibility of her
department to see to it that measures be taken to provide resources for
counselling for them.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chairperson, the question of the wellbeing
of teachers definitely falls squarely within the provincial competencies.
My assumption is that indeed provinces - because every province has a
section dealing with the wellness of educators and the employees in the
provinces - through their wellness programme should be able to provide the
counselling services.

It is a function which is definitely a provincial competence, but if we are
requested to do it as national I am sure we can look at it. But it is
something for which we have no structures on behalf of provinces because
the wellbeing of teachers is catered for by provinces that would have a
wellness programme for staff in the national departments. So this is a
provincial competency and I assume that all provinces do have that
programme.

    Position regarding steps to (i) ensure that FET colleges attract more
   students and (ii) change perceptions regarding inferior qualifications

204.  Mrs F F Mushwana (ANC) asked the  Minister  of  Higher  Education  and
      Training:

      What steps will he take to (a) ensure that the further education and
      training (FET) colleges attract more students and (b) change the
      perception that they offer inferior qualifications?
                                              NO3123E

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Thank you, Chairperson, and
thanks to hon member Mushwana for this question. We want to say that, as a
department, we do agree with the fact that there is a general belief across
our communities that FET colleges deliver programmes and qualifications
that are significantly inferior in quality compared to those offered by
universities.

This is a perception that has developed over a long time, and we are
committed to changing it. We are making several efforts and interventions
to change this perception; I will mention only a few here in response to
this question.

First of all, this year the Department of Higher Education and Training has
already held three summits — the Higher Education Summit, FET Colleges
Summit and a Skills Summit. Part of the strategy of holding these summits
was to involve all stakeholders so that, amongst other things, we create
cohesion between these institutions that constitute the Department of
Higher Education and Training landscape.

In addition to that, what we have also put at the centre of our work, as
part of improving the functionality of the colleges, is that there needs to
be high articulation between FET colleges and universities so that kids who
take programmes in FET colleges are also able to proceed to university if
they choose to do so — something that is not systematised at the moment.

Furthermore, within the next few weeks we will be finalising the National
Skills Development Strategy 3. One of the things that we have put into that
strategy is that we must strengthen the relationship between the sector
education and training authorities, Setas, and FET college, as well as the
relationship with the employers, so that ideally, in the medium to long
term, every FET college student is able to get workplace experience.

This is one of the biggest problems that we face. We think that with some
of these measures we will be able to improve the attractiveness of the FET
college sector. This will be in addition to the mobilising that we, as
government, will continue to do to engage our communities.

Lastly, the FET Summit also focused on very critical issues around how we
can revive and strengthen the FET college sector, including improving
teaching and learning, efficiency, governance, financial management, as
well as preparations for 2011, so that we can start next year on a sounder
footing. Thank you.

Mrs F F MUSHWANA: Thank you, Minister, for your informative response.
However, there will be a need for effective implementation for efforts made
to be realised. Is there a clear plan, with time frames, linked to specific
implementers for monitoring and support? We welcome both of the summits
held - FET and skills - but is there a plan in place for advocacy workshops
to ensure that proposals from both summits are realised? Thank you.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Thank you, hon member. We
definitely do have a plan. For instance, already, on 8 October, I will be
receiving a briefing from the steering committee that was responsible for
the FET Summit on the resolutions of this summit, and how we then begin to
translate them into implementable policies.
In addition, we have also set ourselves the deadline of the end of October
to have visited all 50 FET colleges to look at their capacities and their
needs as well as programmes that are strong, as part of underlining the
necessity for expanding the FET college sector as well as making sure that
it begins to respond positively to our entire strategy of skills
development.

Lastly, what we have decided is that we should continue with the steering
committees that we have formed — the task teams — which have been working
around the summit. This is because we want them to continue to help us with
the process that we are planning, namely a thoroughgoing change management
and capacity building in the FET colleges. Even hon Ellis is nodding
approvingly at what I am saying. Thank you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I just need to say to the hon Blade Nzimande that
I never moved my head. [Laughter.] He is lying, sir. [Laughter.]

Mr A P VAN DER WESTHUIZEN: Speaker and hon Minister, at present the
official position regarding the colleges for next year was stated in the
document Guidelines for Operational Plans for 2011.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Is there a point of order?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Chairperson, my sincerest
apologies; I beg your indulgence. I wanted to find out from you if it is
parliamentary for a member to say to another member that he is lying?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): He is what?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Lying. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Which member said that to whom?

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: He can stand up and identify
himself; he knows who he is. It is hon Ellis.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon members, please let us regulate
ourselves. Let us not impugn the integrity of other members deliberately.
Hon member, continue.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I did say that the hon Blade Nzimande was lying.
And I ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Ellis, please take your seat.

Mr M J ELLIS: Sit down?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Yes.

Mr M J ELLIS: Okay, thanks. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, continue.

Mr A P VAN DER WESTHUIZEN: Thank you, Mr Chair; it is clear that you don’t
want hon Ellis to withdraw his words. [Laughter.] Hon Minister, the
official position ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): House Chair, it is a point of
order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): There is a point of order here.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): House Chairperson, hon Mike Ellis
is a Whip and he was part of the drafting and the adoption of the Rules of
this House. I want hon Mike Ellis to withdraw what he said, that hon
Nzimande is lying. It is not parliamentary. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Ellis, do the right thing,
please.
Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I was going to withdraw until you told me to sit
down. [Laughter.] However, under the circumstances, sir, I withdraw and
apologise to the hon Blade Nzimande. He is certainly not a liar, sir, but
sometimes he does not quite tell the truth. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Ellis, that is why I said you
should sit down, because it was doubtful whether or not you were going to
withdraw that remark. [Laughter.] Please continue.

Mr A P VAN DER WESTHUIZEN: Hon Minister, the official position regarding
colleges for next year is stated in the document Guidelines for Operational
Plans for 2011 issued by the department some two months ago, and it says:

   Colleges plan to keep enrolment figures for 2011 at the same level as
   actual enrolments for 2010.

The same document states that the 2011 budget must be based on the approved
budget for this year plus 4,5%. My question is: Is the severe capping of
FET college numbers and budgets not a move backwards and in contrast with
the enormous and growing demand for training in our country?

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Chairperson, if we were not
in this House I would not answer a question from the DA on FET colleges.
But as a disciplined member of the House I will, because we invited them to
the FET College Summit.

They did not come and they did not even apologise. Maybe that is the reason
why hon James has been removed from the Portfolio Committee on Higher
Education and Training.

It is very frustrating that you only shout at us through the newspapers but
run away from real engagement on the ground, because you want to
opportunistically grandstand. Nevertheless, I will answer your question.

The issue is that what we were indicating then was that they should be
patient with us whilst we were going through the processes that we were
going through. This is because the FET colleges were asking us: How are we
to plan for next year?

We said that there are processes in place; the one being the summit, and
the second being the engagement with Treasury - so that after them we would
then be able to know exactly what would happen. We do intend to expand.
Especially, we want to identify those colleges that have additional
capacity whilst we are putting in place other measures to actually address
the many challenges that we face in the sector. Ngiyabonga. [Thank you.]

Ms N Y VUKUZA-LINDA: Thank you, House Chairperson. Dr Nzimande, I am sure
you agree with me that summits are not an end in themselves, but a means to
an end. I also know that you know that social cohesion cannot be achieved
through summits only.

Can you then help me with this issue of articulation? By your own admission
it is a problem, but could you just give me perhaps one example of how you
want to articulate this whole thing of FETs to universities? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: I am sure hon Vukuza-Linda
knows that I do not have to be lectured about what summits are. That is
why, in my original answer, I came up with very specific things that we are
going to be doing.

These summits are necessary for two reasons. First of all they enable us to
get many good ideas from the stakeholders, so they are not a waste of time
or just a talking shop.

Secondly, they help us to refine our implementation plan. That is why I was
saying on 8 October I would be getting an implementation plan arising from
the resolutions of the summits.

Okwesithathu, angithukuthele Mbazima, angithukuthele. [Uhleko.] Ngizosuke
ngikubuze ukuthi ngokomthetho akufanele ngabe nilapha ningakabambi
nenhlangano yenu nje. Nisibuze ngentando yeningi ningakayibambi inhlangano.
[Uhleko.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Thirdly, I am not upset, Mbazima, I am really not upset. [Laughter.] In
fact, I will remind you that you are not supposed to be here because you
have not even held your elective conference yet. You are telling us about
democracy and yet you have not held your elective conference. [Laughter.]]

On articulation, in short, what we mean is that programmes offered at FET
colleges must have a relationship with the higher education sector. Take,
for example, the National Certificate (Vocational), NCV. Today if you pass
it at an FET college and you want to go to university you cannot, because
the NCV only has one language and universities require two languages.

There are also other programmes, what we call the Nated, the N Programmes,
whose articulation with universities at the moment are based on individual
negotiations between universities and particular colleges. We want to make
it a systemic coherent relationship that certain programmes translate into
particular certificates or diplomas in terms of the Higher Education
Qualification Framework. That is what we mean in short.

Ngabe ngiyaqhubeka kodwa ngiyazi ukuthi impendulo yalo mbuzo owubuzayo
uyayazi. [I will be continuing, but I know that you know the answer to your
question.]

Ms A MDA: On a Point of order, House Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Yes, what is the point of order?

Ms A MDA: House Chair, is it parliamentary for hon Dr Nzimande to call the
hon Shilowa by his first name? Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): No, that is not parliamentary.

Ms A MDA: Can the hon Minister Nzimande withdraw that?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): No, it is not really a question of
withdrawal. I think it is a question of ...

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: I am sorry, Chair. It is
just that he was my comrade not so long ago, but I withdraw that. Thank
you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Minister, sit down, please. I
think it is simply a question of respect; it is a question of education. We
are not supposed to call other members by their first names. We do not do
that in the House. It is really a question of decorum.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, the IFP does not
doubt your intentions about what you wish to do about FET colleges, but
what is happening on the ground does discredit your intentions.

I just want to ask the Minister a specific question: Is he aware of the
goings-on at the Mthashana FET College, particularly at its learning site
at KwaGqikazi campus, where the entire campus has been invaded by squatters
who have refused to even obey a court order to vacate the premises?

In fact, when the MEC visited the college they said to the MEC, “MEC, you
must remember that the fact that we have an ANC branch in KwaNongoma is
through us, therefore we do not want to move.”

Mrs M T KUBAYI: On a point of order, Chair. Is the Minister prepared to
assist ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, let us take the point
of order.

Mrs M T KUBAYI: Chairperson, I think the hon member is out of order. The
question that he is asking is a new question, and a substantive question
that requires an answer.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chair, the hon member is not the Minister. [Laughter.]
It is up to the Minister to decide that.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Let us see whether or not the
Minister will answer the question.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: She is not even chairing the meeting.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, sit down. Take your
seat, you have asked the question; let us see if the Minister will answer
the question.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: But I did not even finish my question due to her
intervention.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, finish your question
and let us hear whether or not the Minister will answer the question.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, I would like to first call her to order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Mpontshane, are you finished
with your question? [Laughter.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: No, no, Chairperson. The point I want to ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Complete the question, please.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, the point that I want to make is that we
must not let members deliberately disturb other members whilst they are
making their points through frivolous points of order. [Laughter.] You must
rule on that.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): That is why, hon member, I am
saying, complete your question.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Minister, my question is: Is the hon Minister
prepared to help his counterpart in evicting those squatters who have
invaded that campus? There is virtually no training taking place on the
campus now.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Chairperson, hon Kubayi was
right; this is a new question that I would have to prepare for and come
back with the facts.

Nevertheless, I want to say that I am very much aware of what is happening
at Mthashana. For instance, I am aware of the situation of the college
principal who is not at work and that there is an acting principal now.

I am also aware of the situation in KwaGqikazi which, fortunately, has also
been brought to my attention by iSilo samaBandla, who has invited me to go
and meet with him so that we can actually address these problems.

I am in touch with the province of KwaZulu-Natal with regard to how we will
deal with this. Remember that as things stand now, as much as FET colleges
are going to become a national competence, before an appropriate
constitutional amendment they still remain the responsibility of the
provinces.

I am, therefore, working very closely with the provinces. We already have a
memorandum of agreement on how the Department of Higher Education and
Training is going to relate to the provinces in relation to managing
problems.

Besides that, I have not sat back. I am engaging the provinces all the
time, hence the need for this audit that we want to undertake by the end of
October, using these task teams that I was talking about to identify each
and every problem.

Ngizoya-ke nalaphaya kuleziya zindawana, ngidlule kaMntwana uShenge ngicele
itiye bese ngidlula ngiyolungisa lo msebenzi, Bab’uMpontshane,
ungakhathazeki. [I will also go to those areas, get to Prince Shenge’s
place to ask for tea and then go on to address that problem, hon Mpontshane
— do not worry.]

 Position regarding steps to ensure equal quality of education for learners
            in public school system and those in private schools

215.  Mr A M Mpontshane (IFP) asked the Minister of Basic Education:


      (1)   Whether she is taking any steps to ensure that  the  quality  of
            education for learners in the public school system is  equal  to
            that of the education which is  currently  provided  in  private
            schools; if so, what are the relevant details; if not,

     (2)   whether she is taking any steps to narrow this quality gap to
            ensure equal education and opportunity for all learners; if not,
            why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                                    NO3136E

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, the question relates to the
comparison between public and private schools in terms of quality. The
answer is that this is something that cannot be compared, Baba uMpontshane,
because there is no conclusive evidence to suggest that the quality of
education provided by independent schools is better than that in public
schools.

What we actually have is that 75% of the success in the sector comes from
public schools. You have public schools like Westerford High, which can
compare very well with any private school.

I don’t think that is the issue. We have lots of very good public schools.
You have your schools like Mbilwi Secondary and Westerford High, and all of
them are public schools.

You have the worst of private schools, which are your fly-by-nights. So, it
is not a matter of whether it is public or private. For me, the issue is to
make sure that we provide quality education for all our children across the
cultural, racial and geographical sectors. That is where we have a
challenge.

The main thing is that all the programmes that we are trying to put in
place are really not looking at the comparison between private and public,
as such. Indeed, it is a fact that in other communities and other areas we
are confronted by challenges in education because of infrastructure
backlogs. That is why we have the Accelerated Infrastructure Development
Plan to address that.

We have problems with management and leadership in schools. Again, those
are the issues that determine whether we get quality or not. It is not
whether they are public or private schools. I thought I should just clarify
that — that we have a number of very good public schools. It is not whether
they are public or private, but it is whether we get quality or not.

The short answer is that we have, indeed, put in place a programme to
address all those challenges affecting us in producing quality education
for all our learners. This programme includes private schools that are
registered with us but produce zero results. They may be private, but some
of them get zero results; so the programme is meant to address all the
challenges within the sector, whether public or private. Thank you, Chair.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, firstly, I must agree with the hon Minister
that there are, indeed, pockets of excellence in some of our public
schools. But the growth in the number of private schools does indicate that
these schools are becoming more and more important as far as the
achievement of quality education is concerned.

We, in the IFP, have always argued that there is no schooling system that
can be better than its teachers. For instance, I do commend the Minister’s
statement two days ago in the programme where she came out very firmly and
authoritatively against the disruptive activities of the Congress of South
African Students, Cosas. Now, one of the factors bedevilling our education
system is this excessive teacher union political activity.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, ask your question,
otherwise your time is up.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, when are we going to hear the same firm and
authoritative statement by the Minister against what we call “political
activism”, as against “professional activism”, that has come to
characterise our schools? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, again, it is incorrect for Baba
uMpontshane to say there are pockets of excellence when our education
system is predominantly public.

Private schools only make up 5% of the sector. Public schools make up more
than 95% of the sector. I am saying that 75% of what we see as success in
the sector comes from public schools; it is not pockets. I admit, and I
agree with you, that we do have lots of challenges in other parts of the
sector where we are not getting value for money. I do not think it is an
issue, really. We are agreed completely on that part.

What I want to correct is the fact that, basically, our education system is
public. If 95% are public schools, you cannot even compare public schools
to private schools. What are you comparing between 95% and 5%? What
characterises high-end public schools which charge up to R200 000? It is
means, right? So, it is more often an economic factor rather than anything
else that you are comparing.

You are talking about those schools which charge R200 000 and comparing
them to schools like Mbilwi Secondary, which is a no-fees school and which
is amongst the top ten schools in the country. So, we are really comparing
things that are not comparable.

On your second point, we as a sector are also quite worried, because our
system stands or falls on the feet of teachers. And if we cannot get it
right there, I think we might as well just forget it. That is why we are
engaging with teachers patiently and consistently, because they are going
to determine whether we succeed or fail.

Where we have high success rates, even in public schools, it is because we
have good principals and good teachers, not good infrastructure,
necessarily.

Denron Secondary, for instance, is in the Top 10 schools. It is a rural
school with nothing, but because there are good teachers and good
principals, they are performing quite well.

I am spending lots of my time engaging with teachers across the sector; it
is enough to say that if we are to succeed, it depends on them. We are
working very closely with them, but as you say, also making sure that we
begin to be very firm in terms of incorrect behaviour by teachers. If it
breaks, it breaks, but we cannot have a situation which is loose and we
hardly know whether we are coming or going. That, definitely, is the
direction that we are taking, to say we strengthen the contradictions, and
the contradictions may produce a different result, but we cannot keep a
system which is unsustainable.

I have very bad teachers from other sectors, but because there is life
after Parliament, we have to work with them as colleagues. I am sorry,
Chair. Thank you. That is the answer. [Time expired.]

Ms A C MASHISHI: Chairperson, Minister, does the department have a strategy
to identify specific teacher development needs and the ability of teachers
to address specific problems in order to improve quality outcomes in our
schools? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, I must say, I was quite privileged,
because by the time I got to the department, my predecessor had convened a
major teachers’ summit which was attended by different stakeholders.

The summit came up with very good resolutions. We are implementing those
resolutions in terms of in-service training, but also in terms of teacher
training. So, I inherited a very good programme, I must say, and we are
implementing it. [Applause.]
Mr D C SMILES: Chairperson, hon Minister, the quality of education is at an
all-time low in the history of our country, and South Africans are looking
towards the department and you to turn the situation around.

What are the interventions that the Minister will apply with regard to
proper and effective school management, with particular reference to
teacher discipline? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, I am not sure where the timeframe
starts, because you cannot say it is at an all-time low. When I went to
school, most of my counterparts, even those before me, will tell you that
it could not have been better for other sectors of society.

We have major enrolment rates. We are leading in terms of Millennium
Development Goals, MDGs, in terms of enrolment; so, it could not be better.

The fact we are not denying is that we are still confronted by a major
challenge to be at the levels where all of us as a country want to be, but
it is not that it is at an all-time low. We admit that we have major
challenges.

In terms of teachers, do you want me to repeat what I have said to Baba
uMpontshane? The system stands and falls on the feet of teachers. That is
why we have a programme that we inherited. In addition, we are working
closely with the unions to make sure that we can correct the major
challenge that we have concerning the management of, and the quality of
teaching in, our schools. So we are agreed.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Apologies, sometimes we get shunted in the aisle, and so I
pressed the wrong button next to my colleague. Thank you.

Hon Minister, over the past two years, the Centre for Development and
Enterprise, CDE, has conducted groundbreaking research into a highly
significant development in South African education, namely the growth of
low-fee private schools catering for poorer sectors of the population.

While many, including public officials, see these private schools as fly-by-
night institutions, indications in this report are to the contrary. In
addition, the view of parents is that these private schools are achieving
better results, that the teachers are more accountable, more dedicated, and
show greater interest in the children, etc, etc, and there are reasons for
it.

What I want to ask is: Is the department looking at this report, and
particularly, at the part where these schools are often faced with long and
unreasonable delays in obtaining registration? A lot of them appear to be
problematic because they cannot get registration. They have been waiting
for years to be registered, and others live in fear of losing their
registration and being shut down.

There may be something here that indicates we perhaps need to be supporting
something that is working and is giving parents some kind of confidence.
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Indeed, Chair, I did read the report and
did raise some concerns with the researchers, including the sample that
they used to arrive at major conclusions. The sample is too low to draw the
conclusions they have drawn, and I think they have accepted that it is
actually methodologically quite problematic.

However, in terms of the substance of what they are raising I do not think
we have difficulties. Indeed, private schools have provided a very good
alternative for our people if they want to make choices.

We do support private schools as an alternative which people want for
religious purposes, but also for financial reasons. If you have lots of
money and you want to go and pour it out somewhere else, you can go to
private schools, because we do have public schools.

It is a good choice for teachers. I do not think we have any difficulty
with that. I even have no difficulty with the conclusions of the report,
except that methodologically the sample that they were using to draw the
conclusions is flawed. I do not think that there are fundamental problems
with their conclusions. If parents choose to go to private schools, that is
fine.

In terms of registration, provinces can register at a certain pace. When
people submit something, you cannot register them before you have at least
verified the points that are there.

I have worked in the province. There are lots and lots of problems with
your fly-by-nights. In all fairness, you have to go and verify all the
information before you can register a school. We had schools which
unqualified people have registered; any other crook can register a school.

As the state, we have a responsibility to make sure that we have all the
information, and that is where the delays occur sometimes. But as a
principle, we have no problems with private schools. It is their right to
choose. They are given that right by the Constitution, and it does not give
us competition. They supplement the work that we do in the public sector.

     Strategy to harmonise housing delivery and stabilise housing market

207.  Ms B N Dambuza (ANC) asked the Minister of Human Settlements:

     What strategy does his department have to (a) harmonise housing
     delivery in the country and (b) stabilise the housing market in order
     to attract private-sector investment in rural towns in view of the
     decline of economic activity in those areas as a result of urban
     migration?                                         NO3126E

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, I would like to thank the
Chairperson of our standing committee for this question. I must preface my
answer by indicating that the earlier debate was around International
Democracy Day.

One of the most important cornerstones of a democracy, beyond political
democracy, is economic democracy. It allows people to have a better quality
of life.

One of the most important requirements for a better quality of life for
people is a roof above their heads. We live in this House, but as we go
home, we all need a roof above our heads.

The question is about the harmonisation of human settlements and housing in
South Africa. It is a very broad question and it requires a very broad
answer with some specifics.

First and foremost our strategy in terms of the harmonisation of human
settlements and housing throughout South Africa is driven by a project that
we have appropriately named, ”Human Settlements 2030”. What does it speak
of? It says that a child born today will be 20 years old in 2030. A child
who is five or 10 years old will be 25 or 30 years old, respectively.
Therefore, it requires that we should provide housing for the future; and
the future is our children.

All these people who will be living beyond us in 2030 will be requiring
flats, apartments, homes, cottages, stand-alone houses and so on. I hope to
be there as well. Our strategy of Human Settlements 2030 provides for the
youth. That is why we are involving the youth in what we call the Youth
Build. We are including women in the Women Build — women in construction.
As of last week, we are including the war veterans in the Vets Build.

The question referred to the harmonisation in so far as the attraction of
capital to the rural areas is concerned. We all know that it is very hard.
Capital does not migrate to places that are depressed. It is for that
reason that a statement was made in this House by the hon President and
also taken forward by the Minister of Finance, Pravin Gordhan, that
R1 billion should be established as a guarantee fund to support those South
Africans, who cannot gain access to home loans.

Capital will be attracted to the hinterland of the country if there are
guarantees that people will repay the money. It is for that reason that we
said in this House such a guarantee provides support for people who are in
the police service, nurses, soldiers, blue-collar workers and teachers.

We saw most of those people demonstrating recently. That is how we will be
able to utilise the public-private partnership, including financial
institutions, as well as our guarantee fund to harmonise housing in South
Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B N DAMBUZA: Hon Chairperson, I would like to thank the hon Minister for
a comprehensive response. You have raised a very critical point on the
issue of a R1 billion guarantee fund as a follow-up question. I would like
to check how far the department has managed to go in so far as publicising
the information to the society as a whole.

The second point is around the issue of the private sector. We know that
despite all the calls by the government, there has always been a reluctance
by the private sector to invest in rural areas, especially participating in
state subsidy programmes. My question is: Can the Minister give his
assurance to this House that the private sector is now ready to come to the
party after the guarantee fund? Are there any mechanisms in place in the
department to ensure that the national objective is strengthened and
enhanced, more especially for achieving Outcome 8? I thank you.

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Hon Dambuza, thank you for that question
again. In so far as publicising the availability of the R1 billion
guarantee fund to the public is concerned, we started here in this House.

Furthermore, together with members of Minmec, I had an interaction for the
day with all the five major banks in this country. We were deliberating
about the participation of the banks behind the guarantee fund. We made it
very clear to the banks that when they get involved, we are going to make
sure that they do not loan money willy-nilly, anyhow. There has to be
lending with responsibility so that we can be assured that the guarantee
that we would be providing does come back to the state.

Furthermore, we are going to hold discussions with the farmers so that they
also come on board. We have realised that whilst farmers farm on productive
land, they also provide housing. But they are scared about the fact that
people have security of tenure. That is why they are driving people off the
farms. A lot of squatter camps or ghettos that we see arise from those
farms.

We will, therefore, sit down with farmers and the business sector. I have
already communicated with the Johannesburg Stock Exchange that we want to
meet with the Top 200 companies. The President has been invited to open
that meeting. I thank you.

Mr A C STEYN: Chairperson, the answer given by the hon Minister was indeed
very broad. He referred to the human settlements in 2030. I am not sure if
either one of us is going to be around come 2030; therefore, I am more
interested in what happens between now and then.

Human settlements are very dependent on co-ordination and integration of
services. On a question last week, the President replied in this House that
the Presidential Co-ordinating Council meeting was held in May, and focused
on matters relating to human settlements, specifically on obstacles
identified. He further stated that processes were put in place to address
this. Therefore, hon Minister, could you please define these processes and
share with us in this House the timeframes for the implementation thereof?
I thank you.

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, we thank the President for
having been very much alive to the question of human settlements. After
all, he is the one who proclaimed it here, moving housing into the arena of
human settlements.

The President convened a special Presidential Co-ordinating Council
dedicated to human settlements. It was not just a normal one. We agreed
about co-ordination of efforts, meaning that all Ministries had to come on
board. That is why we said where we build houses, and where people stay,
should also be where they play. Where we live is supposed to be were we
enjoy leisure and learn.

Therefore, the integration of various departments around human settlements
is very critical; and we thank the President for that. I am saying that it
is not just a broad general question, but these are issues that are very
specific. However, further discussions will be around the increase of the
budget. The current budget is essentially a housing budget which requires
to be broadened so that it can be a proper human settlements budget. I
thank you.

Mr A C STEYN: Chairperson, thank you for this opportunity. Hon Minister, I
am more interested in the specific processes that were identified by the
President - which you also have alluded to. You have not actually shared
them with this House, other than just informing us about the allowance that
should be made in the budget. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Hon Steyn, you are a member of the
portfolio committee. You are very much aware of the various specifics that
were being discussed, arising from the special Presidential Co-ordinating
Council. The President has gone to Russia, China and so on, and he will be
coming back with a second one.

The national NGO will be having its meeting next week and we shall be
getting further specifics. We are dealing with identifying the question of
subsidies for rural areas; changing of hostel landscapes; deliberating
about those who cannot even get a guarantee fund; and discussing the
utilisation of the Home Loan and Mortgage Disclosure Act  to control the
whole question of housing in the country. Furthermore, we will be talking
about how and where the Estate Agents Act will be residing in the future -
something new that you didn’t know. Maybe you would like to do your
homework around that.

Therefore, it is very important to know that there are specifics around
each of the things that I have mentioned. They will be coming with the
settlement of the last meeting that we will be having with the special
Presidential Co-ordinating Council 2.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you hon Minister. The last
opportunity goes to the hon W J Nelson.

Mrs W J NELSON: Chairperson, mine is on the last question. No-one.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): We have the last opportunity there.
Does anyone want to ask the last supplementary question?

   Position regarding reports of increased numbers of rapes and infections
      based on erroneous belief in so-called “Virgin Cure” for HIV/Aids

217.  Mrs C Dudley (ACDP) asked the Minister of Social Development:

     (1)   Whether she has been informed of reports by protection  agencies
           concerning the increase in the number of young girls and infants
           that are being raped and infected with  HIV/Aids  based  on  the
           erroneous belief in the so-called “virgin cure” for HIV/Aids; if
           not, what is the position in this regard; if so,

      (2)   whether she has launched an investigation into these reports; if
           not, why not; if so,

     (3)   whether she intends implementing awareness campaigns to counter
           this erroneous belief; if not, why not; if so, what are the
           relevant details?                                  NO3140E

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Chair, the response to hon member
Dudley’s question is as follows. The hon member’s question is indeed very
difficult to answer in this form as it stands right now.

I must say that we sought information from various sources regarding this
matter of rape as indicated by the hon member. We sought information from
organisations such as the United Nations Children’s Fund, UNICEF, the Human
Sciences Research Council, HSRC, Childline, the Child Welfare of South
Africa, the Medical Research Council and the Department of Health.

When dealing with this horrendous issue of the rape of children, the police
and health care providers do not ask victims why they were raped.
Therefore, there is no reliable statistics on this issue so we do not have
data on whether there has been an increase or, for that matter, even a
decrease in the rape of children, which is informed by the myth that it
will cure perpetrators of HIV and Aids.

I’m also aware that this phenomenon was rumoured to be occurring sometime
around the year 2000. However, we can only assume that through the rapid
expansion of our antiretroviral programme — which, by the way, is indeed
the biggest in the world — and our awareness campaign, these assumptions
ended or died down.

These campaigns were run with stakeholders and partners to address this
myth. People were also made aware of the facts about HIV and Aids and the
benefits of taking treatment.

Again, I stress that this is an assumption since the cause of rape is not
something that people generally report on or are even asked to report on,
by the way. We can only reliably report on this issue if and when a survey
of perpetrators can be done, but, for now, we haven’t done it. I am
referring to a survey of perpetrators because asking victims about the
issue turns to subject the survivors of sexual violence to secondary
victimisation, which we always seek to prevent.

Hon member, given my first response on the first part of the question, I am
sure you will agree with me that Question 2 and 3 then fall away. Thank
you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, hon Minister. Obviously the whole idea of “sex
with a virgin” being a sort of cure basically predates what we have today.
It is not a new thing; it is something that came from the Victorian era or
whatever. So it is not about that kind of research.

What is actually happening — particularly around the time of our previous
budget debates when we talked to a lot of the very same people that you
spoke to and the NGOs that are working with children that are at risk and
actually in crisis — is that there is still an outcry for a campaign to
demolish the perception — which they call a lie — that sleeping with a
virgin will cure Aids.

So it was not coming from me; it was coming from those who are actually in
that situation. Those people feel that this lie is still out there. They
feel that they were promised a campaign to demolish this lie. So the report
that, daily, more and more young girls and babies are raped and impregnated
with HIV/Aids because of the prevalence of this lie are the words coming
from the people working with these children and babies on the ground.

The question is: Do we intend doing anything further in this regard or are
we putting this to bed? Seriously, this is a cry coming from the people who
are right there at the coalface.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Chair, the hon member does indicate
that this is actually a lie, in her own words. We are discussing a lie,
apparently. The question from the hon member is: Have we been informed of
reports from agencies regarding the increase in the number of young girls
and infants that are raped?

It does appear in the question that it is a fact when, in fact, the hon
member is referring to a lie. It is a lie; it is a rumour. It is only after
we have done the survey, which I have referred to, that we will be able to
confirm this to be a fact.

Let me address the issue of a campaign. Our programmes in the department —
not only in the Department of Social Development, but also in the
Departments of Basic Education and of Health — do address this question of
rape, and many other programmes that relate to HIV and Aids and protection
against it for people. However, we cannot definitely say that this myth,
which the hon member calls a lie, is actually a fact. Our programmes and
campaigns continually address these matters. We will work with those NGOs
and protection agencies in order to continue to mount these campaigns.
Thank you very much.

Mrs W J NELSON: Chairperson, firstly, let me thank the Minister for the
manner in which she has responded to the question. Rape is a gross
violation against human rights, especially against women and more so
against children.

It is, unfortunately, still happening in our society and can never be taken
lightly. We would, therefore, be grateful if the Minister would inform us
what types of programmes the department has in place to assist victims of
sexual abuse. And what types of programmes are run to inform communities on
the rights of children? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Hon Chair, we have recently launched
the Children’s Act and called upon all agencies and NGOs that we are
working with to ensure that we all mount campaigns against the abuse of
children and rape, and any other form of abuse, by the way. So there are
programmes in that piece of legislation which we will implement
concurrently or together with all those NGOs.

We want to thank those NGOs, in particular, for the work that they are
doing. There are many of them — for example, we have the Child and Youth
Care Workers and many other NGOs — that are working with us to mount this
campaign.

There are programmes that we also engage in, namely home-based community
care and support care for all other programmes on the protection of
children.

All those services are actually in terms of that Act, and they are
currently being implemented. Thank you.

Mrs H LAMOELA: Chair, arising out of the Minister’s answers, my question to
the Minister is: Are there any timeframes set for the implementation of
these awareness campaigns?

Who will be liable for implementing and monitoring them, bearing in mind
that NGOs are already underpaid and, as we know — it seems to me it is a
national crisis — many NGOs have not even been paid for the last couple of
months? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chair, there are no timeframes for
implementation of programmes; campaign programmes are ongoing. There is a
question about the funding of NGOs which we have to respond to today. I
would really prefer to respond to the issue of payment of NGOs under that
discussion. Thank you.

  Particulars regarding (i) state patients transferred to private hospitals
  during recent public service strike; (ii) any deaths among state patients
 as a result of the strike; and (iii) steps taken against any public servant
             whose strike action led to the death of any patient

193.  Mr M Waters (DA) asked the Minister of Health:

      (1)   Whether any state patients were transferred to private hospitals
           during the recent public service strike; if so,  (a)  how  many,
           (b)(i) from which hospitals and (ii)  to  which  hospitals  were
           they transferred and (c)  what  is  the  expected  cost  to  his
           department of transferring state patients;

      (2)   whether any state patients died as a result of this  strike;  if
           so, what are the relevant details;


     (3)   whether any steps have been taken against any public servant
           defined as providing essential services whose strike action lead
           to the death of any patient; if not, (a) why not and (b) when
           will such action be taken; if so, what steps have been taken in
           each case?             NO3110E

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Hon Chairperson, the first question is about the
number of people who were referred to private hospitals during the strike.
The figure we have at our disposal is 1 220 patients from Gauteng and North
West. The Western Cape and the Northern Cape confirmed that they never
transferred anybody to any private hospital during the strike. We do not
have any information yet for the other provinces. We are still checking.

Until we are sent invoices, it will not be easy to guess how much these
transfers are going to cost the state. This would just be a very wild
guess. We will not be able to enter into that.

On the issue of how many people died during the strike, I am sure we are
very much aware that this strike had many unique features, which some of us
have never experienced in our lifetime. Perhaps even the oldest members of
this House have never experienced what we have seen, so the issue of
identifying which people died during the strike is a very complex one. It
is something not to be taken lightly. One of the main reasons why this is
the case is that even during times when there is no strike, to determine
the cause of the death of somebody is not a matter to be taken lightly.

That is why in some instances we hold inquests, which are headed by judges
or very highly professional people. We do postmortems. Some hospitals, on
an everyday basis, do what they call mortality meetings, where they call
professors to come and determine the cause of death because one can’t just
stand up publicly and say that a particular person was killed by such and
such a thing.
As a country, we went through these three weeks which were very complex.
Obviously, because of the complexity, a lot of complex and abnormal things
might have happened, including death. But I can’t sit down and point out
certain things. There are obvious cases, of course, like the nurse who was
hit by a brick.

If she had died, it would have been directly due to strikers because she
was attacked by them. We had other cases whereby people were dragged out of
theatres. You would remember that I came out publicly and said that this
was murder. I came out publicly and said that if one was undertaking an
operation and the strikers came to drag out the people who were conducting
the operation, this was murder.

However, you are aware that nobody died due to that because the doctors who
were performing operations where this happened stood up and said, “You’d
rather have to kill us!”. They refused to leave those patients alone. The
perpetrators tried but they never succeeded.

The other complication we had was that, for instance, the biggest hospital
in the Southern Hemisphere, Chris Hani Baragwanath, has 30 deaths on any
normal day. But during the strike, the deaths went down to 18 and are now
back at 25 after the strike.

You may argue that most people might have died at home and did not come to
the hospital. How will that be determined? So, this is a matter that needs
very thorough consideration, and we are still doing that. Thank you.

Mr M WATERS: Thank you, Minister, for that reply. Minister, this is the
second time in three years that essential services and hospitals have gone
on strike, and in fact this time it was a violent strike. You even had to
get a court order prohibiting them from going on strike.

There have been numerous deaths which occurred as a direct result of the
strike, and they have been reported in the papers. I hear what you are
saying, that it’s very difficult to ascertain the exact number of these
deaths. But just to give you an indication, the chief executive officer of
Doctor George Mukhari Hospital stated in the media that at least 10 deaths
at his hospital alone were due directly to the strike - directly. These
deaths could have been avoided, and they should be viewed as culpable
homicide.

My question pertains to paragraph 3 of my oral question, Minister. Despite
having a court order, union bosses continued to encourage and promote
workers in essential services to go on strike, violently so. Will your
department take any legal action against the union bosses and individuals
who are found to have gone on strike and used violence in the process?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Chairperson, what I said is the truth. If the chief
executive officer of any hospital stood up and said there were five deaths
due to the strike, he needs to stand up to determine that. I am talking
scientifically here — that even during normal events, to determine
somebody’s death you need to hold an inquest and take note of many other
observations.

Does this mean that if there were 10 deaths in a hospital during a strike
those deaths were necessarily due to the strike? That’s a very tricky
thing. But the fact that he said this even to the media does not
necessarily determine that I must come to this House and say that in George
Mukhari we had 10 deaths and in that hospital we had 5 deaths. I am just
saying that this is an issue that will need a very thorough determination
and inquest.

On the issue of essential services workers, you are aware – and this has
been in many papers – that there was an issue about doctors who were on
strike. No doctor went on strike. Nobody! There is not a single doctor who
went on strike for the whole three weeks. But the newspapers reported on
this everyday.

They showed them toyi-toying even in cartoons, but all of them were at
work. I worked with some of them for the whole night. They never went on
strike, and they declared it to be so.

We now come to the issue of nurses and the Democratic Nursing Organisation
of South Africa, Denosa. Officially, Denosa never called for a strike. We
spoke to them and they said they never called for any strike, but that they
were being stopped and intimidated. Many of the health workers in essential
services will actually stand up and say so.

Now, you are aware that the issue of essential services and the service
level agreement is a contested issue. It is still being debated in the
Chamber at this point. I can’t give the final results here.

People are saying this issue has been on the table for the past 10 years,
since long before some of us were there. They say there was no general
agreement about essential services. It was intended that if there are
essential services, there must be a minimum service level agreement. This
is still an issue of debate. So, as a department, we have not yet reached
finality that so-and-so were on strike and that they were supposed to
render an essential service, so they must be punished. But I know statutory
bodies do so ... [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr D A KGANARE: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, despite what you are
saying in terms of the issue of essential services, I know that Denosa says
they did not go on strike, but there are nurses who went on strike because
on TV some of them were saying this did not matter and that saving lives
was something that used to happen during the times of Florence Nightingale;
this time round they did not care what happened.


The issue is, even if we talk about essential services, there are people
who are supposed to agree that they are part of essential services. But
their behaviour, conduct and statements indicate that they don’t believe or
care about being part of essential services.

What is the department doing, or what are you doing, hon Minister, to
ensure that we enforce discipline with regard to those who defied
legislation in terms of essential services?

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Hon member, I have just informed you that this
issue about essential services and the minimum service level agreement is
still under debate. If you know any health worker who stood up publicly and
mentioned what you have just said, bring them forward so that this can
become a criminal issue. Yes, bring them here and say who stood up.

I’m aware, for instance, that the DA went to court and reported somebody
and said that the person had stood up publicly in the media and said this
kind of thing. They provided evidence and also indicated that the person
must be charged. I want you to do this today rather than throwing it back
at me.

I mentioned, for instance, the fact that I was told there were student
nurses who went to operating theatres to drag other nurses out when
somebody was undergoing an operation. I said they must give me names. I
will fire them here and now; they can’t be health workers. This is because
you can’t have a health worker who kills. But I am still waiting for that
to this day.

What you are saying is what you read in newspapers. The real thing that
indicates the people who did this has never been put on my table. If this
can be done, we will certainly take action.

The nursing council also stood up openly and said the same thing. So did
the medical council. They said that if any health worker who is registered
with us is found to have committed such an act, they will take them to
disciplinary hearings and may actually take them off the roll.

This process can still take place, provided names are brought in. What you
are saying is what you read all over the papers, or what you might have
heard over the radio. [Applause.]

Mr M B GOQWANA: Thank you, hon Minister. There is a very difficult part
here which you have partially answered. It says that if somebody says
people died due to the strike, this makes it an unnatural cause of death
and that this requires that you do a post mortem. The question that I am
asking, which you have partially answered, is whether you would be able to
do post mortems on all these people, even those that have already been
buried? [Laughter.]

The second question, hon Minister, is that we know that strategies and
measures were taken by the department to make sure that the impact of the
strike would not be too bad and that there would be service delivery.

In your preliminary assessment, could you possibly tell us how these
measures helped you, knowing very well that you yourself actually did a
caesarean section in one of the hospitals to try and assist in the
situation? But what I am not going to tell you, Minister, is that we used
to judge how good people were in doing caesarean sections by the time they
took ... [Interjections.] Thank you. [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Thank you, Chairperson. It is true that emotionally
you can stand up and say we lost 100 people during the strike. You could
easily say that and point out the people who were buried. But I am talking
scientifically here in terms of procedures. Otherwise I could also be
giving nonfactual information to the gallery by saying 1 000 people died
and that the people who were on strike killed them. I am trying to give
scientific facts here about what I know.

In terms of measures, they did help a lot. Members of the public were
excellent — those who came in and helped in hospitals. That is why a
hospital like Chris Hani Baragwanath became a centre where everybody went
to.

At one stage, they successfully did 90 caesareans a day, which has never
happened before. People from all over the place rushed there because the
measures that had been put in place at the hospital were such that it was
running like a normal hospital.

We had such situations all over the country where the measures that were
put in place — members of the public — normalised the situation. Due to the
army, the situation never became as bad as it could have been. Thank you.

Ms E MORE: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, I would like to know whether
the department has any contingency and viable plan should the strike resume
due to the fact that no agreement with the unions has been reached during
the current negotiations, even after two weeks. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Well, you are aware that during the strike - even
though we were caught by surprise — we did have contingency plans with the
army. We have called on MECs on Friday this week to get a review so that we
can see where we have gone wrong and then be able to draw up fresh
contingency plans. So, we are not taking any chances. We are meeting with
all MECs in the country on Friday, specifically for this purpose.

            Dealing with water and sanitation backlogs in schools

211.  Mr Z S Makhubele (ANC) asked the Minister of Basic Education:

      Whether her department envisages dealing with backlogs regarding water
      and sanitation in schools; if not, why not; if so, what (a) is the
      current status and (b) measures are being implemented in this regard?
                                              NO3131E

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Hon Chair, the question relates to water
and sanitation backlogs in our schools. We currently have, out of our 30
000 schools, 1 307 that do not have water; and 536 that do not have water
and sanitation. The provincial departments, through their school-building
programmes, are dealing with this. Because of the emergency and serious
nature of this programme, we have been able to get R66 million from the
European Union, EU, to deal with that.

Last Friday I signed a partnership with the Coca-Cola Foundation-led
consortium, which will also be assisting us with water and sanitation in
100 of these schools. We are working with the Departments of Water Affairs
and of Energy to implement and manage the provision of water, sanitation
and electricity in our schools. This is in line with the government’s key
objectives of delivering services to the public and schools of the poor.

Our department has also put in place the Accelerated School Infrastructure
Delivery Initiative, and again this programme is focusing mainly on water,
sanitation and electricity. We do hope that by 2014 we would have provided
water and sanitation to all our schools in the country. Thank you.

Mr Z S MAKHUBELE: Hon Chairperson, whilst appreciating the efforts being
made to involve the private sector in this particular programme, may the
Minister indicate to this House what is meant by proper sanitation in
schools. Does it, for instance, mean pit latrines, and what is the overall
estimated cost of the water and sanitation backlog? Thanks.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, in terms of the first statement
about what proper sanitation is: It varies, that is why the figures even
say 1 300 don’t have water and sanitation, but 500 have sanitation. It
means we are using other methods of sanitation.

Sanitation is not only waterborne sanitation. We have pit latrines and all
other forms of sanitation in schools; and those we count as sanitation, as
long as they are functional. They serve the purpose and are hygienic, so
it’s different forms of sanitation.

In terms of how much it’s going to cost us to address the needs of this 130
000 schools, we’ve worked out the costs for just those     1 000 schools
for water and sanitation and it’s going to cost us more than R4 billion.
That’s the money we are looking for just to deal with water and sanitation.

The major problem is that these schools are in areas where there are no
bulk services. It means we are bringing water to areas where there’s no
water in the whole community. That is why even providing them is much more
expensive than you’ll do in an area where there are bulk services provided
by the municipality. But the latest cost was just in excess of R4 billion
to deal with these 1 000 schools.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Chairperson, 2014 was put forward as the year when
all the sanitation problems would have been done away with. Firstly, does
the Minister think that by that date we would have done away with all those
backlogs?

Secondly, connected to that, does the Minister agree that our system of
education is characterised by this very serious element of wastefulness?
Instead of prioritising sanitation and the elimination of other backlogs,
your provincial counterparts would embark on wasteful activities, for
instance, imbizos and sod–turning ceremonies, which end up with only the
sods being turned but no infrastructure would be put up. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Hon Chair, our schools are indeed
characterised by major inequalities. You have some that have violins and
others that don’t even have whistles. That is the character of what we have
inherited and it is one of the major challenges we have.

On whether we would reach the 2014 target, we are working very hard, that’s
why we’ve worked out the costs. We are saying, in terms of the accelerated
infrastructure programme, that sanitation, water, electricity and fencing
are our priorities. Any other money that we asked to be identified for us
in the fiscus is going to address those priorities. Even in terms of
provincial monies, we are saying to them that they have to prioritise those
four areas. I am quite confident that we will indeed reach that target.

As part of our turnaround strategy, also, we are looking at wasteful
expenditure, where we indeed often have to cut off in different areas. We
are looking at different ways of saving to make sure that indeed we can
make savings, such as, how we deliver books — that there are too many
people in between. In making sure that we can cut off, we are trying to
deal directly with publishers.

Provinces are refused permission to build very expensive schools for R100
million when they still have basic things that are not there in their
provinces. That is part of what we are trying to work on with provinces to
focus on priorities — such as water, sanitation and fencing — that are core
and have to be done. So we are mindful of that and are trying to work very
closely with provinces to rationalise and make sure that we can save
funding for these priorities. Thank you.

Mr D C SMILES: First of all, hon Minister, I hope that your provincial
departments will assist you to reach that target date of 2014, because you
will remember that many schools in the Eastern Cape are still with us.
Despite coming up with different, tougher dates, mud schools are not yet
totally eradicated in the Eastern Cape.

My follow up question is this: Given the large-scale theft of metal and
electrical fixtures as well as plumbing material from schools, has the
Minister put in place any additional security measures at schools? This
would be to protect the entire new infrastructure that is being rolled out;
to ensure that it remains in place and is not simply stolen within the
first few months after installation. I thank you.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, we have designed the accelerated
infrastructure programme in such a way that we are not dependent on
provinces.

We identify resources nationally and work with provinces and the
Development Bank of Southern Africa, DBSA, to help us with project
management. In this way we get the private sector to deliver directly to
schools in the already identified priority areas.

The 2014 commitment is not dependent on provinces as such, but on our
abilities with partners. As I said, we have the Coca-Cola fund, the Mvula
Trust and all those people coming with to assist us to implement. We are
not so dependent on the provinces.

In terms of what you correctly identify as stealing, I think stealing in
schools is a major problem in communities, especially in poor communities.
One of the strategies we are employing is to really work with communities
to create a sense of ownership and to get them to build the schools so that
they can protect them.

However, it’s a major problem - not only with new infrastructure. We lose
desks when schools are closed. It’s just a crisis as to what is going to
happen to education facilities, so it is a matter of great concern.

We are really looking at different ways of mobilising communities to
support schools, because we are aware that where communities take
ownership, they also protect resources which are in their communities. We,
therefore, have a whole major exercise of community mobilisation to protect
the assets that are there in the communities. It’s a major problem in the
sector. Thank you.

   Position regarding departmental funding for electrification of Thokoza
                                   hostels

213.  Mr K P Sithole (IFP) asked the Minister of Human Settlements:

      Whether his department has provided any funding for electrification of
      the Thokoza hostels; if not, what is the position in this regard; if
      so, what are the relevant details?

                  NO3133E

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, hon Sithole has asked a
question that affects one of the most intractable problems the country is
confronting. The question is about hostels. The specific question is about
the Thokoza Hostel which, as I recently mentioned in this House, I
personally visited.

To change the landscape of hostels is going to be one long haul. We should
all know that.

The national department is currently reviewing its human settlements
development funding model in line with the new service delivery approach of
the outcomes-based targets, which we recently signed with the President as
part of our delivery commitment. The funding of the Thokoza Hostel project
will therefore be made available in terms of this model.

The availability of the funding will be dependent upon finalisation by
National Treasury, which is currently being consulted through the Medium-
Term Expenditure Committees process.

Therefore, I assure hon Sithole that this commitment remains. However, it
is prudent that this process be strictly adhered to before any public funds
are expended. This House knows very well that, from my side as a member of
the Cabinet, and together with Cabinet, the last thing this department
would want to entertain is to spend public funds without exercising due
care. We therefore remain committed to the Thokoza initiative, but now the
changes have to happen in line with the new commitment around the outcomes-
based approach. The fund is there and, as soon as we are ready to send that
money, we will do that. I thank you.

Mr K P SITHOLE: Chair, I am shocked by what the hon Minister has said just
now, because the hon Minister announced at Thokoza that he is going to fund
the electrification of Thokoza. Ekurhuleni has funded the electrification
because they expected the Minister to refund them. So if the Minister says
he had not yet started to refund them, then we have a problem.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Is there a question there, hon
member?

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chair, the hon member has a problem; he
is just shocked. I want to repeat – it is not such a difficult thing to
understand – that the commitment remains. The fund is in place and, as the
Minister, I am committed.

I understand that place very well, but the change has happened in line with
the outcomes-based approach. I have just signed this thing last month with
the President, and this has changed the pace because I have to adhere
strictly to this outcomes-based approach. So I am not going to throw good
money at a bad project. We remain committed to help electrify that place
and this matter is being communicated to the council in Ekurhuleni. Thank
you.

Ms D E DLAKUDE: Chairperson, I welcome the hon Minister’s response to this
question as it shows commitment.

Since the Minister has said that he had communicated this to the
municipality, has this also been communicated to the residents, because it
has raised high expectations for both; and how long will it take his
department to fulfil this promise?

One other thing that the hon Minister must also note is that the
municipality is currently under pressure and accused of failing to deliver.
I thank you.

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chair, indeed, we have communicated, but
the question of communicating with ordinary people on the ground is also
the function of the municipality. However, there is no problem. Thokoza is
just around the corner.

I have been there personally and I would want to go back there. If I have
to communicate this to our people there myself, I will do just that. So it
is not such a big issue. How long this will take depends on how soon we can
give the electricians the funding. I thank you.

Mr A M FIGLAN: Chair, usually the electrification of any project takes
place after renovation or upgrading. Therefore, if electrification is done
first, will it not delay the upgrading of the hostels, because it may lead
to a situation where the upgrading is delayed as the hostel dwellers will
be deemed to have better living conditions? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chair, I understand that question very
well. Sometimes upgrading goes hand-in-hand with electrification. I just
want to inform this House that when we talk about the Thokoza Hostel, we
are not talking about a structure which looks like this House; it’s heart-
rending!

Ka Sesotho ba re ke ntho ya masisapelo. Ho bohloko ho ya moo, ho bohloko!
Ntate Buthelezi o a e tseba ntho ena. Ke ntho e thata. [In Sesotho they say
it is heart-rending. It is painful to go there, painful indeed! The hon
Buthelezi knows about this thing. It is a very difficult thing.]

We, therefore, have a problem, a very serious problem. Hon member, you are
aware of what is happening there. If you start upgrading, it is going to
take a long time; so if this electrification is going to happen, it must
happen. They have to have lights, they must have warm water, and they must
be able to cook for their children.

We are doing it in such a way that it addresses the immediate issues of the
people, otherwise, if we subject them to the total upgrading of the hostel,
it will be the long haul I spoke about. We are doing this out of
sensitivity to the people. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A C STEYN: House Chairperson, the hon Minister partly answered my
question. I wanted to ask him if it was prudent to spend money on the
electrification when, in fact, there is no budget to rectify the building.

As he very well knows, the building is in a dire state and it could, in
fact, be prejudicial to the safety of the dwellers. So is that not
something that, with the limited budget, should be addressed and thereafter
followed by the electrification? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chair, I know hon Steyn is a DA member,
but I want to thank him for agreeing with me.
As you have indicated, it is not an easy project, but we just have to help
those people. The architects and other people involved – the electricians
and engineers – have got to do it in such a way that, at a later stage, the
total upgrading can incorporate and integrate the work that has already
been done there. Thank you.

   Particulars regarding development of educational materials and support
   programmes so as to effectively teach key aspects of climate change and
                               global warming

218.  Mr D A Kganare (Cope) asked the Minister of Basic Education:

      Whether she has developed any educational materials and support
      programmes to assist educators to effectively teach key aspects
      relating to (a) climate change and (b) global warming; if not, why
      not; if so, (i) how many educational materials were developed, (ii) in
      which (aa) languages and (bb) provinces and (iii) how many educators
      received training?                      NO3141E

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Thank you, Chair. This question relates to
the inclusion of climate change and global warming in the curriculum. The
answer is that climate change is integrated already, and is addressed in
Natural Science and Social Science, in grades four to nine. It is also
included in the Physical Science, Life Science and Geography curriculums in
Grades 10 to 12.

The question also asks whether or not we have material on global warming.
Education material for climate change and global warming is in approved
textbooks for subjects in the national catalogue as well as in the
provincial catalogues. These text books are in English and Afrikaans,
because in those grades the language of learning and teaching is either
English or Afrikaans.

The question further asks whether or not teachers have been trained in and
understand the issues around climate change and global warming. Indeed, in
2008, the department trained more than 99 subject advisers who were meant
to train teachers in their districts, specifically on issues of climate
change and global warming.

We are aware that we have teachers, who teach these subjects in these
grades, who have been exposed to and trained on global warming and climate
change. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M S SHILOWA: Through you, Chair, Mr Kganare will not be raising a
supplementary question.

Ms D E DLAKUDE: Hon Chairperson, I have already asked my supplementary
question. Thank you.

Mr J J SKOSANA: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you, hon Minister for the
positive response that you have given this House. Hon Minister, will the
subject advisors that the department has trained be able to direct
teachers’ attention towards highlighting climate change in the curriculum?
Thank you.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Thank you very much, Chair. Indeed, the
subject advisors were trained specifically in these areas because of the
importance of ensuring that our children do understand issues around
climate change and global warming.

We are working quite closely with the Department of Water and Environmental
Affairs to also make sure that indeed these concepts are understood. So the
answer is yes, attention has been drawn to the importance of theses issues.
Thank you.

Dr W G JAMES: Chair, because climate change is one of the most compelling
issues of our day, it is essential that there be a public understanding of
that and that it be cultivated at all levels in our education system.

As the Minister points out, in terms of its content, it is included in the
Geography and Environmental Science part of the curriculum. So is it not
perhaps appropriate to include climate change, global warming, adaptation
and mitigation in the civics education part of the curriculum so that every
child is, in fact, exposed to that information?

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Member, I did indicate that these issues
are dealt with in Natural Science and Social Science in the lower grades,
where there is no choice of subject. So every learner will have been
exposed to them. It is only in Grades 10 and 11 where they are only found
in Physical Science and Life Science.

Therefore, the basics will have been learned in the intermediate phase
where every child will have been exposed to them. Only the deeper concepts
are tackled under Physical Science, which are the mitigating factors. This
is really not so much a civic education issue, but a deeper understanding
of the physics around them that they are taught about in a later class. But
all children will have been exposed to these issues in their intermediate
phase.

Mr D C SMILES: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, I am sure that you
will remember that there was a subject, during my years of schooling, which
they called “Omgewingsleer”, in English “Environmental Studies”.

I hope that I have translated that correctly. I think that whilst we
appreciate the efforts of the department to deal with the question of
climate change and global warming, it is still important for the department
to engage the learners at a very early stage, because concepts like
“mitigation” might sound very difficult, but they can be explained in a
very simple way. The same applies to adaptation, because we can show them
examples of how animals adapt to climate change. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: In case the hon member is like me — these
grades also confuse me — Grade 4 is Standard 2 according to the old terms.
This means that it is already at that early age. So, we are saying that
between Standard 2 and Standard 9 minus two — Grade 7 — they will have
learned that. [Laughter.]

Therefore, if we take those back to exactly the age that we were being
taught these things, you will see that we are teaching them at the same
age; it is just that we are using different terms for the grades. It sounds
later, but it is actually earlier. It is Standard 2, so I guess it is early
enough to expose them to these issues. As I have said, we have also changed
the way we name subjects.

Perhaps what you were calling Environmental Studies, being older than you,
we called something else in my time. Now you might find that the subject
that you named, calling it in Afrikaans, is one of the subjects here;
either it is Natural Sciences or Social Sciences. So, these might be terms
that we are talking about.

The fact of the matter is that we are indeed trying to spread as much as
possible across the different subjects at a lower phase. As the member has
said, at a senior phase, where we now include the concepts as part of
Physical Sciences, where we are now looking at the scientific part of it,
it is in Grades 10 and 12. Grade 10 is Form 3 and Grade 12 is Form 5.

That is where we go deeper. So it is exactly at the same age, there is just
a difference in how we name the grades and subjects. But we agree with you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you, hon Minister. You are
not the only one. I have a last opportunity here for another supplementary
question. No one? Then I go to question 183 put by the hon Thobejane to the
Minister of Social Development.

   Position regarding (i) systems to prevent SA citizens who have British
 citizenship from receiving pensions from both countries and (ii) number of
  persons receiving both a state pension and a pension from a foreign state

183.  Mr S G Thobejane (ANC) asked the Minister of Social Development:

      (1)   Whether there are any systems in  place  to  ensure  that  South
           African citizens  who  also  have  British  citizenship  do  not
           receive pensions from both countries; if not, why  not;  if  so,
           (a) what systems and (b) how does  her  department  apply  these
           systems to applicants with dual citizenship;

      (2)   how many persons who are receiving state pensions are also
           receiving pensions from a foreign state?                 NO2663E

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you, Chair. The first thing is to
move from the premise that the pension that the hon member refers to is a
social assistance pension and not any other kind of a retirement pension.
Yes, indeed, we believe that our means test, which we have in terms of the
Social Assistance Act, is an administrative tool that requires every
applicant for a pension to disclose any form of income, whether from South
Africa or elsewhere — Botswana, Britain or anywhere else.

Individuals with dual citizenship are managed by exclusion through the
application of this means test. Citizens with an income below the means
test will qualify either for a full social grant or a reduced grant based
on this means test, which they must declare in terms of the regulations and
the Act.

Section 5 of the Social Assistance Act, Act 13 of 2004, states that only
the following categories of people are eligible to receive social
assistance in South Africa:

   ... South African citizens who are resident in the Republic, permanent
   residents and a category of persons prescribed by the Minister by notice
   in the gazette.

These requirements include valid forms of identification. The SA Social
Security Agency, Sassa, can only comply with the eligibility provisions of
the Social Assistance Act and can, therefore, not exclude anybody who
qualifies in terms of the criteria stated earlier on.

Having said that, it does therefore indicate that we’ll not have a number
of people who are receiving pensions from any foreign state because,
naturally, they’ll be excluded by a means test, which is a tool we use.
Thank you very much.

Mna S G THOBEJANE: Ke a leboga, Tona. Ke nagana gore taba ye re e bolelago
fa ya gore go na le badudi ba bangwe bao ba nago le magwalo a bodudi
dinageng tše pedi — ye nngwe ya dinaga tše e le Afrika Borwa — gomme ba
humana phenšene ye o bego o e hlalosa fa, ke taba ye e lego gona. Ke ka
lebaka leo ke botšišago gore na le na le palo ye e laet šago batho bao ba
swerego mangwalo a bodudi bja naga ye ya rena le bja naga ye nngwe ka nako
ye tee gomme ba humana phenšene go tšwa nageng ye nngwe ba dutše ba le ka
gare ga naga ye ya gaborena. Ge re sa be le palo ya bona, mma, re tlo
humana e le gore batho bao ba se nago maswanedi a go humana tšhelete ke
bona ba e humanago gomme bao ba loketšwego ke go e humana ga ba e humane.
Ke be ke kgopela gore le šaleng taba ye morago gomme le boneng gore le e
direla molawana wa go e hlaola. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[Mr S G THOBEJANE: Thank you, Minister. I think it is true that there are
people with dual citizenship – one being South African – who are receiving
a social assistance grant. This is the reason why I am asking if you have
statistics on people with dual citizenship who are also receiving grants
from foreign states while residing in our country. We need to have the
number of such people to avoid a situation in which grants are paid to the
wrong people instead of those who deserve it. I propose that you look at
this matter and come up with an Act to clarify it.]

TONA YA TLHABOLOLO YA SETŠHABA: Modulasetilo, tla ke arabe ka puo e
gaufinyana le e rre a buileng ka yona. Dipalopalo tse rre a buang ka tsona
ga re na tsona ga jaana, gonne fa re tsenya molao o mo tirisong, o tla bo o
raya gore o ka tswa o le moagi wa Aforika Borwa, a o ka tswa o na le
makwaloitshupo kana o le moagi wa dinaga di le pedi, se re yang ka sona go
ya ka molao o re nang le ona ga jaana ke gore re leba gore letseno la gago
le go dumelela go bona phenšene eno ya thuso ya katletleloloago mo Aforika
Borwa naa.

Ke tlhaloganya se rre a se buang fa a re ka gongwe re tshwanetse re lebe
phetolo ya Melao gore e re kgontshe go leba batho bao. Ga jaana ka gore
Molao ga o ise o fetolwe, ga re na dipalopalo tsa go nna jalo. Fa re ka tla
ra leba Molao oo jaaka go tshitshinngwa, re tla kgona go nna le dipalopalo
tse di ntseng jalo. Re amogela gore ka gongwe go a dumelesega ebile go a
tshwanelega gore re lebe tshitshinyo e rre a e bayang. (Translation of
Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, let me respond by using
my common knowledge and also what the gentleman spoke about. At the moment
we don’t have the statistics that the gentleman is referring to, because if
the Act is put into practice, this will imply that you can be a South
African citizen, by virtue of having an identity document or a dual
passport. In actual fact, what should guide us regarding this current Act
is that we need to check whether your salary qualifies you to receive this
social grant in South Africa.

I understand what the gentleman is referring to when he says we should
maybe look at amending the Act so that it can allow us to accommodate those
people. It should be noted that the Act has not been amended at the moment,
and furthermore we don’t have the statistics. Once we look at that Act as
it is suggested, we will be able to have the statistics. It is acceptable
and it is also in order for us to consider the gentleman’s suggestion.]

Mrs S P KOPANE: Thank you, hon Chairperson. Hon Minister, I really agree
with what you said about the means test, but Sassa doesn’t have cross-
reference resources because they rely on the hard copy information provided
to them. In the light of the fact that Sassa doesn’t have the resources to
cross-reference, will the Minister initiate any bilateral agreement with
the British government or any other country where people have a dual
membership? At present Sassa relies only on the hard copy information that
is given to them as much as they don’t have access for cross-reference,
where someone has not declared any banking accounts. Thank you. [Time
expired.]

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you, hon Chair. Yes, indeed, I
agree that we do not have a cross-referencing system currently, but as I
indicated earlier on, we solely rely on the Social Assistance Act. What hon
members are proposing is something that we have to look at, which I
responded to earlier. It may well be something that we need to look at —
maybe not even a bilateral agreement, but the means to actually cross-
reference. Thank you very much.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr G R MORGAN: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That this House debates the current state of bulk water infrastructure in
   South Africa and comes up with recommendations on how to improve the
   maintenance and refurbishment of this infrastructure.

Dr A N LUTHULI: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

  That the House debates the retaining and recruitment of health
  professionals so as to prevent the large exodus of health professionals
  to foreign countries.


I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: House Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

  That the House debates the government’s failure and refusal to fire plus-
  minus 1 000 police officers who were found guilty of fraud charges.

Dr G W KOORNHOF: House Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

  That the House debates how to mobilise resources so as to support and
  encourage co-operatives as a means of creating jobs and to grow the
  economy.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


   That the House —


   (1)      notes that according to a study commissioned by Johannesburg
        (Bourse operator) JSE Ltd black South Africans own 18 percent of
        the available shares of the top 100 companies listed in
        Johannesburg, edging closer to a government target of 25 percent;
        and


   (2)      commends South African companies who were encouraged to increase
        black ownership under rules established to address economic
        imbalances after the end of apartheid in 1994.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, on a point of order: This is a matter that we
discussed at the Chief Whips’ Forum this morning, that a notice of motion
should simply indicate what the topic is for debate. Once again, the ACDP
is now making a statement rather than simply asking for a motion to be
debated in this House.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, can you stick to the
Rule of a notice of a motion? Thank you.

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates the effect of the performance of understaffing in
  the Department of Health’s Directorate for Radiation Control and comes up
  with recommendations on how to turn this situation around. I thank you.

Mr M A NHANHA: Hon Chairperson, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

  That the House debates the report of the Commission on Traditional
  Leadership Disputes and Claims, also known as the Nhlapo Commission, as
  announced by President Jacob Zuma.

Ms B THOMSON: House Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

  That the House debates plans geared at meeting our targets of employing
  2% of people with disabilities.

                 CONGRATULATIONS TO LADYSMITH BLACK MAMBAZO

                             (Draft Resolution)


Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move without notice:

   That the House —

     1) notes that Ladysmith Black Mambazo will be celebrating  their  50th
        anniversary and their leader Joseph Tshabalala’s 70th birthday with
        a tour this month;

      2) further notes that the group has been  South  Africa’s  ambassadors
         for almost 50 years, and have kept the South African flame  burning
         and have amassed many awards, including Grammy awards, in the  past
         years;

      3) supports the group’s efforts to remember where they have come  from
         by hosting their 50th birthday celebrations  tour  locally  despite
         their hectic international schedule; and

      4) wishes Ladysmith Black Mambazo and their leader Joseph Tshabalala a
         successful tour.

Agreed to.

              IMPORTANCE OF TOURISM MONTH AND WORLD TOURISM DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move without notice:

   That the House —

     1) notes that Tourism Month is an annual celebration held in September
        to focus on the importance of  tourism  to  the  economy  of  South
        Africa;


     2) further  notes  that  World  Tourism  Day  is  commemorated  on  27
        September each year and that this date was chosen to coincide  with
        an important milestone in world tourism:  the  anniversary  of  the
        adoption of the United Nations World Tourism  Organisation  (UNWTO)
        Statutes on 27 September 1970; and


     3) recognises the importance of Tourism Month and World Tourism Day to
        foster  awareness  among  South  Africans  and  the   international
        community of the importance of tourism and  its  social,  cultural,
        political and economic values.

Agreed to.

             LIVING OUT THE VALUES OF A JUST AND CARING SOCIETY

                          (Debate on Heritage Day)

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Chairperson and hon members, I greet you
in this Heritage Month. As we celebrate our heritage and the hard work of
our nation, united in its diversity, we also thank the people of this
nation for all the good work done during the historic first 2010 Fifa
Soccer World Cup to be held on African soil.

This year’s national Heritage Day celebrations will be held in Durban on 24
September at the Moses Mabhida Stadium with the theme “Celebrating the 2010
Fifa Soccer World Cup successes: Our heritage”, and will be addressed by
President Jacob Zuma.

Our religious communities will lead a thanksgiving service to give thanks
for a successful 2010 World Cup. On this occasion political leaders will
also be requested to participate through presenting their messages to the
nation.

Our sports teams from various sporting codes and our football legends will
be given pride of place at this event. Our artists will also participate
and show their commitment to a nation united in action.

Truly, the 2010 World Cup was an event where our people stood together,
where they displayed great patriotism and great confidence in themselves.
In this way, as a nation, we exhibited a renewed consciousness of who we
are as a people and what we can do together; a sense of pride in what we
have achieved and can achieve together, through displays of the South
African flag; and also a sense of an African identity evident in our
collective support for the other African countries participating in the
2010 World Cup.

As a people united in action, the challenge moving forward is how to use
this example as a living legacy to propel our people into the future, to be
confident about our own destinies, our own abilities, and to be proud of
our history and to honour our living human treasures.

The theme of national Heritage Day, therefore, is a call to all South
Africans who pooled their efforts in making the 2010 World Cup a success to
use their energy to make this country a better place and to work together
towards social cohesion. Let the achievements of this year be a source of
inspiration, hope and strength, especially when we are confronted with the
challenges we face as a nation in our daily lives.

This was, in fact, ubuntu in action. Ubuntu is our core value, encompassing
inclusiveness, communal solidarity, empathy, kindness and sharing, which
sums up the spirit of togetherness and generosity characterised by the
South African participation in the 2010 World Cup.

Yet I am sure that you will agree that the full story of how we, as a
nation, rallied together to welcome guests to our shores is yet to be told.
How we constructed stadiums, how we built roads, how we offered our homes
to others, supported our national team and all African teams, how we
rallied behind our national flag, how we prepared and practised, and how we
sang and danced to our vuvuzelas and makarapas and welcomed the world, is a
story yet to be told.

This is a story, of course, of discipline and selflessness, of
industriousness and family values — a story of profound humanism that
celebrates a united nation at its best. It was a timely reminder of the
very foundations, values and principles that are enshrined in our
Constitution and also of what we have come to stand for. It is a reminder
that in winning a long and hard battle for equality, for a nonracial and
nonsexist society, we, as South Africa, were seeking to take humanity
forward through helping ourselves and the world to turn over a new leaf, to
enter a new productive space of possibilities and, out of this, to give
birth to a new man and a new woman.

It is in this context that the topic of today’s debate on living out the
values of a just and caring society gains meaning. Our leaders, such as
Charlotte Maxeke, Chief Albert Luthuli, Lillian Ngoyi, Helen Joseph and
Oliver Tambo placed emphasis on nonracialism, nonsexism and an inclusive
society as being essential for the transformation of our nation. They lived
their lives with these values guiding their actions. We need to follow
their example. On culture, President O R Tambo said:

   Our people, with their varied cultures, which are continuously mingling
   and interacting to their mutual enrichment, exhibit, despite their
   conditions, a great love for life and a sensitive joy in the creative and
   human endeavours of the people of the world, without exception. These
   ordinary, industrious and peaceful people want to revolutionise
   themselves and their country.

It is this selfsame spirit described by Comrade O R Tambo that
characterises our people today. It is indeed our great love for life and a
sensitive joy that enables us to make our stories and to value our cultural
experience.

It is precisely our commitment to the creative and humane endeavours of the
peoples of the world that has propelled us to want the story of our people
and our nation to take its pride of place in the narratives of the world as
our contribution to our own development and as part of world culture.

It is in this context of drinking from the fountains of history and
learning from the men and women of practical wisdom in our communities and
those who gave birth to us that we are embarking upon an initiative to
honour and to celebrate our living human treasures.

“Celebrating South Africa’s living human treasures: The custodians
of our intangible cultural heritage” is an initiative of the Department of
Arts and Culture to draw attention to the role played by our living legends
and to seek to protect and preserve this knowledge and to transmit it to
future generations.

The programme also makes provision for the posthumous recognition of living
treasures where strong recommendations are made by bearer communities.
Accordingly, this policy will ensure that the status of national living
treasures is a lifelong status.

The arts and culture sector is full of such distinguished individuals. I am
sure we have some of them up there amongst our beautiful women. Malibongwe!
[Praise!] [Applause.]

The symbols of our nation are also important parts of our heritage. Earlier
this month, one of the flags flown beneath the helicopters at President
Mandela’s inauguration in 1994 was rescued for our country by a great
patriot, Mr Giuseppe Ciucci. This flag will be formally handed over to our
government at an event on 27 September at Stellenbosch University.

We are also going to host a national seminar on human living treasures on
30 September 2010. The main objective of the seminar is to start a national
dialogue that will further expand and elaborate on the concept of living
human treasures.

During Women’s Month, we honoured Charlotte Maxeke, Lillian Ngoyi and Helen
Joseph by declaring their graves national monuments. We honoured Dulcie
September by instituting a Dulcie September Memorial Lecture at the
University of the Western Cape.

On Thursday, tomorrow, we shall also launch the Social History Centre at
the Iziko Museums here in Cape Town. This centre will also play an
important role in the preservation of our heritage.

Last week I also announced our department’s support for the design and
construction of the Steve Biko Centre in Ginsburg in the Eastern Cape which
will comprise a museum, an archives centre, a community media centre,
performance spaces and a commemorative garden. In this way, new generations
will be able to understand their history with confidence and renewed
consciousness.

In this way and through these initiatives, we are beginning to make
strides, as South Africans, to preserve and promote our creative and humane
endeavours, as Comrade O R Tambo coined it. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr H P MALULEKA: Hon Chairperson, hon members and our beautiful guests in
the gallery, lo kovhela [good evening]. The celebration of heritage must
seek to contribute to the resolution of three interrelated contradictions,
namely class, race and gender oppression.

In the context of arts and culture and the celebration of heritage, these
contradictions impact on socioeconomic, cultural, religious, family and
other relations in all communities. Their impact presents deep-seated
challenges that could require strategic transformation in order to build
values of a just and caring society. Our debate should promote an
understanding that there is a dialectical relationship between heritage and
culture, social cohesion and quality of life.

South Africa’s rich heritage has been recorded and stocked in the libraries
in both rural and urban communities, but not in its totality. In this
regard the ANC policy emphasises that arts and culture should be preserved
and promoted as part of heritage. Moreover, the production of arts and
crafts should be financially resourced and encouraged among the
communities.

This task requires the capacity of the economy to allocate funds for the
purposes of building a unitary state. In a diverse, constitutional,
democratic society like ours, the impact of heritage and culture is
profound and central to enhancing the values of a just and caring society.

Fortunately, there is tremendous progress within this area, also as far as
ensuring that heritage and culture is popularised, preserved, democratised
and opened to all South Africans. Many now serve as a rich resource for
communities. Community needs have been integrated into appropriately
restructured management of heritage resources.

The ANC government must continue to strengthen partnerships across society
to ensure social cohesion and a better quality of life.We must consolidate
partnerships across society to strengthen social cohesion and ensure that
our nation achieves the values of a caring society. Indeed, the need to
build co—operation among all South Africans applies more so to matters of
spiritual sustenance, such as beliefs and moral values, which are as
communal as they are profoundly personal.

This we must do, proceeding from the understanding that comprehensive
social transformation entails changing the material conditions of all South
Africans for the better, but also ensuring that we forge a nation inspired
by values of human solidarity. It is the combination of these factors that
describes the civilisation of the national democracy that we seek to build.

We must continue to encourage the development and promotion of traditions,
religious expressions and other belief systems which are consistent with
the values of our country’s Constitution. These form a critical part of the
nation’s collective resource in the promotion of humane values. In this
regard we must seek to emphasise that which is common and good for our
society.

I believe in linking the values and quality of life firmly to key
priorities such as access to health, housing, rural development and
anticorruption. These are of vital importance to ensure that values are
entrenched as a key component of development. The Ready to Govern document
argues that, through arts and culture, a sense of national identity and
pride can be cultivated.

We must promote the national democratic revolutions’ revolutionary values
of morality, and these long-standing values must inform the new national
democratic society as articulated in the ANC’s 2007 Strategy and Tactics
document. The society we seek to build must have a humane value system, a
strong revolutionary morality and must espouse the principle of
selflessness and a deep-rooted respect for truth and honesty.

The Strategy and Tactics document argues that a national democratic society
should be founded on a thriving economy. It should be an economy that
promotes development, decent jobs and rural co-operatives to ensure
national prosperity. These include vegetable gardens and the development of
letsema [collective farming].

In many communities, Heritage Month is associated with agridevelopment
activities. Critical to this is the value system based on human solidarity
and appreciation of the culture of hard work and zeal.

This debate takes place during the month of September. This is the month
that is central to the area of agriculture and rural development because
our diverse communities are united at this time of the year in ploughing
their lands and cultivating their gardens in order to plant maize,
vegetables and fodder for their animals.

Great strides have been taken since 1994 in the project of nation-building.
Key steps have been taken to advance the national democratic project of
reconciliation, patriotism and a proudly South African identity. These
accomplishments are rooted in longstanding ANC traditions such as
nonracialism, nonsexism, nontribalism and unity.

In this regard, social cohesion and revolutionary moral values and quality
of life should be linked to building the infrastructural conditions for a
united nation. Through appropriate policies it should overcome the legacy
of the Group Areas Act, apartheid social geography, inequalities and uneven
development.
Through our programmes for housing, social security, quality health care
and sport and recreation, we aim to continue to build a life of better
quality and values. Housing is not just about building houses but also
about transforming our cities and towns; building cohesive, sustainable and
caring communities with closer access to work and social amenities,
including sports and recreation facilities; and a better health system with
the necessary hospital infrastructure.

Our health system and the provision of antiretroviral drugs are aimed at
empowering those living with HIV and Aids. Similarly, the new economic path
must succeed in creating decent jobs, ensuring quality of life and closing
the gap between our people in both income and wage.

We must proceed from the understanding that comprehensive social
transformation entails changing the material conditions of all South
Africans for a better quality life. It also entails ensuring that we forge
a nation inspired by values of human solidarity. It is the combination of
these factors that describe the national democracy that we seek to build.

All sectors of society must ensure an overarching South African identity,
recognising the diversity of the country’s people. We need to promote pride
in our heritage, including our African identity and our common humanity as
global citizens. The 2010 Soccer World Cup has left us with a rich heritage
that we must preserve and promote.
Central to this endeavour is the ongoing mobilisation of all South Africans
to strengthen the nation’s moral fibre, informed by the ideals of human
compassion and solidarity.

In conclusion, the debate on social cohesion, heritage and values must not
be seen in a socioeconomic vacuum. Of significant importance are the
improvement of our country’s economy and the quality of life of our people.

Planting and harvesting for a future quality life for our people is the
hope that heritage brings. In that sense, September is not only looking to
the future, but also backward-looking to improve programmes of the past in
order to ensure unity and a life of quality for our people. I thank you.

Dr A LOTRIET: Hon Chair, this month we celebrate our heritage and it is
usually a time of looking back and reflecting on our heritage. Heritage is
often defined as what we inherit, what we value or what we want to pass on
to future generations. In this sense we tend to refer to our tangible and
intangible heritage, our cultural capital.

During Heritage Month, we celebrate the rich diversity of this cultural
capital. I do believe that at this particular juncture where we are in our
country today, it is perhaps more important and imperative to reflect on
the values that we have today, which will be the heritage that we pass on
to future generations. What is the heritage that they will reflect on, and
will it be worth celebrating? This is a tremendous responsibility, as we
are the authors of our own history and heritage.

When we talk about living out the values of a just and caring society, most
people would agree that they wish to live in a just society. The question,
however, is: What is meant by a just society? This question has been asked
by numerous philosophers, leaders and academics, and their answers differ
greatly, depending on their ideological context.

I would, however, propose the following. A just society should be seen as
more than the mechanical application of the rules of justice. Inherent in
this is the understanding that justice, and in this sense also fairness of
access, must be actual, not just theoretical or something that lip service
is paid to.

A caring society refers to a positive state of affairs where there is
social justice and equality, free from oppressive forces; access to quality
education, adequate health and social services; economic prosperity;
adequate housing; a clean and safe environment; support for community
structures; and the opportunity to engage in cultural and religious
activities.

The aim for a just and caring society is one in which all people, with no
exceptions, have the rights, freedom and capacity to access services and
resources to enhance their wellbeing, and where the most disadvantaged and
marginalised members of society are given extra support to ensure such
access; or, stated in a different way, an open-opportunity society for all.

But let us examine some of the values of a just and caring society and
reflect on where we are and to what extent we do, in fact, live out the
values. The first value is that of respect, where the intrinsic worth of
all individuals is recognised.

Every human being has a unique worth and all people are entitled to be
treated with honour and respect. Respect is a cornerstone of justice and
caring. Injustice and neglect can only flourish where respect for others is
absent.

Where are we? What are we leaving as a heritage? Are we leaving behind as a
heritage health workers prevented by force and violence to care for
patients as seen in the recent strike; teachers preventing others by force
to teach; and even worse, teachers preventing learners to learn and write
exams?

What values of justness and caring do these learners take with them on
their journey into the future? Perhaps the answer can already be seen in
learners attacking other learners to prevent them from writing exams, as it
is happening right now.

Another value of a just and caring society is opportunities for
participation. This is a society where people are given choices about how
they live, where they have the means to make those choices and where people
are not only beneficiaries, but active participants. This is where they
have the right and freedom and capacity to take responsibility for their
own destiny.

What do we have in our country today? Do people have the ability to make
their own choices and have access to opportunities or do they have to
belong to the ruling party to get access to opportunities? In other words,
the value that is fostered is one of who you know, what your party-
political and family connections are and not what your merit is.

A just and caring society is one where everyone has equal access to
information. But what kind of just society are we creating when this
government proposes a Bill, aimed at keeping information from members of
society; when media tribunals are proposed? What are the values that we
leave as heritage? Is it values of silence and secrecy?

If we reflect on what our society looks like today, it is not the
embodiment of a just and caring society. The problem is that we treat
values as something out there, something that we can create and establish
commissions and movements for. And we believe a few projects and workshops
will make us a society that lives out these values. But the reality is that
values have to be part of our daily lives at every level and have to be the
guiding force in all our activities.

Every act that defies the values of justness and caring, every
contradiction in what is said and what is practiced, erodes the heritage
that we leave to future generations.

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Chairperson, hon Minister, and hon members, in Cope we
have a very strong belief in the rights of individuals and communities to
live by their religious views and to uphold their cultural heritage. This
is because we stand for the rights that are guaranteed in our Constitution.
Heritage Day must, therefore, play an intricate but pivotal role in nation-
building in our country.

Every Heritage Day should serve as a milestone to determine how many more
obstacles we have to overcome as a nation on our journey to a common
national identity. We conceived Heritage Day as a way to reinforce the
political compromise we have reached. On this year’s Heritage Day we should
set aside differences in political affiliations, creed, race and religion
and share our culture and learn from one another.

During the World Cup we demonstrated to ourselves and to the world our
pride in being South Africans. There was such unity among all South
Africans, regardless of age and race. We all want to be South Africans
because we understand the importance and significance of having a common
bond that ties all of us together in spite of our diversity.

South Africa is today the world’s most unequal society, unfortunately.
Millions of our people are out of work. Poverty and destitution are
endemic. For many the dream for a better life for all has turned into a
living nightmare. Heritage Day must give us time to pause and reflect. Is
this the kind of society we set out to forge in 1994 — a society in which
social equality will be stifled?

Unity and national identity are universal values that all nations seek to
promote. All over the world there is a need for nations to forge together
regardless of history, race, age or culture. For example, the United States
will celebrate for the whole month the contribution that Hispanic Americans
have made, stretching from today, 15 September 2010, to 15 October 2010.
During this time, Hispanic heritage and culture will be celebrated and
recognised.

I want this House to ponder for a moment the possibility of such a move in
our own country. We ourselves have so much to offer because we are such a
diverse group of people and, in the process, we could even create a tourism
bonanza. We are a unique country because the cradle of human society is
right here on our doorstep. We are unique also in being the first country
ever to settle deep political divisions around a negotiating table rather
than resorting to a destructive war to settle the conflict.

On this day, therefore, it is not only important to make a potjie and samp,
have a braai, drink umqombothi and dish out a delicious Malay curry, but
also to look back at our history and commemorate those who fought for the
political and cultural freedom that we enjoy today, including the values
that they fought for.

It is proper and fitting that Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu has been
decreed patron of this day. What a major role he played in fighting for
liberation and then consolidating democracy in South Africa! He was the
first black South African Anglican Archbishop of Cape Town and Primate of
the Church of the Province of Southern Africa.

He has been active in the defence of human rights and used his high profile
to campaign for the oppressed. He has campaigned to fight Aids, TB,
homophobia, poverty and racism. Tutu received the Nobel Peace Price in
1984, the Albert Schweitzer Prize for Humanitarianism in 1986, the Gandhi
Peace Prize in 2005, and many more too numerous for me to mention within
the limited time that I have. This is an impressive track record for one
man.

However, we too have all played our little roles in bringing South Africa
to where it is today. The ordinary people, young and old, fought against
the apartheid regime as did the social and political movements that were
organised by and in which ordinary people participated.

Many people fought and died so that we could be free and live in peace,
unafraid of one another. We salute them and in remembering them we must
take the work they began forward.

We should all be proud that we have the privilege to celebrate such a day
in freedom. The very fact that this day exists shows that we have truly
come a long way. Therefore, Cope encourages all South Africans to enjoy the
coming public holiday and to celebrate our freedom and, above all, the
values of our common humanity.

I join those who praised the women up there; they really do look very
beautiful. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

USIHLALO WENDLU (Nk M N Oliphant): Malungu ahloniphekile, bengicela ukuthi
nehlise amazwi. Abanye bethu iminyaka ngicabanga ukuthi ihambile, kanti
abanye baba nenkinga yokuthi baphathwa amazinyo bawakhipha isikhathi
singakafiki; manje uma nihlebeza ungathi igundwane lihamba. Ngakho-ke
ngiyanicela ukuthi nehlise amazwi. Ngicela oSotswebhu njengoba bethembisile
namhlanje ekuseni ukuthi bazoqinisekisa ukuthi amalungu awawubangi umsindo.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, could you please
lower your voices. Some of us are old, and others had problems with their
teeth which they had removed before it was time to do so. Now when you are
whispering it sounds like a moving mouse. So please lower your voices.
Chief Whips, please honour the promises that you made this morning; you
promised that you will make sure that the members do not make a noise.]

Mrs H S MSWELI: Chairperson, we, including the hon members around me, the
House, this Parliament, in fact all South Africans today, are the product
of the rich and varied heritage of this our land, South Africa.

Heritage Day marks the day on which South Africans come together and
celebrate what it means to be truly South African, what it means to be
united, and what it means to have a common vision arising from a rich and
varied cultural diversity, which truly means no boundaries, as it is a
celebration of our unity in diversity.

Therefore, it behoves us to honour and, at the same time, showcase to the
rest of the world that we are one human race, sharing a common evolutionary
vision of a harmonious and unified tomorrow.

The IFP commends both our leaders, His Excellency Prince Buthelezi and our
Zulu monarch, King Goodwill Zwelithini, for the manner in which they both
emphasise Zulu cultural heritage in the improvement and upliftment of the
Zulu people. Two examples in that regard are the umkhosi womhlanga or reed
dance and the male circumcision rite.

The reed dance, which encourages the tradition of remaining a virgin until
marriage, and the male circumcision rite, which is now performed by
qualified medical practitioners, directly address the scourge and spread of
HIV and Aids.

In conclusion, and in the commemoration and spirit of King Shaka, the King
of amaZulu — who himself played a most resolute and, in fact, destiny-
defining role in the unification of the entire Zulu nation - the IFP would
like to see the entire nation of South Africa come together on Heritage
Day, united under one common cause, namely a better and brighter tomorrow
for all South Africans. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs R E NYALUNGU: Chairperson, hon Ministers, the Deputy Ministers present
here and our guests in the gallery ...

Ndzi ri perile. [Good evening.]

Allow me, Chairperson, to say that our assessment of the contribution of
culture towards social cohesion and a caring society resonates well with
the Reconstruction and Development Programme, RDP, when it provides a
description that arts and culture are within the system of socialisation
and reflect the whole organisation of society. Our appreciation of the
Heritage Day debate recognises that cultural expression and arts and
culture permeates all aspects of society and are integral parts of social
and economic life.

However, the 1994 democratic breakthrough sought to affirm and
promote the rich and diverse expression of South African culture by giving
constitutional right to all people to practise their culture, language,
beliefs and customs.

In the post-1994 situation, the ANC’s key task has been to promote the
development of a unifying national culture representing the aspirations of
all South Africans. The key task includes promotion of the principles of
nonracialism, nonsexism, human rights and democracy.

This includes the task of conserving and promoting South Africa’s national
heritage. Part of this perspective places arts education squarely within
the national education curricula. This pertains to preprimary schools and
the secondary and tertiary levels, including informal educational
structures.

In creating cultural expression, I have no doubt, Chairperson, that the
language, dance, songs, symbols and art and crafts are expressions of
heritage. They transmit ideas, expressions, collective memory and the
interpretation of the cultural value systems.

Our country is a multilingual society with a significant number of
languages, and it is this diversity that becomes the strength of our
heritage and democratic values. In this regard, the ANC policy recognises,
protects and develops all languages.

Our Bill of Rights constitutes a cornerstone of democracy in South Africa.
The Constitution enshrines the rights of the people in our country and
affirms the democratic values of human dignity, equality and freedom. These
values contribute to the growth of our democracy. Section 30 states that —

   Everyone has a right to use the language and to participate in the
   cultural life of their choice, but no one exercising these rights may do
   so in a manner that is inconsistent with any provision of the Bill of
   Rights.

This section provides that diverse cultures and the development of
languages are not to be used for political cessation from the rest of South
Africa, the promotion of division, ethnic mobilisation, narrow identities
or chauvinistic Africanism.

Section 31(1) states that —

   Persons belonging to a cultural, religious or linguistic community may
   not be denied the right, with other members of that community, to enjoy
   their cultural practices, religion and the use of their language.

This section promotes vibrant development of constitutional values amongst
different communities, particularly the historically oppressed communities.

In the past 16 years, there has been a concerted effort to build South
Africa as a nation state, to build national common identity and South
Africanness. We have made advances to reverse the legacy of apartheid
colonialism. Our nation achieved some values of a caring society inspired
by the traits of human compassion, which informed our struggle against
apartheid colonialism. Indeed, the need for spiritual matters, sustenance
of such beliefs and moral values are as communal as they are profoundly
personal.

Key to the contribution of culture towards a caring society is the
promotion of the principle of ubuntu. This is a principle that promotes
human solidarity. It recognises human responsibility towards the needs of
others.

The principle of ubuntu must permeate all levels of society. It must be
promoted in government, civil society, nongovernmental organisations, NGOs,
the education system, and at justice and policy levels. This requires a
strong developmental state with the capacity to mobilise economic
resources. The ubuntu project could help create conditions for a caring
society.

The ANC-led government remains committed to creating a united, cohesive
society out of our fragmented past. As hon Comrade President Zuma once
said:

   As the ANC we committed to promoting unity in diversity and to developing
   a shared value system, based on the spirit of community solidarity and a
   caring society. Our shared value system should encourage us to become
   active citizens in the renewal of our country. We must build a common
   national identity and patriotism.

Ubuntu has always been the cornerstone of South African society whereby
South Africans are united by one common objective — to help those who could
not help themselves.

I would argue that the road towards social cohesion and development of a
caring society requires transformation of economic and social relations.
This type of transformation does not take us away from the route towards
such a caring society. This articulation was affirmed in the 2007 Strategy
and Tactics document.

In this regard, the national democratic revolution is about transforming
the power relations that reproduced colonialism of a special type and that
relate to subcultural expressions, alien cultures, subcultures and crass
materialism.

Chairperson, the values of a just, caring society, including Ubuntu-Botho
principles, should be integrally connected to social structure. Their
success or failure could depend on the nature and task of society in terms
of addressing priorities, such as levels of crime and corruption;
unemployment and poverty; available decent jobs and social equity; and the
degree of the wage and income gap.

In this regard, social cohesion and a caring society should be linked to
building the infrastructural conditions for and development of a caring
society. It should overcome the legacy of apartheid colonialism. We must
change apartheid social geography, inequalities and uneven development and
do so through a new economic growth path.

Our Strategy and Tactics document argues that a national democratic society
should be founded on a growing economy. Accordingly, it could be an economy
that promotes development and decent jobs in order to meet our government’s
seven priorities.

I believe that the values of a caring society, inspired by the traits of
human compassion, informed our national struggle against national
oppression. Indeed, the need to work together among all our people became
relevant more than ever before in the 16 years of our democracy.

As the ANC, our premise should move from the understanding that
comprehensive social transformation entails changing the socioeconomic
conditions of all our people. In doing so, we should be inspired by values
of collective solidarity. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Chairperson, hon members and members of the public in the
gallery, we would do well to remember that culture is not a static set of
traditions and practices. Culture happens around us at this very moment.
The lifestyles and habits of today will become the culture of tomorrow.

In this sense we can take great pride in how we have celebrated our
heritage and come close to each other as a nation in the run-up and
eventual hosting of the Fifa Soccer World Cup. South Africans of all walks
of life took ownership of the event and together we forged a deeper sense
of being united in our diversity.

The sense of togetherness and achievement in the wake of the event should
inspire us to continue reaching for greatness on the world stage. July 2010
represents a significant marker on the road to nation-building and will be
remembered as an important cultural occasion for many generations to come.
The flip side of the same coin is that today we also face the danger of
establishing many negative things as part of our culture because this have
become common lifestyle choices and habits. Fast food, fast cars and fast
money seem to be the sole motivation of many people, including many of the
elite.

We need to resist this culture of conspicuous consumption and greed as well
as inevitable corruption that is required to sustain it. This selfish
lifestyle and predatory behaviour runs contrary to our most valued and
commonly shared cultural values as captured by the word ubuntu.

Instead of promoting that central tenet of our heritage, namely that the
individual prospers when the community prospers, there are too many people
in power who are popularising the theory that the individual should prosper
at the expense of the community.

Another disturbing trend that runs contrary to our heritage, but which
threatens to become part of our culture, is language intolerance. Two years
ago many of us warned that unwarranted and personal attacks on the Head of
State will surely set the precedent for similar behaviour in future.

Today we already see this culture in certain quarters. That same reckless
intolerance informed the wild abandon with which various factions in the
ruling party and its partners have attacked each other and the media. It
fuelled unnecessary and violent trends. [Time expired.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, living according to the values of a just and caring
society is an awesome challenge! Most of us get this right to some degree
at times — perhaps not the hon Mike Ellis — but the rest of us fall short a
lot of the time.

Today my attention has been drawn to what I consider one of my
shortcomings. I cringe a little at the idea that, as Jawaharlal Nehru says:


   We are known by the way we treat our animals.

Collectively, as South Africans we should be more than cringing right now
at the systematic destruction of our wildlife heritage, in particular
rhino, through years of unprosecuted thieving, which erodes any facade of
our being a caring society.

In April the Minister said a special national wildlife reaction unit was to
be set up to combat the activities of organised crime syndicates engaged in
the poaching of rhino horn.

With a total of 4 661 environmental crime cases reported nationally, there
was a compelling case for the establishment of environmental courts with
prosecutors and magistrates trained for environmental crimes.

Referring to water issues last month, she said that the launch of the first
courts would be in the near future. Recent official reports accusing the
chief operating officer of the Mpumalanga Tourism and Parks Agency and the
principal officer of the agency’s provident fund of poaching rhino horn in
the province point to the urgent need for these courts.

The World Wildlife Fund’s African Rhino Programme has asked people to take
action during this month to help protect our remaining rhino populations
and also to support people like Gilberto Vicente, who was murdered in
August, as they risk their lives daily against the sophisticated, ruthless
and heavily armed international criminal gangs who run the illegal rhino
horn trade.

The month will culminate in Make Noise for Rhinos Day, during which people
are asked to blow their vuvuzelas at 13h00 on Wednesday, 22 September in a
symbolic call on government to take this issue seriously, strengthen law
enforcement and impose strict legal penalties as successful deterrents.
Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr M H STEELE: Madam Chairperson, hon members, this year we should all be
celebrating the contribution of the Indian community to South African life.
2010 is the 150th anniversary of the arrival of the first Indian indentured
labourers in 1860.

According to research, some 152 000 people of Indian origin settled mainly
in what is now KwaZulu-Natal, many as indentured labourers, others as free
settlers, traders, artisans and farmers.

The subsequent discriminatory treatment and legislation lumped all the
descendants of these immigrants together as one single racial category of
Indians.

Research has shown that the diversity of these immigrants is an important
part of their story. Hon Singh, I’m sure you will learn something. There
were regional and language differences, for instance, between the Northern
Hindi speakers and the Southern Tamil or Telugu speakers, which differences
were themselves overlain by differences in religion with Hindu, Muslim and
Christian adherents.

The very economic success of these Indian settlers in liberating themselves
from indentured servitude and poverty played a part in the subsequent
racialised conflict in KwaZulu-Natal. The competition for land and trading
opportunities that led to the imposition of the now notorious Group Areas
Act had a huge and destructive effect on Indian communities and the
psychological scars are still felt today.

If we are going to be a just and caring society we need to acknowledge
this. Their story of disposition and removal is one that needs to be
recorded and respected if we are to truly demonstrate a respect for our
heritage. The oral history of individuals and communities need to be
captured as part of our cultural heritage as a nation and to heal the hurts
of the past.

The story of loss and alienation is not the full story of that community
either. Their contribution to the political, economic and religious life of
this country has been enormous. The struggle for democracy and the adoption
of the 1996 Constitution would have been very different had it not been for
the values of respect for persons in law, tolerance and the sanctity of
life which the Hindu and Muslim spiritual traditions both emphasised.

To promote a democratic respect for heritage also means ensuring the
availability and accessibility of cultural artefact. We are learning
rapidly, for example, that cultural heritage is not only a democratic
obligation and part of a tradition preserving the legacy of the past, but
it is also big business.

The interest in cultural heritage translates into a growing market for
heritage tourism. To provide access to our different cultural traditions is
the challenge for our heritage managers. Within my own constituency of
Pietermaritzburg, there is a modestly-sized municipal art gallery, the
Tatham.
The handful of staff have embarked on a project to place its entire
catalogued art collection on the internet. Nearly half of the whole
collection, some 600 works, have over a period of six years now been
photographed and digitalised for public web access. That is achieving their
mission of heritage outreach. The point is: How much do we value having
such a project and why are the council and its staff having to conduct such
a valuable exercise with their resources?

Making heritage accessible to all and selling it as an attractive tourist
commodity is part of ensuring its commercial viability. It means that all
our spheres of government need to seize on the opportunities which are
presented and to market our nation and our heritage.

When the Victorian architectural jewel, which is the centre of
Pietermaritzburg, is allowed to decay into grime and neglect because of the
position of its municipal finances, we should all be worried. When this
happens because of the factional infighting of elements within the ruling
ANC, who have been carrying out a fratricidal struggle for over three or
four years, this is a public disgrace.

Respecting heritage means practising the virtues of good governance, and
this is something the ANC in Maritzburg has to learn the hard way. That is
not the way we go about cultivating justice and a caring society. Thank
you. [Applause.]
Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: Mudzulatshidulo, Nnḓu i ṱhonifheaho na vhueni hashu vhu
re ngei kha vhugalatenga, ndi masiari. [Chairperson, hon members and our
visitors sitting in the gallery, good afternoon.]

Through the colonial and apartheid years ...

... vhathu vhashu vho pfiswa u vhavha lune vho vha vha sa ḓivhi zwauri musi
hu tshi pfi u muthu, ho vha hu tshi vha ho vhonwa mini kha iwe. Hezwo
zwithu zwoṱhe zwo ḓo ri sia ri songo tsha vha vha mashudu nga tshenetsho
tshifhinga. Vhuthu hashu a ri ngo kona u vhu sumbedza, sa zwine ra khou zwi
vhona ṋamusi. Muvhuso wa tshiṱalula na makoloni e a vha e hone, vho ri
tambudza zwi vhavhaho vhukuma.

Fhedzi-ha, u ḓa ha demokirasi ya Afurika Tshipembe, zwo sia ri tshi vho
kona u vha na zwiimiswa zwine ra vho vhonala ngazwo. Izwo zwo sumbedza
ḓivhazwakale, nḓila ya u ṱhonifha na vhufa ha vhadzulapo vhoṱhe. Ri nga
bveledza vhukoni hashu hoṱhe u itela uri ri sa tsha thivheliwa kha zwine ra
tea u tshilisa zwone.

Ḓivhazwakale ya vhathu vhashu, yo sumbedza nḓila i si yone. Vho vha vha
tshi nyadziwa na u dzhiiwa vha si vha ndeme. Ngauri zwa zwino shango ḽashu
ḽo vhofholowa, ḽi vho ḓivha-vho zwauri musi hu tshi pfi Muvenḓa hu khou
ambiwa mini. Ri vho zwi ḓivha zwauri musi hu tshi pfi muthu u amba
Tshitshangana kana TshiXhosa, u tea u ambara nga nḓila-ḓe. Mvelele yawe i
tea u ṱhonifhiwa. Hezwo zwithu zwoṱhe zwo ḓisa phambano. Mbofholowo yo ḓela
u ri ṱuṱuwedza uri ri ite ngauralo.

Vhukoni vhune ra vha naho, ho ḓiswa nga mbofholowo. Hu na ṱhanziela dza uri
vho zwi gudelaho vha kone u zwi vhona zwauri muthu arali a tshi tshila e
kha zwa hawe, u a lelutshelwa nga zwithu zwoṱhe. Ifa ḽeneḽo ḽe ra ḽi ṋewa,
ḽine vhaṅwe na u ḽi vhona a vha ḽi vhoni, ḽi bva kha vhomakhulukuku vhashu,
u itela uri ri sale ri tshi ya phanḓa na vhutshilo. Vho ri ifa iḽo, ḽi
bvele phanḓa u bva kha mirafho u ya kha miṅwe, u itela uri ri vhe na
vhuḓikukumusi kha zwithu zwoṱhe.

Zwine ra zwi ḓivha ndi zwauri, musi ri tshi kha ḓi aluwa, ho vha hu na
zwine vhathu vhashu vha zwi ḓivha sa ifa ḽa u tshila, ḽine ḽa ḓa na maitele
a matshilisano, ane a vha dzi ... (Translation of Tshivenda paragraphs
follows.)

[... our people had to endure a system that deprived them of their sense of
identity and continuity. This deprived us of our worthiness at that time.
We never expressed our sense of being in the way we do today. The apartheid
regime and the colonists treated us very badly.

However, the dawn of democracy in South Africa gave birth to institutions
that display our identity, that showed the history, a way of respect and
the legacy of all citizens. We can develop all our potential so that
nothing can hinder us from living a better life.

The history of our people had shown the wrong path. They were disrespected
and undermined. Now that our country has been liberated, it recognises a
black person. We now know that if a person speaks Xitsonga or isiXhosa,
which traditional attire they should wear. Their culture must be respected.
All these things brought diversity. Freedom has come to encourage us to do
likewise.

The ability we have was brought about by liberation. There is confirmation
from the experts that if a person lives according to his culture all things
become easier. This legacy was given by our forefathers for us to continue
with life. They said this legacy must pass on from one generation to
another so that we may have pride in everything. When we were growing up,
there were things that our people knew as the legacy of life that prescribe
the way of living, which are ...]

... worship rights, rights of passage, birth rights, wedding and funeral
rituals, oaths of allegiance, traditional legal systems and ritual kinship
ceremonies.

Zwoṱhe zwo vha zwi si nga si vhonale arali hu songo vha na mbofholowo ye ra
fhira khayo. Ri na mvelele dzine dza tea u sumbedza nḓivho dzine ra vha
nadzo. Ndi musi ri tshi kona u amba nga luambo lwashu, u fana na zwino ndi
tshi khou amba. Tshifhingani tsha kale nyambo nnzhi dzo vha dzi sa pfali.
Wo vha u tshi ri u amba Tshivenḓa, Tshitshangana kana TshiZulu, wa vhonala
sa tshiḓaela tshi sa koni u amba luambo. U vha tshiḓaela nga nḓila-ḓe u
tshi khou amba luambo lwau lwa ḓamuni?

Ro vhuya ra gudiswa na u amba tshivhuru. Hu tshi pfi ... (Translation of
Tshivenda paragraphs follows.)

[All these things would have never happened were it not because of the
liberation that we achieved. We have cultures that reflect our knowledge;
for instance, when we speak our mother tongue, like I am doing right now.
In the past most languages were unknown. If you spoke Tshivenda, Xitsonga
or isiZulu, you looked like a fool who did not know how to speak the
language. How could one be stupid when one speaks one’s own mother tongue?

We were even taught to speak Afrikaans. They said ...]

... jy lieg soos ‘n koerant. Nou lyk dit asof die koerant nie meer lieg nie
... [... you are lying like a newspaper. Now it seems as if the newspaper
is not lying anymore ...]

... ngauri i sokou amba zwe ya sa vhudziswe.

Hu na nḓivho ine musi ri tshi khou tshila, ra tea u i tsireledza.
(Translation of Tshivenda sentences follows.)

[... because it just says  things which were never asked.

There is some knowledge that we should protect in life.]

We also have traditional craftsmanship and herbal medicine ...

... hune ra wana hu na miri ya tshirema, ine ya tea u sumbedziwa u itela
uri ni kone u alafhiwa nga tshirema. Vhathu vhashu vha ḓivha vhuṅanga ha
mishonga yo raloho. Hezwo zwithu zwo vha zwo dzidzivhala, ri tshi vho
tshila zwi si tsheho, ngauri nḓivho yashu yo vha yo bwelwa fhasi, nahone
vhathu vhashu vha si tsha ḓivha zwine vha khou ita zwone.

Arali ri sa koni u lwa nndwa ya u ḓivhofholola, ṋamusi ro vha ri tshi ḓo
pfi vho nnyi? Ro vha ri tshi ḓo vha ri sa ḓivhei. U fhambana ha mvelele hu
tea u dzhielwa nṱha ngauri hu ita uri ri gude khadzo. Zwithu zwine ra zwi
ita, ri a kona u alusana ngazwo. Zwa zwino ri vho kona u tshilisana sa
vhathu vha Afurika Tshipembe ngauri ri khou shumisa yeneiḽa nḓivho ye ra i
ṋewa nga vhomakhulukuku washu. Vho ri rathisela nḓivho ya vhufa, u itela
uri ri kone u tshila sa vhathu vha ḓikukumusaho nga zwine vha vha nazwo.

Kha guvhangano ḽa vhu 52, ANC yo ḓivhofha na u ṱuṱuwedza vhathu vha Afurika
Tshipembe uri vha farane, hu sa vhe na tshiṱalula nga muvhala, nga mbeu na
zwoṱhe zwine ra nga ṱalulana ngazwo. ANC yo ombedzela uri hezwo zwithu
zwoṱhe, zwi songo vha hone. Rine ro dzula ra zwi vhona zwauri ndi ngoho ri
khou tea u vha vhathu vhathihi vha tshilisanaho. Mvelele dzashu dzi tea u
sumbedzisa uri ndi zwifhio zwine ra fana ngazwo ngauri dzi a ṱangana
vhukati. Hezwi zwi sia ri tshi kona u tshila sa vhathu, ri tshi humbula zwe
vhomakhulukuku vhashu vha ri siela zwone uri ri zwi shumise na matshelo.

Ngauri heiḽa nḓivho yo shumiswaho mulovha, ri khou tea u i shumisa ṋamusi,
matshelo, na kha tshakha dzi ḓaho, u itela uri hune ra dzula hone hu
vhofholowe. Ri tea u kona u amba nyambo dzashu na u tevhedzela vhurereli
hashu ri sa tsha imiwa phanḓa. Makoloni na tshiṱalula zwo ḓa zwa ri
fhambanya, ngeno ri vhadzulapo vha Afurika Tshipembe roṱhe. [U vhanda
zwanḓa.]

Ri songo tenda u luṱanywa nga ḽifhedzi. Riṋe ri a zwi ḓivha zwauri musi ri
tshi tshila sa vhathu vhathihi, ri vha na mulalo nahone ri a kona u
ṱhaḓulana mihwalo kha zwithu zwinzhi. Hezwo zwithu ro zwi gudiswa nga
vhomakhulukuku washu. Ri tea u dzula ri tshi funana ngauri mulalo ndi ifa.
U nga balelwa u tshila nga mulalo arali wo gudiswa u tshila ngawo? Arali wo
funḓedzwa u funa muhura wau u nga balewa, ngeno Bivhili yo ḓi tou zwi amba?
(Translation of Tshivenda paragraphs follows.)
[... where we find indigenous plants which we must preserve for traditional
healing and medicines. Our people have knowledge of these traditional
healing practices. These practices had faded and we were living without
them because our knowledge was buried and our people didn’t know what they
were doing.

If we did not fight to liberate ourselves, where would we be today? We
would be unknown to the world. Diverse cultures need to be taken very
seriously because we learn from them. Things which we do provide common
ground for the promotion of mutual understanding and enriching one another.
We are now able to live together as people of South Africa because we are
using the same knowledge which we inherited from our forefathers.  They
have passed the knowledge of heritage to us so that we are able to live
with pride and embrace what we have.

At its 52nd National Conference, the ANC committed itself and encouraged
the people of South Africa to unite, and not to discriminate on the basis
of colour, gender and other things which we may use to discriminate against
each other. The ANC emphasised that all these should not happen. We have
realised the need to unite and to live together. Our cultures must display
their commonality since they have similarities. This makes us to live as a
people, remembering the heritage which our forefathers left behind for us
to embrace even in future.

The knowledge used by our forefathers should be used now, in future and by
future generations to ensure freedom. We should be able to speak our
languages and to observe our religions freely. The colonialists and
apartheid systems have separated us, while we are all citizens of South
Africa. [Applause.]

Let us not allow anyone to stir up enmity and discord among us for nothing.
We know that when we live together as one, we have peace and we are able to
carry each other’s burdens. We have learned this from our forefathers. We
must always love one another because peace is a legacy. How can you fail to
live in peace if you have been taught to do so? If you have been taught to
love your neighbour, how can you fail, when even the Bible said so?]

The Bible says:

   Love your neighbour as you love yourself.

Hezwo zwithu ro zwi gudiswa nga vhomakhulukuku washu. Vho ri vhudza uri ri
tea u tshila nga yeneyo nḓila. Ro zwi pfa a si kale, musi Minisiṱa Vho Lulu
Xingwana vha tshi ri vhudza uri bola yashu, ine ya kha ḓi tou bva u vha
hone zwenezwino, yo ri ṱanganya. Arali i ngoho zwauri mvelele i ya kona u
ṱanganya vhathu, ri khou kona u zwi vhona ngauri ro vha ro vhuisa ḽifhasi
ḽoṱhe fhano. Afurika a i ngo vhuya naa? Ḽifhasi a ḽi ngo vhuya? Ḽo vhuiswa
ngauri ro vha ri tshi khou kovhekana dzimvelele. Zwithu zwo vha mvumvusaho,
zwo vha zwithu zwa mvelele. Na zwino vha ri vha funa u vhuya ngauri Afurika
Tshipembe ndi shango ḽavhuḓi ḽi tshileaho khaḽo. Vha ri fhano hu a ḓifha
nahone vhathu vha hone vha na vhuthu.

Hu na phungo yo iswaho nga vho riaḓivha musi vha tshi vho sokou amba zwithu
zwi sa itwi nga vhathu vha fhano Afurika Tshipembe. Vha tshimbila vha tshi
amba uri hu ḓo vha na vhavhambadza-mivhili vha swikaho miḽioni mbili vhane
vha ḓo ḓa fhano.

O vha a si mazwifhi ayo? Izwo zwithu zwi sumbedza tshumisano? Riṋe a ri ngo
vhuya ra vha vhona ngauri ro gudiswa uri ri vhe na vhuthu, ri hulisane na u
ṱhonifhana. Vha kha ḓi ḓo vhuya kha ḽino shango ngauri vho zwi vhona uri
mvelele ya fhano Afurika Tshipembe ndi ya matshilisano avhuḓi.

Kha zwa vhubindudzi, musi vhathu vha tshi ita zwithu zwavho, riṋe ri ḓi
ṱongisa nga dzi satellite dish dzashu. Khedzi vha tshi khou dzi vhona.
[Maseo.] [U vhanda zwanḓa.] Hezwo zwithu zwi sumbedza mvelele. Vhakalaha na
vhakegulu khevhala vho ambara vho tou ḓitama. A vha tamisi? U tou vhona
makhulu wau vho fara zwone-zwone zwine rine ra tea u fara khazwo.

Ndo ita na u vhudza vhaṅwe uri ndi kale Vhavenḓa vha tshi ḓivha
thekinoḽodzhi. Satellite dish dzi tshi ḓa, riṋe ro vha ro no vha nadzo.
[Maseo.] Hezwo zwo vha zwi tshi khou sumbedza zwauri vhudavhidzani na maṅwe
mashango zwo vha zwi hone ngauri ri na vhuthu nahone ri a kona u tshila na
vhaṅwe vhathu.

Nga aneo maipfi, ndi khou livhuwa u kovhekana, u kunguwedza na u pembelela
vhufa ha mvelele vhune ra khou ḓitongisa ngaho ṋamusi. Ndi a livhuwa. [U
vhanda zwanḓa.] (Translation of Tshivenda paragraphs follows.)

[We have learned this from our forefathers. They taught us to live this
way. We heard Minister Lulu Xingwana telling us about how our Soccer World
Cup that took place not long ago united us. It is true that culture unites
people, we can see that we brought the whole world here. Was Africa not
united? Was the world not united? It was united because we were sharing our
cultures. They were entertained by cultural activities. They said they want
to come back because South Africa is a beautiful country to live in. They
said it is nice here and people have humanity.

There was some rumour by some journalist saying bad things about South
Africa. They spread the rumour that there would be more than two million
prostitutes coming to this country.

Was that not a lie? Does this show co-operation? We did not see them
because we were taught humanity, honour and respect. They will come back to
this country because they saw that South African cultures are good.

In business, when people do their things, we are proud of our “satellite
dish”, mapala beads — thick strands of cotton with beadwork, worn around
the neck by girls/women. Here they are. [Laughter.] [Applause.] These
things display culture. Old people are dressed nicely in their traditional
attire. Are they not admirable? To see you grandparent preserve culture
like this, as we are suppose to.

I even told others that the Vhavenda people know technology. When satellite
dishes were introduced, we already had them. [Laughter.] These indicated
that we had communication with other countries.

With these words, I am grateful to share, to encourage and to celebrate the
heritage of culture, which we are all proud of today. I thank you.
[Applause.]]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: House Chairperson, hon members,
Ministers and Deputy Ministers, it is my honour to wrap up this important
debate today. This debate reminded us that as a nation we should continue
striving to build a better, more humane and caring society. These values
are enshrined in our Constitution.

We urge all of our people to continue building a culture of democracy,
social justice and fundamental human rights. As a nation, we have just
managed to host a very successful World Cup. The Minister indicated earlier
on that we will be celebrating Heritage Day in Durban under the theme:
“Celebrating the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup Successes: Our Heritage”.

Let us remind ourselves that, as we will be celebrating our Heritage Day on
24 September 2010, we just came from a very successful month where we
celebrated together with the Moral Regeneration Movement. We are once more
calling on all our people to continue promoting values of ubuntu, where we
should say be saying: ”I am because you are”.

As a nation, during the World Cup, we once more demonstrated the true
meaning of ubuntu to all those who were visiting our country. We did this
by opening our hearts and arms to our visitors, proving to the whole world
that we were indeed a caring, warm and loving nation.

Our immediate task is to sustain the positive momentum we built up during
the World Cup, both in word and in action. We must continue to work towards
a more cohesive society that is just and caring.

We must also sustain the spirit of patriotism and national pride that was
so evident during the World Cup. This, amongst other things, requires that
we should continue to fly the South African flag and popularise our
national symbols. Therefore, it is fitting that, as this House, we should
decide how we are going to sustain the gains we made during the World Cup.

As we continue, we should build on the culture of hard work, better
planning and working together. You know that the success of the World Cup
happened because of the collective efforts of our people who worked
together, irrespective of their diverse cultures. They ensured that we were
focused and that the World Cup became a big success.

Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity today to thank hon members
for all the good suggestions that they have made, because as the Department
of Arts and Culture we are going to continue building on this big success.
We will continue celebrating South Africa’s living human treasures — the
custodians of our intangible cultural heritage.

We know that there are many experiences in our communities. We have many
heroes who are busy coming forward with many initiatives. They would like
to ensure that they are exposed and that South Africa can celebrate its
diverse culture together. We should make sure that, indeed, we build a
better country and a united nation.

I also want to thank our mothers who came all the way from Limpopo today.
We would like to say to them, “Thank you for showing us that South Africa
is indeed a beautiful country.” [Applause.]

Ndi madekwana. [Good evening.]

A lot has been said this evening. We would like to urge you to continue
working together like you did during the World Cup. Let us make sure that
we hold hands and continue building the culture of sharing, respect and
hard work. As a nation, let us continue ensuring that we are moving
forward.

Therefore, I wish you all happy Heritage Day celebrations. We are hoping to
see all of you in Durban on 24 September 2010. Let us all come to celebrate
and work together to build a successful nation. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

USIHLALO WENDLU (Nk M N Oliphant): Sibonge kuSekela Ngqongqoshe, uSekela
Ngqongqoshe ubesephothula ingxoxompikiswano ngakho-ke siyileNdlu sifuna
ukwengeza ekutheni siyabonga ukuthi omama nobaba bethu bezile ukuzoba
yingxenye yale ngxoxompikiswano ebikhona namhlanje kulesi Sishayamthetho.
Sikholelwa ukuthi nangokuzayo bazophinde babuye futhi. Malungu
ahloniphekile, umsebenzi wosuku sesiwuphothile, ngakho-ke iNdlu iyaguqa.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you, Deputy Minister. The
Deputy Minister was wrapping up the debate, therefore, as members of this
House, we would like to add that we are grateful that the high-ranking
officials came to be part of this debate which took place here today in the
National Assembly. We believe that they will come again in future. Hon
members, we have accomplished the day’s work, therefore the House is
adjourned.]

The House adjourned at 18:36.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)    Report and Financial Statements of the South African Revenue
        Service (SARS) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 173-2010].

2.    The Minister in The Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation
    as well as Administration

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 6 – Government
        Communication and Information System (GCIS) for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information of Vote 6 for 2009-2010 [RP
        183-2010].

3.    The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences Research
        Council (HSRC) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 164-2010].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDAT INSERT - T100915e-insert1 – PAGES – 2775-2799


