---
title: 'National Assembly - 11 August 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-08-11
---

Wednesday, 11 august 2010
                                    ____

                      ProceedingS of national assembly
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms E MORE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House –


      1) debates the 2009 to 2010 Child Gauge Report released by the
         Children’s Institute, which points to a rise in child mortality in
         South Africa since 1990; and

      2) comes up with solutions to reverse the negative trends articulated
         in this report.
Mr N J J KOORNHOF: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That this House –

      1) discusses the tourism and environmental implications for our
         national parks, particularly the Greater Kruger National Park,
         against the growing poaching threat;

      2) further discusses the negative effect on the fauna caused by the
         polluted rivers running through it; and

      3) comes up with positive solutions.

Mr K S MUBU: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the appropriateness of the appointment of Mr
   Ebrahim Rasool as South Africa’s ambassador to the United States of
   America.

Mrs C N Z ZIKALALA: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the House –
      1) debates the ongoing crisis regarding our wastewater treatment
         systems countrywide; and

      2) further notes that –

           a) billions of rands are needed to fix the systems;


           b) less than 45% of the systems perform at acceptable standards;
              and


           c) the sector is in complete disrepair and on the verge of
              collapse.

                   BEST WISHES TO RETIRING ARCHBISHOP TUTU

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I hereby move
without notice:

   That the House -


      1) welcomes the decision of Archbishop Desmond Mpilo Tutu to retire
         from public life;

      2) recalls that Archbishop Desmond Mpilo Tutu is one of the leaders
         who popularised the notion of the rainbow nation and is a symbol of
         peace and reconciliation, a renowned clergy and an academic of
         excellence;


      3) further recalls that he was the voice of the liberation movement
         when its leaders were silenced, through forced exile, imprisonment,
         house arrests and banning by using his clerical position and the
         pulpit to expose the injustice and the inhumanity of the apartheid
         regime to the international world;


      4) believes that South Africa would not be what it is today without
         the contribution of Archbishop Tutu and many of the leaders of his
         generation;


      5) acknowledges Archbishop Tutu’s selfless contribution to the
         liberation of our country, South Africa, and his continental and
         international campaign for peace and justice; and


      6) wishes Emeritus Archbishop Desmond Mpilo Tutu well on his
         retirement and that his contribution to the liberation of South
         Africa will always be part of our history and will be narrated from
         generation to generation.

Agreed to.
                     CONGRATULATIONS TO MR DANNY JORDAAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I hereby move
without notice:

   That the House -


     1) welcomes the commissioning of former World Cup head Danny Jordaan
        in a senior fulltime capacity to join the Fifa World Cup inspection
        team to look over prospective World Cup candidates for 2018 and
        2022;


     2) believes that Jordaan deserves the position as he worked tirelessly
        to deliver what many foreign journalists said would be impossible -
        a successful 2010 World Cup , the first on African soil;


     3) further believes that the choice of Jordaan is in recognition of
        South Africa’s ability to host the biggest sporting event in
        history as well as Jordaan’s sterling contribution to the success
        and stunning achievement that has made our nation proud; and


      4) congratulates Jordaan on his new appointment and wishes him well.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                   (The late Mr Tsietsi Daniel Motitjoane)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I hereby move
without notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes with sadness the death at the Helen Joseph Hospital in
        Johannesburg on 5 July 2010 of Tsietsi Daniel Motitjoane, popularly
        known as "Nana Coyote","The wild dog", who was a lead singer for
        Stimela, one of the country's oldest and most popular musical
        groups;


     2) remembers that Nana was born in Lesotho in 1955 and grew up in the
        dusty streets of Sharpeville and, while at Makabelane High School
        in Qwaqwa, started his musical career by forming a band with his
        schoolmates;


     3) further remembers that in 1980, at the height of political unrest,
        as resistance against the unjust laws of apartheid intensified,
        Nana went into exile in Lesotho where he joined the group Uhuru,
        now Sankomota, and returned to rejoin The Black Five for a spell
        and then, in 1984, headed for Johannesburg seeking to further his
        professional music career;


     4) recalls that Coyote featured as a lead vocalist in many renowned
        songs, including "I'm suffering", "Take your love", and "Whisper in
        the Deep (Phinda Mzala)", that he collaborated with many artists
        such as Steve Kekana, Ray Phiri and Joe Nina and that, at the time
        of his passing, he was with Stimela finalising a new album which
        will be released soon;


     5) believes that Nana became a beacon of hope and inspired many
        artists and individuals in our country; and


     6) conveys its condolences to his family, friends and fellow musicians
        at this hour of great loss and assures them that the thoughts and
        prayers of its Members are with them.

May his soul rest in peace.

Agreed to.
       SHORTAGE OF MEDICAL STAFF AT CLINICS IN KHAYELITSHA, CAPE TOWN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs H S MSWELI: Hon Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the IFP,
I hereby move without notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that on Monday 2 August 2010, 15 victims  of  a  Khayelitsha,
        Cape Town, taxi crash that also claimed  two  lives,  had  to  wait
        almost 24 hours for medical attention at a local clinic;


     2) further notes that the victims of the crash  were  traumatised  and
        suffered from severe pain but could not be treated  immediately  as
        there is a shortage of emergency medical staff at the clinic;


     3) expresses concern that shortages  of  emergency  medical  staff  at
        local clinics have not been addressed; and


     4) requests the government to investigate the reasons for the shortage
        of emergency staff at clinics and  to  put  measures  in  place  to
        ensure that the suffering of victims in need of  emergency  medical
        care are not further prolonged by  the  lack  of  adequate  medical
        care.

Agreed to.

     EXTENSION OF DEADLINE OF SERVICE DELIVERY AD HOC COMMITTEE’S REPORT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I move:


   That the House, notwithstanding the resolution it adopted on 11 May 2010,
   resolves to extend the deadline by which the Ad Hoc Committee on Co-
   ordinated Oversight on Service Delivery under the Theme: “Working
   together to ensure the delivery of quality service to communities” has to
   report, to 24 August 2010.


Agreed to.

     WORKING TOGETHER FOR EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES AND PROGRESS FOR ALL WOMEN

                      (Debate on National Women’s Day)

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon Deputy
Speaker, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon Members of Parliament,
firstly, I would like to express our appreciation to the millions of South
African women who are participating in various initiatives and programmes
across our country to mark our national Women’s Month.

Women’s Day is a day that highlights the courage of women in our country,
past and present. It was on this day in 1956 when 20 000 women, carrying
100 000 petitions, marched to the Union Buildings, protesting against the
inhuman act of having to carry passes in the urban areas.

These women delivered the petitions to the office of J G Strydom. Women
throughout the country had put their names on these petitions, indicating
their anger and frustration at having their freedom of movement restricted.
Although Strydom was not at the Union Buildings to accept the petition, the
women of South Africa sent a public message that they would not be
intimidated and silenced by these unjust laws.

Since 1994, this day has been commemorated every year to recognise and
recall the bravery of these women who risked arrest, detention, banning and
forced exile to have their voices heard. This day in the calendar of our
country, serves to remind all of us that we need to review the path we have
travelled and find solutions to the challenges facing us now.

Our programme for this month seeks to reach women different social
backgrounds across the different geographical localities. Various
legislatures are convening Women’s Parliaments to provide platforms for
ordinary women to engage issues affecting them and voice their concerns and
challenges. I had the honour of participating in one of these forums in
Mpumalanga last week.

We have also met university students in the Eastern Cape during the past
weekend to discuss issues of education and the critical role young women
and men have to play in transforming the gender demographics of our economy
through the careers they choose. We also gathered with women from various
churches in East London and prayed together for a society free of all forms
of abuse of women and girls.

It is really disturbing that even as we commemorate Women’s Month, women
continue to be attacked and raped. We have to do more to protect women and
children from continuing incidents of gender-based violence. In this
regard, we are going to continue with our efforts to raise awareness and
seek to address sexist stereotypes and attitudes that undermine the rights,
dignity and wellbeing of women.

To mark the national Women’s Day on Monday, we mobilised 30 000 women who
gathered at Absa Stadium in East London to celebrate this day. We received
a visionary address by the President of our country, hon President Jacob
Zuma.
We are taking an approach that enables us to reach out to women in rural
and urban areas; women who are employed and those who are unemployed; and
women who are economically empowered and those who live in poverty. We are
doing this because we seek to address the various limitations of patriarchy
which negatively affect these women’s lives and limit their development and
success.

Our country can now show many gains and achievements in promoting women’s
rights and advancing gender equality. Under the leadership of the ANC, we
are striving to ensure that the whole of our society accepts the principle
of 50-50 gender parity. In the near future, we will be approaching this
House for support and enactment of the Gender Equality Bill which is being
developed by the Ministry for Women, Children and Persons with
Disabilities.

We acknowledge that many challenges still persist and we need to work
together to overcome them if we are to achieve our dream of a truly
democratic and nonsexist state. The key issues that inform our programme
for the Women’s Month include intensification of poverty eradication, rural
development, economic empowerment of women and an effective response to the
major challenge of violence against women and girls.

Today I would also like to talk about the empowerment of women in the
information and communication technologies, ICT, sector - an area which we
tend to overlook quite often — and, in the process, link it to the
educational and economic opportunities for the empowerment of women. We
need to more strongly encourage girls to enter this previously male-
dominated field of study, that is telecommunications and the world of
technology in general. We must also encourage more young women to begin to
enter this area at the tertiary level of education.

We do have legislation on ICT, which is encouraging in this regard. Section
5(9)(b) of the Electronic Communications Act stipulates that the Authority
must, in granting a licence for provision of electronic communications
network services, broadcasting services and electronic communications
services, promote the empowerment of historically disadvantaged persons,
including women.

Furthermore, section 6(8)(a) of the Broadcasting Act of 1999 stipulates
that the corporation must develop a code of practice that ensures that the
services and personnel comply with the constitutional principle of
equality. It further says that the public service provided by the
corporation must strive to offer a broad range of services targeting,
particularly women.

The empowerment of women in terms of the Independent Communications
Authority of South Africa Act states that the authority may make
regulations on empowerment requirements in terms of the Broad-Based Black
Economic Empowerment Act of 2003. Broad-based black economic empowerment,
in terms of this Act, means the economic empowerment of all black people,
including women, through many diverse but integrated socioeconomic
strategies that include increasing the number of black people that manage,
own and control enterprises and productive assets, amongst others.

Overall, the country has developed an ICT charter for the empowerment of
women. I urge for the full implementation of this charter and all
applicable pieces of legislation so that young women can be encouraged to
enter this particular field. At the same time, I urge that women are
provided with increasing opportunities to utilise the ICT sector towards
their economic empowerment. I have just concentrated on this one aspect in
the interest of time.

I wish to leave the House with words of wisdom from our former President
and father, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, who said:


   Freedom cannot be achieved unless women have been emancipated from all
   forms of oppression.

In line with the theme for Women’s Month this year, let us work together
for equal opportunities and progress for all women.

Forward to a decade of the African woman, forward!

HON MEMBERS: Forward!

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES:
Wathint’ abafazi! [You a strike woman!]

HON MEMBERS: Wathint’ imbokodo! [You strike a rock!]

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: I thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, we are having a very important debate.
However, there are members who are even violating the code of members in
the House. They stand in gangways talking, to the extent that one can hear
them while there is somebody on the platform. I didn’t call the House to
order because there are students seated up there, who have come to grace us
with their presence. It becomes very foolish to start saying that members
of this respectable House must have order. [Interjections.]

I won’t respond to that. I really won’t respond to that. The fact that I am
looking in that direction is maybe because I saw people standing in the
gangway in that direction, more than the other direction. [Interjections.]
So you don’t have to respond. [Interjections.]

Mrs D ROBINSON: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers and members, throughout
the ages women have had to fight for recognition as individuals and the
right to make their own choices. I think of someone like Florence
Nightingale who defied convention and revolutionised nursing during the
Crimean War, of Emily Hobhouse who left a life of prosperity in England to
come and work in the concentration camps during the Anglo-Boer War in South
Africa to assist the woman and children who were living in appalling
conditions.

I think of the militant suffragettes in England who risked their lives to
earn the right to vote. And then there was our own Helen Suzman who braved
ridicule and insults and asked the difficult questions exposing the evils
of apartheid. She stood her ground and fought for her principles and the
human rights of people like Nelson Mandela and his fellow prisoners at
Robben Island.

The national Woman’s Day commemorates the 20 000 South African women who
marched for justice on 9 August 1956. Fearlessly, they sang a song that has
become a rallying cry: “Wathint’ abafazi, wathint’ imbokodo!” [You strike a
woman, you strike a rock!] Women can be the rock on which a freer, safer
and more prosperous South Africa is built. They just need the opportunities
to be educated, to be given a decent health care, to make informed choices
about their reproductive rights, to determine their own futures and those
of their children.

Empowering women economically and giving them opportunity to be gainfully
employed is key to social and economic progress. Their creativity,
entrepreneurial skills and determination to provide for their families is a
driving factor towards economic success and a better standard of living.

Remember that women comprise 52% of our population. How can South Africa
prosper if more than half of the people are marginalised, oppressed and not
economically productive? If patriarchal attitudes continue, and ignorance
prevails, economic growth and prosperity will be impossible.

However, it is interesting to note that, according to the MasterCard
Worldwide Index of Women’s Advancement, more women are being enrolled at
universities. Their figures show that for every 100 men in the workplace
there are 75 women. South Africa has many dynamic successful businesswomen,
but their biggest issue is hitting the proverbial glass ceiling. However,
we need to assist those grass-roots women who have their own informal
businesses and projects by giving them necessary mentoring to grow their
businesses, as Mrs Lillian Masebenza does so successfully through her Mhani
Gingi Programme.

Mrs Masebenza is in the gallery with many of her student volunteers from
Norway, and we thank them for their contribution. She provides tailor-made
skills and social justice training. “Mhani Gingi” means industrious and
caring women, those on whom our social stability and moral values lie. The
lives of many rural women are still dominated by the need to fetch water
and firewood; they eek out a meagre living.

In some areas, women are denied the right to own property and are regarded
as mere chattels to be passed from one member of the family to another. So
often, platitudes are mouthed about equality, but we need to make this a
reality in every day. I quote Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United
Nations:

  Gender equality and women’s empowerment are fundamental to the global
  mission of the United Nations to achieve equal rights and dignity for
  all. But equality for women and girls is also an economic and social
  imperative. Until women and girls are liberated from poverty and
  injustice, all our goals - peace, security, sustainable development -
  stand in jeopardy.

I would like to quote our former Speaker, Frene Ginwala, who said:

   Education and training are vital for women and for future generations in
   order that women can be at the centre of restoring social and moral
   values, bringing back discipline and respect.

Hon Deputy Speaker, as leaders of our nation, may we all encourage all men
to support this so that we work together for equal opportunities and
progress for women, their families and our entire nation. Malibongwe igama
lamakhosikazi! [Let the women’s name be praised!]

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Let it be praised!] [Applause.]

Ms S P RWEXANA: Hon Deputy Speaker, Monday, 9 August 2010, marked 54 years
of commemoration of the women’s march to the Union Buildings. South African
women from all walks of life walked to the Union Buildings to hand over a
petition against pass laws. The march was a follow-up to the 1954 Women’s
Charter.

On both these occasions, women came from all walks of life, irrespective of
race, colour, creed or political affiliation. Women then – as they still
are today - were brought together by the same problems such as poverty,
violence against women, gender parity and patriarchy, and so on. These
problems are the ones that bring all women together.

Therefore it is very important to understand and acknowledge that 9 August
brings all South African women together. We will only be able to fight for
women’s rights if we fight together as South African women. During the
actions taken in 1954 and 1956, South African women came in unity to fight
the same problems that we still face today. These are struggles that cannot
be fought by one political party, but by the South African women at large.

The theme for this month is: Working together for equal opportunities and
progress for all women. When we talk about 50-50 gender parity, Parliament
should be the leading example. But, unfortunately, it is not. The reason
for that is that not all political parties adhere to the 50-50 gender
parity principle. It should start here. Women in Parliament should be
working together to achieve 50-50 gender parity.

The struggle for women continues; it does not happen only when it suits
you. Therefore, it is very important for us as women in Parliament to take
on this fight and ensure that the 50-50 gender parity is legislated. As the
saying goes: Charity begins at home.

As Cope we acknowledge the strides taken by the government to deal with
these problems. We also acknowledge the steps taken by our government on
gender mainstreaming and poverty reduction in line with the resolution of
the Beijing Platform for Action taken 15 years ago. But, the problems
facing women remain a major challenge. For instance, we are now in the
sixteenth year of our democracy, but women are still the ones that are
mostly hit by poverty in rural areas and informal settlements. Women-headed
households are without employment and a basic salary. Now is the time for
women’s issues to be prioritised in the government’s agenda.

Recent statistics show that every six minutes a woman is raped or sexually
abused. This indicates that, instead of decreasing, violence against women
is actually increasing despite the government’s efforts. The recent
portfolio committee oversight visits to various provinces observed that,
despite having the Domestic Violence Act, no 116 of 1998, the scourge
remains a serious challenge. Therefore the above-mentioned Act needs to be
reviewed.

Government programmes that are being implemented today are the same as the
demands of the 1954 Women’s Charter. Women like Lilian Ngoyi, Ray Alexander
nabanye [and others] would be happy in their graves if, one day, poverty-
stricken women, particularly those in rural areas, could be financially
independent and have access to employment. They would be happy if a
gendered approach to poverty reduction would concentrate on the economic
development and empowerment of poor women.

Furthermore, Lilian Ngoyi and others would be happy if resource-generating
opportunities that are easily accessible and conducive to a woman’s needs
are made available; indigenous women in rural areas are given access to the
ownership of land; programmes that provide financial assistance and credit
to women at accommodating interest rates and convenient terms of repayment
are initiated so as to increase a woman’s opportunity to engage in small
business activities; programmes are implemented that provide education and
employment training that build the capacity of women to become economically
independent and thus enable them to alter situations of violence; and
functional literacy programmes are initiated, as these are a crucial step
in empowering women to take control of their own lives.

In conclusion, Madam Deputy Speaker, the Multiparty Women’s Caucus and
women from other political parties should work together to achieve the
above. When a human being comes into existence, a woman breaks water. Water
is an important component of life – we cannot live without water.
Therefore, there is no life and future without a woman. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Malibongwe! [Praise!]

HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

Ms C N Z ZIKALALA: Hon Deputy Speaker, the national Women’s Day must always
be the day upon which the women of South Africa – women who are the very
rose petals of our society – are honoured and thanked for the untold
selfless work and sacrifices that they have endured to make this great
nation what it is today.

We in the IFP believe that women are truly, for the most part, the unsung
heroines of our nation’s history. The mothers, the carers, the wives, the
daughters, the grandmothers, in addition to being, in some cases,
breadwinners are, in most cases, contributors to household income. They are
truly the most precious assets of any nation and, as such, should be
treasured and accorded the respect they deserve.

Yet, unfortunately, the reality remains far from the ideal. Many women
still live and raise families in abject poverty. They run households with
no water, no sewerage systems and no electricity. These women, especially
the sole breadwinners and the single-parent mothers, must be identified and
assisted by the state in their fight to provide a better future for their
children.

Women remain victims of domestic violence and abuse. The Domestic Violence
Act has failed women due to its poor implementation. Lack of knowledge on
the part of police officers when assisting women has also contributed in
this regard. Women’s groups around the country are also revealing how
apathetic South Africans can be towards domestic violence within their
communities. Neighbours, most often, just turn a blind eye to women who are
abused by their partners, as they reason that that is none of their
business.

This culture of quiet acceptance is wrong and must be changed. Children
must be educated from early age as to what is acceptable behaviour in this
regard. Our sons must be taught that real men don’t abuse women.

Early pregnancy is another issue that must be addressed by the departments
of education and social welfare. Teen pregnancy is not in any way a
desirable state of affairs for a young woman who is still at school. Once
again, we must educate our children so that situations like these are
minimised as in most cases both the mother and the child suffer
unnecessarily because of these. The mother has to leave school or get a
substandard matric while the baby is born into an unsuitable environment.

Human trafficking and forced prostitution of women is yet another sign of a
decaying global culture. We in South Africa must show the world that this
is totally unacceptable in our country. I therefore urge the Minister of
Police and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development to deal
most resolutely with perpetrators of this heinous crime.

In conclusion, Deputy Speaker, I would like to say that we should respect a
woman because you can feel her innocence in the form of a daughter; you can
feel her dedication in the form of a wife; you can feel her divinity in the
form of a mother; you can feel her blessing in the form of a grandmother.
She is a woman, and she is life. Respect her! I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs W S NEWHOUDT-DRUCHEN: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members in the House and
invited guests, I would like to use this opportunity to add my voice and
congratulate us women for hosting a successful Fifa World Cup.

As I prepared for this speech, I was thinking about two young deaf ladies
who have just landed from Venezuela yesterday afternoon - an eight-year-old
young girl and a young female leader. This girl-child had a once-in-a-
lifetime opportunity to attend the World Federation of the Deaf children’s
Camp 2010. These two women were the only deaf people from Africa to attend
this camp. For this young girl it was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to
experience meeting other deaf children from around different parts of the
world.

I look towards home and I think of millions of other young girls and young
female adults who will never experience these kinds of opportunities. We,
as Members of Parliament, are in a special position to use our contacts and
our opportunity of meeting people in extraordinary positions to be able to
give these kinds of opportunities for many other young women.

We can use our skills, our knowledge of Parliament and our constituency
work to share our experiences so that other women can benefit and grow. We,
as Members of Parliament, can also work in our constituencies with other
role-players in civil society - for example, the different NGOs - to bring
on the development of women and young girls.

We have just celebrated August the 9th, our Women’s Day commemoration
throughout the country – a day in remembrance of women who have fought,
marched and were imprisoned for the freedoms of all our women. And we also
use this day to reflect on how today we can best advance the goals of
working together for equal opportunities and progress for all women.

This year also marks the beginning of the decade of the African women, from
2010 to 2020, which has been adopted by the African Union, AU. Today, we
continue to march forward with the theme: Working together for equal
opportunities and progress for all women.

Women cannot be free, unless we are free of all discrimination against
women. Women cannot be free, unless both men and women work together
towards the emancipation of all women. The ANC’s 51st National Conference
reaffirms the important matter of focusing on the challenges of the
eradication of gender oppression and discrimination. It directed us to
design a comprehensive strategy on our programme to build a nonsexist
society and provide for the integration of gender in all aspects of
policies and programmes.

The ANC’s commitment to eliminate racism, oppression and exploitation from
our society cannot fail to address the question of the emancipation of
women. The experience of other societies has shown that the emancipation of
women is not a by-product of a struggle for democracy or national
liberalisation or socialism. It has to be addressed in its own right within
our organisation, the mass democratic movement and the society as a whole.

The majority of women who are black are the most oppressed section of our
people, suffering under the yoke of oppression. The liberalisation of women
is central to our people’s struggle for freedom. The ANC Women’s League and
alliance partners proposed the formation of a Progressive Women’s Movement,
PWM, where the key objective was to promote the transformation of the South
African society into a truly nonracial and nonsexist society.

The PWM was launched in 2006, and the then Minister of Foreign Affairs in
one of her speeches said:


   PWM is a movement that is representative of progressive forces in our
   country; a movement that will stamp the issues that face women daily onto
   the agenda of every sphere of society in our country.

The aim of the PWM is clearly stated in its founding documents. It states:

   We, as South African women, declare our aim of striving for the removal
   of laws, regulations, conventions and customs that discriminate against
   us as women and deprive us in any way of our inherent right to the
   advantages, responsibilities and opportunities that society offers to any
   one section of the population.

And, ja [yes], I’m quoting from the Women’s Charter adopted in 1954.
The PWM has six main objectives, but I only have time to highlight one,
which I feel is linked to the theme: Working together for equal
opportunities for all women. This objective is: To deepen democracy, so as
to ensure we fight patriarchy.

Some of the institutions that we have seen and have been able to exist
still maintain the culture, values and norms of a patriarchal society. The
movement must enable us to fight these atrocities and demons of a
patriarchal society in the family, church, government institutions and in
the judiciary through all forms of struggle.

To be able to work on this one objective, we need to contribute to the
extension of the larger movement for a global justice with women within and
outside of the PWM, younger women, mainstream NGOs, national or social
movements, the state, multinational institutions and international
structures that are committed to women’s issues.

The ANC has led efforts aimed at eradicating oppressive gender relations by
entrenching the constitutional guarantees of the equality of women;
abolishing legislation and policies that discriminate against women;
establishing national gender machinery in government; and introducing
policies and programmes targeting women and aimed at empowerment and
poverty alleviation.

The nongovernmental sector has a role to play in the process of deepening
democracy and people-centred development. Democratic forces need to
continue to interact with the sector in joint programmes against poverty
for social development and assist in strengthening its capacity.

On Women’s Day our hon President said: “Everyone has a role to play to
ensure that we reach our targets for the benefit of our country.” So, hon
members, let us continue to work for equal opportunities and the progress
for all women in our society. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Hon Deputy Speaker, on Monday, 9 August, I participated in
three Women’s Day events, where I joined government officials, NGOs and
ordinary women in George, Mitchells Plain and Somerset West to celebrate
Women’s Day. The more I sat there, listening, the more I began to hear
clearly some of the massive challenges faced by women in a male-dominated
society.

If women are struggling like this today, imagine what it took for 20 000
women to face the might of the apartheid regime and march defiantly to the
Union Buildings in Pretoria on 9 August 1956. I also began to share the
view of hon Winnie Madikizela-Mandela that we do not just need large
numbers of women; we need quality women who can improve the quality of life
for all other women.

I also realised that Women’s Day is as much about men as it is about women
because, if men truly respected women as equals and worked with them to
create equality in all spheres of our society, there would be no need for
Women’s Month. Patricia de Lille and thousands of other women’s
contribution towards the struggle against apartheid was no less significant
than the contribution of their male counterparts. In fact, they contributed
more because, after a day in the trenches, many of them still went home,
fed and clothed their families. It is for this reason that all of us must
embrace the continuing struggle for equality. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members and all hon Ministers
present in the House, today we celebrate Women’s Day to honour the
contribution that women made to the attainment of our democracy. In many
ways, women bore the brunt of apartheid’s cruelty and pettiness. In the
aftermath of that repression, we not only decided to celebrate a national
Women’s Day, but also ensured that gender equality forms a central tenet of
the new democratic Constitution.

So, today we can celebrate the advances in gender equality, but with a
sense that there is still much more that needs to be done. Indeed, certain
indicators are positive, such as the number of women who enrol for further
education. However, across the spectrum of social, economic and safety
issues, women continue to suffer disproportionately.

In social terms, there continues to be large numbers of women who have to
fulfil multiple roles in poverty-stricken households. The burden of being
the sole breadwinner and sole parent in the face of overwhelming poverty
and little and or no basic services is a heavy one. We have to ask
ourselves whether current government interventions, primarily by way of
social grants, are having the desired outcome of helping these women.

The social factors overlap with the economic status of women. Those who are
at a social advantage often find themselves at the economic disadvantage as
well. We must acknowledge that one of the most important aspects to address
these concerns in the long run is education. Education is the bridge that
can span the gulf between socioeconomic suffering and prosperity. It is our
duty to build that bridge, maintain it and help as many disadvantaged South
Africans, women included, to cross over it to a better future.

Finally, allow me to emphasise the question of women and security. We live
in a country with shocking high rates of abuse and violence against women.
These crimes continue with sickening regularity. We - especially men in
position of authority - must continuously commit ourselves to rooting out
this evil; it is immoral and repressive. It makes a mockery of our attempts
to build a society that is fairer and better than the one we had under
apartheid. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Agb Adjunkspeaker, die afgelope week het ons weer Vrouedag
in Suid-Afrika herdenk. Dit is ’n geleentheid wat ons het om stil te staan
en te evalueer, nie net hoe ons gevorder het in die proses om vroue te
bemagtig nie, maar ook om gelyke geleenthede en vooruitgang vir alle vroue
te bevorder.

Dis ook natuurlik nie ’n nuwe onderwerp nie. Onlangs, op 9 Maart vanjaar,
het ons in hierdie Huis ’n debat gehad oor Internasionale Vrouedag, en was
die onderwerp, “Gelyke regte vir almal, gelyke geleenthede vir almal”,
feitlik identies aan vandag se onderwerp.

Die VF Plus is van mening dat daar die afgelope klompie jare groot
vordering gemaak is om vroue nie net te bemagtig nie, maar ook om gelyke
geleenthede daar te stel. Dit is goed en dit is reg. Die VF Plus sal alle
maatreëls ondersteun om aan vroue gelyke geleenthede te gee. Die VF Plus
besef terdeë welke belangrike rol die vrou speel en wil alle vroue daarvoor
eer en respekteer, maar alles is ongelukkig nie net maanskyn en rose nie.

Die ANC wil, soos vandag, die indruk wek dat hulle aan die voorpunt is as
dit kom by gelyke regte en gelyke geleenthede vir vroue. Die werklikheid in
Suid-Afrika is dat daar gevra moet word of die gelyke geleenthede op kans
en op vooruitgang vir vroue in Suid-Afrika vir alle vroue geld, en of daar
onderskeid getref word tussen kleur en ras wat vroue betref.

In Suid-Afrika is daar ’n aanslag teen wit vroue en geniet hulle nie gelyke
regte en veral gelyke geleenthede nie. Die Direkteur-generaal van Arbeid,
mnr Jimmy Manyi, as president van die Black Management Forum, sê dat wit
vroue uitgesluit moet word met die toepassing van regstellende aksie. Die
Minister gaan netnou praat; hy kan daarop antwoord. Dit is mnr Jimmy Manyi
se standpunt. Hier word dus blatant onderskeid getref op grond van ras. Wit
vroue? Nee!

Indien die ANC regering werklik bedoel dat daar gelyke geleenthede moet
wees vir alle vroue, waarom moes kaptein Renata Barnard, ’n wit vrou, haar
tot die hof wend om haar regmatige bevordering tot superintendent in die
Polisie af te dwing? Dit bewys dat die regering se beleid en toepassing van
regstellende aksie inherent verkeerd en onwettig is, soos ons nog altyd
geargumenteer het. Hoekom moet ’n wit vrou, naamlik kaptein Renata Barnard,
vir vyf jaar ’n stryd voer om bevorder te word in die Polisie? Sy voldoen
aan al die vereistes, is al twee keer goedgekeur vir die pos, daar was geen
ander swart geskikte kandidate vir die pos nie, maar die Polisie weier om
haar te bevorder.

As die ANC lede wat vandag hier sit sê dat hulle die beleid van gelyke
regte en gelyke geleenthede vir alle vroue ondersteun, dan behoort hulle
toe te tree en vir die Minister van Polisie te sê en opdrag te gee om die
appèlaansoek – wat nou gebring word om daardie polisievrou se aanstelling
deur die hof te verongeluk – terug te trek of te stop. Selfs die hof het
gesê dat haar nie-bevordering tot in hierdie stadium neerkom op blatante
rassisme.

Solank dinge soos hierdie in Suid-Afrika met verskillende
mindersheidsgemeenskappe gebeur – of hulle wit, bruin of Asiër is – sal die
woorde van vandag, van gelyke geleenthede vir alle vroue, geen betekenis hê
nie en ’n hol propagandakreet bly met geen betekenis nie. Ek dank u.
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Hon Deputy Speaker, this past week we again celebrated
Women’s Day in South Africa. It is an opportunity that we have to pause and
to reflect, not only on what progress we have made in the process of
empowering women, but also in promoting equal opportunities and advancement
for all women.

Of course, this is not a new topic. Recently, on 9 March this year, we had
a debate in this House about International Women’s Day, and the topic was,
“ Equal rights for all, equal opportunities for all”, almost identical to
today’s topic.

The FF Plus holds the view that, in the past few years, excellent progress
has been made, not only to empower women, but also in effectuating equal
opportunities. This is right and this is fair. The FF Plus will support all
measures that would afford women equal opportunities. The FF Plus realises
completely what an important role women play and wants to celebrate and
honour all women for this, but everything isn’t just moonlight and roses.

The ANC wants, like today, to create the impression that they are at the
forefront when it comes to equal rights and equal opportunities for women.
The reality in South Africa is that it needs to be interrogated as to
whether equal opportunities to prospects and the advancement of women in
South Africa are applicable to all women, or whether a distinction is made
between colour and race as far as women are concerned.

In South Africa there is a plot against white women and they don’t enjoy
equal rights, especially not equal opportunities. The Director-General of
Labour, Mr Jimmy Manyi, as the president of the Black Management Forum,
said that white women should be excluded when it comes to the
implementation of affirmative action. The Minister will speak shortly; he
can respond to that. This is Mr Jimmy Manyi’s position. Here brazen
discrimination is applied based on race. White women? No!

If the ANC government truly has in mind that there should be equal
opportunities for all women, why did Captain Renata Barnard, a white woman,
have to approach the court to enforce her rightful promotion to
Superintendent in the South African Police Service, SAPS? This proves that
the government’s policy and implementation of affirmative action are
intrinsically wrong and unlawful, as we have always maintained. Why must a
white woman, namely Captain Renata Barnard, wage a struggle for five years
to be promoted in the SAPS? She meets all the requirements, has been
approved for the position twice already, there were no other suitable black
candidates for the position, but the SAPS refuses to promote her.

If the ANC members, who are sitting here today, say that they support the
policy of equal rights and equal opportunities for all women, then they
should intervene and say to and instruct the Minister of Police to retract
or stop the application to appeal the judgment, which has now been lodged
to ruin this policewoman’s chance of being appointed as ordered by the
court. Even the court stated that her nonpromotion up until now comes down
to brazen racism.

As long as issues like these occur in South Africa with its various
minority groups—whether they are whites, coloureds or Asians — the words
that are being used today, of equal opportunities for all women, will have
no meaning and remain a hollow propaganda slogan with no substance. Thank
you.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Deputy Speaker, 2010 is an important year for women in
Africa. Firstly, it marks five years since the Protocol to the African
Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa came
into being. Secondly, it marks six years since the adoption of the Solemn
Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa which all heads of state and
government committed to. Thirdly, it is the start of the African Women’s
Decade.

Women make up 70% of those living below the poverty line and, therefore,
they are most likely to bear the heaviest burden. At the same time, women
are often left out of the conversation about adapting to climate change,
even though they are sometimes in the best position to provide solutions.

In most poor communities, women play many roles. As providers, women
usually work in agriculture or other informal sectors. They collect food,
water and fuel. As caretakers, they look after the children, the sick and
the elderly, the home and the family’s assets. As a result of their
multifaceted roles, women have invaluable knowledge about adapting to
erratic environmental changes. However, socially constructed roles and
responsibilities usually put women at a disadvantage in preparing for
climate change.

Women have less access to resources, are frequently unable to swim, are
reluctant to leave the house unattended, and are less likely to migrate to
look for shelter and work when disaster hits.

Therefore, statistically, women are more likely to die during disasters
than men are. But it doesn’t have to be this way. If women are included in
decision-making in their own communities, the special needs of both women
and men can be met, and the survival rate of women will improve.

Article 18(3) of the Charter is aimed at protecting women in the context of
the family only. Therefore the Charter needs to be completed by an addition
which addresses particular problems encountered by African women. I hope,
Minister, that you will spearhead the amendment.

The Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights relative
to the Rights of Women in Africa comprehensively enshrines civil,
political, social and cultural rights, the rights to development, peace, as
well as reproductive and sexual rights. It provides a legal framework to
address gender inequality. Most importantly, the protocol calls for the
legal prohibition of female genital mutilation, a practice which is still
in use in at least 23 countries in Africa. South Africa has a
responsibility to put pressure on these countries and also on those that
have not ratified the protocol.

South Africa has expressed reservations with respect to article 4(j) on the
death penalty because that has been abolished. Another reservation South
Africa has with the protocol is with regard to article 6(h) where our laws
on citizenship are more advantageous for children than the provision in the
protocol.


It’s all very well to have a protocol on paper. However, for it to be
effective, we need to encourage all countries to sign and ratify the
protocol; to build the capacity of gender machinery and ministries; to put
in place effective monitoring mechanisms to measure implementation of the
protocol; to develop and include gender sensitive indicators and sex-
disaggregated data on women’s rights into national statistics, national
development plans and national budgets; and to confront the cultural and
religious barriers to full attainment of women’s rights as per the
protocol, especially in respect of customary inheritance laws and treatment
of widows.

In conclusion, I wish to congratulate hon Matladi of the UCDP on her
appointment as the Vice President of the Women’s Caucus of the Pan-African
Parliament. Thank you. [Applause.]

UMPHATHISWA WEZEMISEBENZI: Malibongwe!

AMALUNGU AHLONIPHEKILEYO: Igama lamakhosikazi!

UMPHATHISWA WEZEMISEBENZI: Oko batsho abafazi ngowe-1955 ukuba: “Wathinta
abafazi, wathinta imbokodo” umzabalazo awukapheli. Amazwi abo asankenteza
ezindlebeni: “Wathinta abafazi, wathinta imbokodo”.

Umbutho wesizwe kumgaqo-siseko wawo uneenjongo. Eyona iphambili kuzo
kukumanya bonke abantu boMzantsi-Afrika, ingakumbi ama-Afrika. Oko
kwakuqinisekisa ukuba zonke iimeko zocalu-calulo nengcinezelo
ziyatshitshiswa kwaye nokuxhasa nokuqhubela phambili idabi lenkululeko
yoomama kuyaqhubeka.
Kula maxesha sikuwo kukho imikhwa nemikhuba ebangela ukuba eli dabi lethu
libe neziphene ezifuna ukuguzulwa nokubangulwa. Sibona ukuxhatshazwa
nobundlobongela obenza ubomi babantu basetyhini bube nkene-nkene.
Amantombazana aphila ubomi bentshontsho engcungcuthekiswa zizidlwengu,
kungenjalo esendiswa ngetshova nangenkani. Ezi zenzo ke zibenza babe
sesichengeni sokosuleleka zizifo, ingakumbi ezinje ngoGawulayo neGcushuwa.

Ngexesha sisakhula ubuye ubaluleke kakhulu xa uyindoda okanye ungumfana
ongudlalani. Kule mihla sithe gqolo sibetha sibuyelela emadlakeni singcwab’
odlalani. Abantu kufuneka bazi ukuba kufuneka sithobe isantya kwizinto
ezininzi ukuba sizondelele ukuphila. Kwabanye, ingathi kufuneka sibe
nezinto esizichwethayo kumasiko nezithethe zethu, ingakumbi ezi
zingamanyumnyezi, ukuze sikhuthaze ezi zizakwenza idabi lethu lokukhulula
oomama liphumelele.

Masivume, kunjalo nje sivumelane, ukuba amaxesha ngamanye. Asisanxibi
ndyilo kwaye nemicimbi yokwendiselana siyithethela ezindlini,
asisayithetheli ecaleni kobuhlanti. Iyabonisa ke loo nto ukuba amaxesha
ngamanye. Oomama bayaphangela. Bavuka ngonyezi. Benza imisebenzi efanayo
namadoda, maxa wambi bathi xhaxhe bade bathi tyishi kumadoda amaninzi.
Ngamaye amaxesha kula amadoda unga ungathi: “Khulula ibhulukhwe ezo,
ntondini, sikubolek’ ilokhwe.”; ingakumbi xa ubona ukunukunezwa koomama
phaya emisebenzini. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Bayatswikilwa babhantswe,
kungathatyathwa manyathelo ngabaqeshi. Wathinta abafazi, wathint’ imbokodo.
Iindawo zokugcina abantwana phaya emisebenzini zithe nya. Ndiva buhlungu
ngakumbi xa kanti nePalamente le nayo iyindawo elolo hlobo. Kungokuba
kutheni le nto kungekho ndawo zokugcina abantwana kusaziwa nje ukuba
amadoda akamithi? Mhlawumbi sesi sizathu esibangela ukuba kungabikho
zindawo zokugcina abantwana. Amadoda akancancisi. Mhlawumbi yiloo nto
kungekho ndawo yokugcina abantwana apha ePalamente. Ukuba bebencancisa,
ndiqinisekile ukuba ngeyikhona indawo yokugcina abantwana. [Intswahla.]

Imivuzo yoomama ayikalingani neyamadoda noxa besenza umsebenzi omnye
ofanayo. Ewe, ukhona umnyinyiva asizukutsho ukuba awukho, kodwa
kuyakrokrisa. Oomama basarhuq’ ezantsi nakwizikhundla eziphezulu.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Let it be praised!

HON MEMBERS: The name of women!

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: They started chanting in 1955 that: “You strike a
woman, you strike a rock” and the struggle continues. Their words are still
ringing in my ears: “You strike a woman, you strike a rock”.

The ANC has objectives in its constitution and one of the primary
objectives is to unite all the people of South Africa, Africans in
particular. This will ensure that all forms of discrimination and
oppression are abolished and that the support drive for the emancipation of
women continues.

Nowadays there are habits and tendencies that make this struggle defective
and that needs to be rectified. We are witnessing the abuse and violence
against women which makes them more vulnerable. Girls live in fear of
rapists or being forced into marriage. These acts make them vulnerable to
diseases, especially Aids and syphilis.

We used to be highly respected when we became fully fledged men or
playboys, but today we are burying the playboys on a regular basis. People
must know that we need to slow down on other things if we want to live
longer. To some, it seems as if we have to amend some aspects within our
customs and cultures, especially those that are disgraceful, and pursue
those that advance our struggle for the emancipation of women.

Let us agree on the fact that times have changed. We don’t wear traditional
underwear anymore and “lobola” negotiations take place indoors and not at
the kraal. That is proof enough that times have changed. Mothers are
employed and they wake up at the crack of dawn to go to work. They perform
the same jobs as men and sometimes they do even more and do it much better
than men. Sometimes you are tempted to say to these men: “Take off your
trousers, you idiot, and let us lend you a dress”; especially when you
witness women being harassed in the workplace. [Applause.] They are
sexually harassed by being pinched and touched, but nothing is done by
management. Wathint’ abafazi, wathint’ imbokodo. [You strike a woman, you
strike a rock.]

There are no childcare facilities in workplaces. It concerns me a lot to
learn that Parliament doesn’t have a childcare facility. Why are there no
childcare facilities knowing that men do not conceive? It is probably
because of that very same reason that there are no childcare facilities.
Men do not breastfeed. Maybe that is another reason there is no childcare
facility here at Parliament. If men were breastfeeding, I am certain that
there would be a childcare facility in Parliament. [Applause.]

Women are paid far less than their counterparts although they are doing the
same job. Yes, there is slight progress, but it makes one very suspicious.
Women are still in the minority in respect of executive positions.]

It is clear that we require measures to address the disparities that impact
on working women’s careers, namely childcare facilities that need to be
provided in each and every workplace and - I want to repeat - including
this Parliament. Flexible working arrangements must be introduced to enable
women to balance careers and domestic responsibilities.

As a member of the ANC, the party that forms the government of the day, I
take no delight in talking about how persistent racism, colour division,
gender inequality and discrimination are against people with disabilities.
For decades, the ANC has advocated a gospel that says South Africa belongs
to all who live in it, and all shall be equal before the law. These
principles found expression in the new Constitution of the Republic of
South Africa. Thus, compliance with the Employment Equity Act is not an
option but mandatory in terms of Chapter 2 of the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa.

For the past 10 years, we have been knocking patiently on closed and barred
doors, calling for diversity in the work place, equitable representation
and the elimination of unfair discrimination. Once more, the employment
equity report conveys the sad news of a people hell-bent on self
destruction by resisting the reality that all South Africans have the
inalienable right to equality.

I believe it is a society of the equal that can be truly democratic and
prosperous. The resistance displayed thus far against the Employment Equity
Act whispers an unfortunate message that persuasion is a pale and dry
strategy too barren to bear fruit. If that be the case, we are forced to
explore other additional methods to realize this constitutional mandate of
employment equity in the workplace.

Looking back from the year 2005, when the first Commission for Employment
Equity’s 5-year term ended, we are reminded of how we reported with a
measure of satisfaction that the first five years have laid a solid
foundation by developing the needed institutional framework, policies,
regulations and codes of good practice for employment equity to prevail.
Little did we know that by now, when the second commission’s term ended at
the end of July 2010, we would be submitting a report as gloomy as the one
we have.

There cannot be any doubt that the data presented in this 10th CEE Annual
Report paints a gloomy picture of the status of employment equity in the
country. More whites, both males and females, are recruited into the middle
and upper management levels than any other group. The same racial
recruitment profile also applies to people with disabilities.

It petrifies to note how the privileged have chosen to distort the
substance of the Employment Equity Act to preserve their privileged
positions. White males dominate the economy and their privileges continue
to hold sway in the work place. There are employers who have chosen to
equate gender equity with the exclusive focus on white women when it comes
to recruitment and promotion to senior positions.

Black women remain subjected to the brutalities of historical triple
oppression. At the workplace, black women can hardly claim to have taken
their rightful place as equals in a free nation. This is more pronounced in
the economics of our country. They continue to be looked upon and treated
as inferior by virtue of being black in the colour of their skin.

Lately, there seems to be yet another distortion of this Act whereby a
narrow upward mobility is opening up slowly to black males, leaving behind
black women. This cannot but be unfortunate, because it perpetuates the
gender inequality aspect of the triple oppression theory in practice.

In the face of all this, the question that calls for an urgent answer is:
How we change this trend? I, for my part, cannot preside over this fateful
venture. Change must and will come in this regard. We have no option but to
revisit the Act and tighten it so that those who stand opposed to this
constitutional mandate bear the consequences.

After a thorough scrutiny of the employment equity report, the question
arises as to whether it is not high time we considered harsh fines linked
to the turnover of the affected enterprises? Should we not revisit the form
and content of our inspection work so that a combination of advocacy and
injection of the sense of duty on the part of the employer to honour one’s
obligation ultimately bears the desired fruit?

I will act swiftly to get this matter into the public arena so that the
necessary social discourse is embarked upon towards finding the ultimate
solution. I am convinced that employment equity still remains relevant in
our efforts to redress inequalities in the workplace. We must act speedily
to increase representation of, especially, black women and people with
disabilities. The longer we take to make reasonable progress towards
implementing employment equity, the more negative the impact will be on the
growth of our economy and stability of our democracy.

I for one, personally ... nje ngegungqayi lakuQoboqobo eZingcuka, eMzantsi
ilali ... [... as a rural boy from Qoboqobo, at Lower Zingcuka village ...]

... do not understand why we must beg for this country to be transformed. I
do no understand why the reconciliation hand of the ANC is continuously
being beaten and thwarted. I do believe that the approach the ANC took to
reconcile the people of this country must be taken seriously, because the
opposite is too ghastly to contemplate. [Interjections.]

Once more, I implore men and women of living conscience – including the one
sitting on this side, howling and very worried by what I’m saying - in
every workplace, to join me in this mission to create a conducive
environment for employment equity to prevail. The longer we delay, the more
we subject our beautiful country to the pain brought by discrimination in
whatever forms it presents itself.

If we love Nelson Rholihlahla Mandela, let us not bite the hand that is
forcing us into reconciliation in this country. If we do, then it means we
do not love Madiba. All that we are doing ... sibhibhidla’ mazinyo,
sikhwaza nje igama lakhe, singenzi le nto yena uMadiba afuna ukuba
masiyenze. Malibongwe! [Kwaqhwatywa.] [... is wasting our time, chanting
Madiba’s name and not doing what he wants us to do. Let it be praised!
[Applause.]]

HON MEMBERS: Igama lamakhosikazi! [The name of women!]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Yes, hon Minister, there’s a lot that is very sad, and we
don’t understand all these things. I myself have three white sons and a
white husband. I know that two of my white sons have to leave this
beautiful country to find work. It is sad, it’s complex, and it’s not as
simple as it looks.

Let me now aggravate you more. Women’s Month this year for the ACDP is
under a cloud as future generations of Africans continue to be labelled as
unwanted and are targeted. Unscrupulous groups, largely from the Western
World, used the legitimate call for a safer birthing environment at the
15th African Union Summit in Uganda to once again push for the abortion of
African babies. Despite the fact that abortion - legal or otherwise -
damages women’s mental and physical health, these groups continue to claim
that, in sacrificing their children and their health, women will somehow
gain equal opportunities and progress.

An interesting 13-year study of the entire population of women in Finland
showed that deaths from suicide, accidents and homicide were almost 250%
more likely in a year following an abortion. The majority of post-abortion
deaths were due to suicide, a rate six times higher than that of women who
had given birth to their children. This is not progress. An examination and
comparison of several countries also contradicts the idea that legal
abortion lowers maternal mortality rates. Instead, it confirms that
countries with restrictive abortion laws are in most cases the leaders in
reducing maternal mortality.

South Africa is a shocking example of the link between liberal abortion
laws and skyrocketing child and maternal mortality rates. The pro-abortion
NGOs’ coalition, in a statement to the recent African Union assembly, said
that they were ashamed of Africa’s high maternal and child mortality. Yet,
their statement failed to address the need for better-skilled birth
attendants and emergency obstetric care. The impression created is that the
concern about reducing maternal mortality is nothing more than a
smokescreen as the abortion agenda in unscrupulously promoted.

Abortion advocates have long argued that abortion liberalisation is an
unstoppable global trend. However, that is also a lie as more and more
countries take a stand, and a trend toward the protection of life is taking
root. Ireland, Poland, Mexico, the Dominican Republic, South Korea, Japan
and Russia have all issued strong pro-natalist statements reflecting their
concerns.

The birthing process is not an area of equality for the sexes, but is the
crown of womanhood and produces the nation’s hope – children, the children
of tomorrow. As such, women and their babies require great respect and
consideration from men and women in working together for equal
opportunities and progress for all. Thank you.

Mrs I C DITSHETELO: Madam Speaker, Ministers, 2010 marks the 31st
anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination Against Women. Therefore it cannot be more fitting
that, in celebrating Women’s Day, we reflect on strides and failures in
ensuring that women in particular benefit from created opportunities.

South Africa has undeniably made strides as far as women representation in
government and in Parliament is concerned, even though the quota has
decreased with this current administration. That is a cause for concern.
Forty-one percent of the working population is female, yet women constitute
19,8% of executive managers and 13,3% of directors. Is this right?
A recent study shows that for every R1 men earn, women earn 75 cents. How
does this justify the country’s commitment to gender equity? Only 11% of
companies listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, JSE, have 25% or more
of their directors’ positions occupied by women. I ask again: Is this
right?

Women make a major contribution to household wellbeing through productive
labour, but they have been largely absent in the debates on land reform or
not rewarded for their contribution. Our land reform policy is unlikely to
develop poor rural women as its direction prioritises promotion of
commercial farming above other commitments. Yet, rural black women suffered
most in colonial and apartheid history and had no rights altogether on land
ownership. Where is justice?

It is encouraging to learn that 97% of women use antenatal care services,
and 95% of babies are delivered in hospitals and clinics with a nurse or a
doctor present. But what quality of health care are we giving our women and
children if South Africa still has the highest maternal and infant
mortality rate in the world? Fifty-five percent of those infected by HIV
and Aids are women.

Rural women face enormous challenges in the quest to protect themselves
from HIV and Aids as they are often threatened with violence at the
suggestion of the use of a condom. What have we done to empower them
effectively and efficiently? How many of them have even seen or heard of
the female condom? What have we invested in ensuring progressive
development and improvement of the femidom?

HIV and Aids treatment requires frequent visits to health care centres that
administer treatment. For rural women living in poverty, access to these
centres is sometimes virtually impossible. Lack of physical access to
treatment centres amounts to denial of health care services. Can we pat
ourselves on the back then?

One thousand four hundred women die every year at the hands of their
partners. We have the Domestic Violence Act, but how have we made sure that
it is implemented effectively? What purpose does it serve to have beautiful
policies purporting to emancipate women when we do not implement them?

I conclude that though we have made great strides in terms of legislation
and policy formulation, women, surely, will be raped in our country today.
Another one is that you will be beaten by a partner today ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon members, I have been asked to
correct something here. I think earlier on hon Kalyan referred to hon
Matladi as the Vice President of the Women’s Caucus of the Pan-African
Parliament. Hon Matladi is in fact the President of the Women’s Caucus of
the Pan-African Parliament, not the Vice President. Thank you.
Ms B THOMSON: Chairperson, Minister Mayende-Sibiya, hon Ministers, Deputy
Ministers present, hon members, our guests up in the gallery, and a special
welcome to our guest Senator Tom Mndzebele and his delegation from the
Swaziland parliament. [Applause.] The post-1994 situation has presented new
democratic realities for South Africans, in general, and South African
women, in particular.

Two decades have seen - from the birth of our democracy after the 1994
elections - a commitment by our government and civic organisations, as well
as the development and upliftment of women. The likes of Sarah Baartman,
Charlotte Maxeke, Dorothy Nyembe, Mama Winnie Mandela, Mama Shope, Mama
Albertina Sisulu, Mama Bertha Xowa, Mama Lydia Ngwenya, MaNjobe and many
more women in the struggle must never be forgotten.

Our Constitution entrenches gender equality and form the basis for
transformation of gender relations. The equality clause in our Constitution
owes its origin to - amongst other gallant struggles - sacrifices and
indomitable spirits of women during the colonial and apartheid eras. It
should be remembered that gender equality and women’s rights formed the
axis of many demands and petitions of women activists. It did not just come
on a tray.

Consequently, the current constitutional democratic dispensation bears
indelible insignia of struggle against oppression and discrimination from
the early 1900s to the present moments. It is worth mentioning that the
national liberation struggle has, in the main, been about the creation of a
nonsexist and nonracist democratic society for all.

The ANC’s Freedom Charter and constitutional guidelines and, ultimately,
the Constitution of our country seek to build a caring democratic society
for all. The Bantu Women’s League under the leadership of Mama Charlotte
Maxeke spearheaded struggles for the rights of the oppressed people. At
that time, the ANC Women’s League was also involved in campaigns against
poor working conditions, pass laws and the enactment of apartheid. We would
recall women from various different backgrounds who took lead in the fight
against the notorious 1913 Land Act.

In 1994, the ANC women’s League played a leading role in the building of a
nonracial Federation of South African Women. At its inaugural conference,
it then drafted the Women’s Charter. The Women’s Charter called for equal
rights with men in various relations, the right to vote and the right to
full employment opportunities. It was at this period that the ANC Women’s
League identified a need for a broader structure that will unite all women
around issues affecting women and society.

Currently, this objective has been achieved through the successful launch
of the PWM in August 2006 in Bloemfontein. The key role for the women’s
movement is to build a nonracial and a nonsexist society which will result
in the emancipation of women. The ANC Women’s League appreciates the
current position of women and, despite challenges, supports the women’s
movement as a broad front of various women’s organisations, feminist-
orientated groups, researches, faith-based organisations and policy makers.


There are other women formations in different communities that should take
up local struggles affecting women. Women empowerment should always respond
to the fact that women are not a homogenous group, but have diverse
backgrounds and interests.

As early as the 1990s, women rose up to positions of leadership within the
structures of the ANC, despite entrenched structures of patriarchy. During
the transition period and the post-1994 democratic breakthrough, women
representation and popular participation in politics and leadership were on
the agenda of the ANC and the Government of National Unity. From this
period on, there was a noticeable vibrant engagement on women
representation and participation, drawing from continental and global
gender relations.

The ANC’s constitution provides for a quota of no less than 50% of women in
all structures to ensure effective participation in the fight for the
emancipation of women. The ANC is committed to the emancipation of women,
hence the entrenchment of the 50-50 principle in its constitution. The 50%
gender balance is a huge achievement within the Progressive Women’s
Movement at present. Women have come a long way to adopt that position in
the ANC’s constitution - the binding document.

Comrade Thenjiwe Mthintso’s excellent work focuses on the women’s question
and gender relations within the national democratic revolution, NDR, and
the state. The women question quotas or the 50-50 approach relate to women
representation and the number of women in all decision-making structures.
She argues that significant numbers of women facilitate access of women to
decision-making structures or bodies to fight against their
marginalisation, poverty and apathy. However, women need to be mobilised
and empowered through education and emancipation.

Concurrently, the perspective and policy of the ANC and other feminist
schools of thought advocate transformation of gender relations. This
implies changing patriarchal power relations through gender conscious women
and state intervention. This further implies that it is not a given fact
that the presence of women in leadership and politics would open up space
for more women to swell leadership ranks and overthrow patriarchy.

An ANC Today edition criticises the gender blindness of the decision of one
woman in a position of power and illustrates the complex nature of the
circumstances of women. It uncovers the image of the all-male Western Cape
provincial cabinet appointed by a female premier with disregard to the
ongoing changes in various levels of governance. A question should then be
asked whether there were no capable women in the province. These are some
of the contradictions that the PWM should take up in a programmatic manner
to isolate and undermine patriarchy and its proponents.

The South African government is committed to the spirit of
nondiscriminatory practices and equality of all persons, irrespective of
gender or sex, in line with the Bill of Rights as entrenched in the
Constitution. The evolution of women representation on national, regional
and international level takes place within a broader gender balance of
power in accordance with the international law and international
instruments.

Accordingly, SADC, the AU, the UN and other protocols and instruments seek
to ensure women’s representation in all decision-making structures. Data
also shows the differing attitudes of various countries concerning the
representation of women in their parliaments.

The Constitution and democracy have presented us with various mechanisms to
advance gender transformation such as the Bill of Rights; the establishment
of comprehensive national gender machinery; high representation of women in
government structures; and an accelerated process aimed at the eradication
of gender-based violence. Part of other widely noted achievements include
the Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act, which allows all women access
to termination of pregnancy under certain circumstances, helping to improve
the rights of women and reducing the health risks associated with illegal
abortions.

Primary health care was introduced with major benefits for poor rural
women. The Department of Health distributes female condoms to try to
protect women from HIV infection. Thank you, Chair. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mrs S P KOPANE: Hon Chairperson, let me first start by using words of
wisdom from an unknown author who defines gender equality in the following
terms:


   Gender equality means that all human beings are free to develop their
   personal abilities and make choices without limitations set by gender
   roles, that the different behaviour, aspirations and needs of men and
   women are equally considered and favoured.

Let me also go further and define gender inequality according to my own
understanding. It is an unequal and biased treatment between men and women.

Ho tloha kgolong ya ke ne ke ntse ke lora ka setjhaba seo basadi le banna
ba tshwarwang ka mokgwa o lekaneng. Mme toro ena ya ka e ntse e tswela
pele. Ke tumelo ya ka e tiileng ya hore ho se lekane ho pakeng tsa banna le
basadi, ke taba ya kgale mme e lokela hore e be e fedile mehleng eo e
fetileng. Re phela nakong ya sejwalejwale mme re se re tswetse pele haholo.
Ha ho sa le nako ya menahano ena e siilweng ke nako. Ke le mosadi wa
Moafrika, ke tseba hantle ka tshwaro e sa lekaneng ha ho bapiswa banna le
basadi. Ke na le metswalle, basebetsimmoho le ba leloko ba ntseng ba
lwantshana le taba ena bosiu le motsheare.

Re a tseba hore re bopilwe ka seriti sa Modimo mme ka pele ho sefahleho sa
Hae, re a lekana.

Motsamaisi ya kgabane wa dipuisano, e re ke qale ka ho hopotsa bohle ka
seabo sa basadi ba naha ya rona nakong eo ba neng ba itella ho aha
demokrasi ena eo e leng hore tsatsing lena e hloleha ho ba lokolla
ditlamong. Re lokela ho hopola le ho utlwisisa diketsahalo tsa 1956 tsa
mokoloko wa boipelaetso o neng o lebile Union Buildings. Ho ne ho
phuthehile basadi ka ho fapafapana. Ho ne ho le basadi ba dipolotiki,
bodumedi, le ba mahaeng jwalojwalo.

Basadi bana bohle ba ne ba susumetswa ke ntho e le nngwe, e leng tjheseho
le ho labalabela toka. Basadi bana, ho ya ka ho fapana ha bona, ba ile ba
tlohela tsohle tse neng di ba arohanya mme ba tsepamisa maikutlo a bona
hodima se neng se lokela ho etswa molemong wa naha ena ya rona. Basadi
bana, ba ile ba ikakgela ka setotswana ntle le tshabo ya letho ho tlisa
diphetoho tseo re di bonang kajeno.

Ba ile ba re neha mohlala o motle wa hore re eme mmoho re le ngatana e le
nngwe ho lwantsha bobe mme re emele nnete. Sena se pakahatsa hore keteko ya
letsatsi la bomme ha se ya mokgatlo o le mong hobane basadi ba bangata ba
ile ba kgatha tema lebelong lena. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs
follows.)

[From my youth days my dream has always been to see a society where men and
women are treated equally. It is still my dream even today. I strongly
believe that the inequality between men and women is old-fashioned and
belongs in the past. We live in the 21st century and we have moved forward.
There is no time for these old mentalities. As an African woman, I know
very well about the unequal treatment between men and women. I have
friends, colleagues and relatives who are still struggling to fight this
every day.

We know that we are created in God’s image and that we are all equal before
Him.

Honourable Speaker, let me start by reminding everyone about the role
played by women of this country when they made a sacrifice to build
democracy, which today is unable to set them free. We need to remember and
understand the events of the march to the Union Buildings in 1956. Women
converged from different backgrounds.

There were women from politics, religions, rural areas and so forth. All
these women were encouraged by one thing, courage and justice. These women,
despite their differences, set aside what separated them and focused on
what needed to be done in the interest of our country. These women did what
was needed to be done without fear in order to bring about the changes we
see today.

They set us the good example that we need to stand together as one to fight
evil and to stand for the truth. This proves that the celebration of
Women’s Day is not only for one party, because many women were involved in
this struggle.]

Violence against women and children is a scourge in our country. It poses a
significant threat to human rights and the development of women and girls.
It is clear that women suffer a very high level of sexual assault, rape and
domestic violence.

People cannot take advantage of opportunities if their lives are under
siege; if their rights are not respected by fellow citizens or their
visions are limited by fears. Yet the web of terror that crime throws over
women and children is so strong and it affects everyone. The right to
equality is the right of all human beings to be treated with dignity,
respect and consideration in order to participate on equal basis with
others in any area of economic, and political, cultural or civil life
social rights.

In South Africa the Constitution emphasises the equality of men and women.
However, we lack the implementation of laws that provide effective legal
protection against discrimination, harassment and unequal opportunities,
and the legal means to promote equality. Gender inequality is a deeply
rooted and entrenched attitude by societal institutions and market forces.
We need a strong leadership, political will and commitment to institute the
policies that can trigger social changes and allocate the necessary
resources for gender equality and women empowerment.

Re le setjhaba re tla tswela pele feela ebang basadi le bona ba tswela pele
mme le bona ba fuwa menyetla le ditokelo tse lekaneng. Ho setseng feela ke
hore sena se phethahatswe ka ho panya ha leihlo.

Hangata re dula re mametse bomaila diphetoho ba dulang ba fana ka envangedi
e fosahetseng mabapi le kamoo basadi ba haellwang kateng le kamoo ba ke
keng ba tlisa diphetoho tsa makgonthe kateng. Re lokela ho nka mehato ya
nnete e netefatsang hore seabo sa basadi se a tshehetswa le hore ba
phahamisetswa maemong a phahameng ho ba kgontsha hore ba etse diqeto. Re
tlameha ho tshehetsa sena ka ho rupella basadi le ho ba tshehetsa ka
ditjhelete tse hlokahalang, le ho ba beha tlasa batho ba ka ba rutang hore
le bona ba tsebe mosebetsi ba tle ba tsebe ho ikemela. (Translation of
Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[We will only move forward as a nation if women also move forward and are
given equal opportunities and rights. The only thing left is for this to be
done immediately.
We often hear critics of change giving misleading information about how
women are lagging behind and how they cannot bring real changes. We need to
take the necessary steps to ensure that the roles that women play are
supported and promoted to higher positions to enable them to make
decisions. We must support women by educating them and providing them with
the necessary financial assistance as well as giving them mentoring so that
they can be independent.]

We cannot deny the fact that the status of women in our country has
improved, but we cannot afford to be complacent. The critical aspect is
that women are now struggling to rise. However, without the enabling
environment, it won’t be possible for the marginalised women to realise
their potential.

We cannot talk about freedom or celebrate Women’s Day if women are
unskilled, illiterate, unemployed, and cannot take decisions about their
lives, their health, and especially their reproductive rights as part of
their human rights.

Ha ke phethela, ke rata hore ho bomme kaofela ba ileng ba nka kabo
letsatsing la bomme, ke re ho bona “bomme, ha re tiiseng”. Ke rata hore ho
bontate ba dulang ba re tshehetsa ka nako tsohle, le tsebe hore re leboha
seo le re etsetsang sona. Ka ho bua jwalo ke re ho bomme, “tshwarang le
tiise”. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[In conclusion, I would like to say to all women who played a role in
Women’s Day, “Ladies, let us hold on tight”. I would like to say to the men
who always support us that we appreciate what they do for us. With that in
mind I would like to say to women, “hold on tight”. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mrs L S MAKHUBELA-MASHELE: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy
Ministers, hon members and invited guests, I greet you all. Women’s Day is
a day for applauding women’s achievements and for focusing attention on
tasks which lie ahead. It is a day for reflecting on how far our society
has come and how far we still have to go.

The struggle for equality continues unabated. The woman warrior who is
armed with wit and courage will be amongst the first to celebrate victory.
In our advocacy campaign, let us not forget to take along the girl-child.
There is a saying in Siswati which says: Ligotjwa lisemanti. [Discipline is
instilled at an early age.]

We must, as this generation of women, take the girl-child by the hand and
move with her to total emancipation of a woman. In the girl-child lies the
future heroine who must take the baton in advocating women’s total
liberation.

Prescribed gender roles lead to the women’s role as mothers and nurturers
in the domestic sphere being seen as of less importance and value than
men’s tasks. Women are said to be nurturers and domestic labourers while
men are perceived to be the natural leaders and decision-makers. These
roles are enforced at home, at school and throughout the media, thus
restricting women’s self-perceptions, disempowering their social and
economic potential and limiting the possibilities for their future.

The curriculum taught in our schools still seeks to have one gender
portrayed as superior to the other. The girl-child is still seen as the
weaker gender when compared to the boy-child. Our education and advocacy
need to start from the foundation phase of the education system and educate
equality for all genders, as well as the role that can be played by both
boy- and girl-children to build a society that is tolerant and respectful
of all humankind regardless of gender.

Instilling this from an early stage of development will enable young women
to resist all manifestations and consequences of patriarchy, from the
feminisation of poverty, physical and psychological abuse to the
subjugation of self-confidence. Women must resist open and hidden forms of
exclusion from all positions of authority and power.

Social and biological features have been used in human history to exclude
and repress the progress of women in our communities. Critical in this
regard is the creation of the material and cultural conditions that would
allow the abilities of women to flourish and enrich the life of the nation.
In doing so, we would place women at the centre of evolution and
development in our society.

The ANC believes that we cannot say that we are progressing as people and
as a nation unless the women of our country are truly liberated and until
we have reached a state of gender equality and gender equity. In view of
the challenges that the democratic South Africa still faces in achieving
gender equality, and as revolutionaries tasked with responsibilities to
lead the transformation project, it is necessary to ask ourselves: What
kind of struggles do we still need to engage in? What type of organisation
do we still need to lead such struggles?

Women and men always remember that we were united through the discovery of
our common wounds and scars. The national democratic and nonsexist society
will not come as a consequence of liberation of the white minority regime,
but as a result of a collective deliberate resolve and effort to eradicate
all forms of gender discrimination.

Let me remind all our male citizens here, as Susan Anthony writes: “It was
we, the people, not we, the male citizens, but we, the whole people, who
fought for liberation.” The mobilisation of women is the task not only of
women or men alone, but all of us, men and women alike, comrades in
struggle in our pursuit for gender equality. The mobilisation of the people
into an active resistance and struggle for liberation demands the energies
of men, not less than of men, as a system based on the exploitation of man
by man can in no way avoid exploitation of woman by the male members of
society.

The emancipation of women is not an act of charity or a result of a
humanitarian or a compassionate attitude. The liberation of women is a
fundamental necessity for the revolution, the guarantee of its continuity
and precondition for its victory. The ANC will, therefore, continue to
strive for the realisation of the commitment of the Freedom Charter which
says: “The rights of all people shall be the same, regardless of gender,
race, or colour.”

At this moment, let me quote O R Tambo in the concluding session of the
conference of the women’s section of the ANC in Angola:

   The women’s section is a weapon of struggle to be correctly used against
   all forms and levels of oppression and inequality in the interest of a
   victorious struggle of the people. There is, therefore, no way in which
   women, in general, can liberate themselves without fighting to the end
   the exploitation of man by man, both as a concept and as a social system.
   If we are to engage our full potential in this pursuit of the goals of
   our revolutionary struggle, then as revolutionaries we should stop
   pretending that women in our movement have the same opportunities as the
   men.

This is a clarion call for all of us to take stock of how far our society
has come and how far we still have to go in our pursuit of total equality
and total equity.

Women have suffered and continue to suffer from all forms of oppression. As
women warriors, we will suffer, but, hon members, friends and comrades, we
must rise and rise every time we face challenges.

Let me conclude by borrowing these poetic words from Maya Angelou, a well-
renowned poetess, who wrote:

   Out of the huts of history’s shame
   I rise
   Up from a past that’s rooted in pain
   I rise
   I’m a black ocean, leaping and wide,
   Welling and swelling I bear in the tide.
   Leaving behind nights of terror and fear
   I rise
   Into a daybreak that’s wondrously clear
   I rise
   Bringing the gifts my ancestors gave,
   I am the dream and the hope of the slave.
   I rise
   I rise
   I rise.

I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr K J DIKOBO: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members and guests, on Saturday, 7 August 2010, 18-year-old Mapula
Makabole, a Grade 12 learner at Derek Kobe High School in Lebowakgomo, left
home to visit a friend in her neighbourhood. She did not return. The
following day, her father was called to identify her body at the mortuary.

We later came to know that she had visited a male friend, who allegedly
strangled her. The male friend then called another male friend who had a
car. They bundled Mapula’s body into the car and dumped her in the forest.
After dropping Mapula’s friend at his house, the driver of the car went
straight to the police to report what had happened. As we speak, the
suspect is still at large.

During the same weekend in Lebowakgomo, there were reports of another three
incidents where women were alleged to have been killed by people whom they
knew and trusted - husbands or boyfriends. One is tempted to ask as to
whether the alleged perpetrators deliberately planned those acts to
coincide with the national Women’s Day because one man was once heard
telling his wife that the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women
and Children would pass and then he would deal with her.

Azapo’s point is that our mothers and sisters are still vulnerable and feel
unsafe in their own country. They are looking towards us and the Ministry
of Women, Children and People with Disabilities to come to their rescue. I
met some of them on Monday, and they had many complaints. One of their
complaints was that a year after the establishment of this Ministry, they
are still waiting for a White Paper, or a strategy or policy document, that
sets out the vision and activities the Ministry intends to embark upon.
They are looking towards this House to pass laws that promote and protect
them.

As we were talking, they were very clear that transformation is not an
option; it has to take place. The question that we continued asking
ourselves in that meeting was: What kind of society do we have that
produces young men who have no respect for human life and women? We said
that, as the police continued to raid and close down factories producing
drugs in our country, the society should close down those that produce
angry young men.

We cannot fail our women because, if we do, history will record that this
fourth democratic Parliament presided over a system that continued to
oppress and marginalise women. History will be unkind to us. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Mrs P C DUNCAN: Chairperson, structures are failing dismally, and
corruption is the order of the day. Service delivery is nonexistent, and
the social ills affecting women are escalating. Relationships are at an all-
time low, and unemployment and poverty break up the families. We have all
forms of violence and abuse of such proportions that it makes one sick in
the stomach.

We speak about women every year. Women’s Days come and go. We deliberate,
debate, make promises and highlight weaknesses in the system of government,
but - year in, year out - the same songs are sung. Some organisations and
institutions only come alive during Women’s Month.

The ANC continues to claim success based on the numbers game, yet the lucky
ones that make the quota race forget where they come from and dismally fail
the majority of women who are so trapped in many of the social conditions
described above. One wonders if indeed the end of the world is nearing us.
It is definitely the end of the ANC in sight.

The ANC-led government established the Office on the Status of Women.
Although this structure worked hard and endured many pressures in the early
years whilst under the Presidency, a new Ministry then replaced it, with
even more pressures such as a weak Minister, understaffing and
underfunding. Why is it so hard to learn from these mistakes? Who are
protected in this? Is it the ANC Women’s League cadres who must be deployed
or maintained in jobs?

The ANC Women’s League was present on Monday at the Women’s Day
celebrations in the Eastern Cape, in its full force and colours. Another
ANC party turning sour as it failed to give meaning to real women’s issues.
It also failed to attract women across all equality expressions of our Bill
of Rights. The President had to intervene and call the gathering to order,
reminding participants that it was not an ANC meeting, but a Women’s Day.
The Minister of Women, Children and People with Disabilities is all quiet
and not in charge.

Where was the Multiparty Women’s Caucus? What part did they play to ensure
that that was not an ANC rally? [Interjections.] Is it because its
management is clueless about the Joint Rules of Parliament in the sense
that they can advise, influence and consult on women’s issues inside and
outside Parliament? Are they running around not knowing what to do or where
to fit in because they are also underfunded and understaffed?

Hierdie tipe flaters is onaanvaarbaar en ’n klap in die gesig van alle
vroue van Suid-Afrika. Nog so ’n onaanvaarbare flater is die Konvensie oor
die Uitwissing van alle Vorme van Diskriminasie teen Vroue, die Cedaw-
verslag. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[These sorts of blunders are unacceptable and a slap in the face of all
South African women. Another unacceptable blunder is the Convention on the
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women – the Cedaw
report.]

This report was not tabled in Parliament before being submitted to the UN
in 2008, nor was it compliant with the UN reporting requirements. But it
was signed by the hon Kgalema Motlanthe when he was President and the late
Dr Manto Tshabalala-Msimang when she was Minister in the Presidency.

Just guess who recently came to light to bring clarity on this matter three
weeks ago in the year 2010? It was the Commission for Gender Equality, CGE.
Why only two years later did the CGE make this important matter known? I
can only think that the CGE was so trapped in the mismanagement of their
own funds, getting a disclaimer of opinion for two concurrent years, that
they were unable to oversee such an important report to the UN. They were
also not serious about women.

In the 16 years of democracy in our country, South Africa, I had the
personal opportunity, for the first time, to experience a united nation
through sports, giving us moments of song, praise, rhythm and the vuvuzela
sounds when the Soccer World Cup arrived on 11 June 2010. We were able to
shift from our own prejudices to something new to support what is good and
the will to win even after our own team, Bafana Bafana, lost. We continued
to support other world teams. We felt it, saw it, and it was a success. I
thought this is how I see our country using the same spirit and will to
look after our people.

However, the vuvuzela sound softened, and the togetherness was no longer
there. Everything is back to normal, and uncertainty prevails again. The
theme chosen for the 2010 Women’s Day, namely “Working Together for Equal
Opportunities and Progress for all Women” is not in sight.

Building and sustaining the kind of energy of the World Cup - the same
spirit, the same will, united as a nation - is needed to change the lives
of all our people, especially our women and children. We are all
responsible to achieve this. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Chair, Ministers and Deputy Ministers
present, hon members, comrades, ladies and gentleman, allow me to join all
the other speakers who spoke before me to honour and celebrate the
contributions of our great women. Allow me to pause and salute the pioneers
who paved the way for us - the gallant heroines who rose against
colonialism, protested against the pass laws and took united action against
unjust laws.

Women who, under severe conditions of poverty, oppression and exploitation,
created homes, and educated, developed and produced leaders of yesterday
and today. I think hon Robinson was quite right when she said that we
should celebrate our Florence Nightingales and Helen Suzmans. Many will
agree that the 1956 demonstrations were probably the most successful and
militant of any resistance campaigns mounted at that time - a revolutionary
process set in motion long before the 1950s.

It is very important for us to remember and celebrate this day so that we
can preserve the memory of our heroines because memory is a weapon. By
remembering the brave acts of heroines we are strengthened and encouraged
to pick up the spear and take those struggles forward. Let us not use this
day as an ANC Women’s League attacking platform for people who fail to
mobilise their own forces on an open day, but blame us for their inability
to motivate. [Applause.] We use this day to celebrate and thank our
heroines. So, hon Duncan, go and get your act together and mobilise your
own people. [Interjections.]

All these struggles had something in common - a process of deliberate,
careful, systematic and coherent planning and organising. These struggles
demonstrated and confirmed that when women have decided to undertake
responsibility and not complain about other organisations, they can do that
so well as these women did. More humbling about these struggles is that
they were organised and executed with very little resources in a climate of
political repression, setting in motion an irreversible momentum for the
struggle of women’s emancipation.

Black South African women, under the leadership of Charlotte Maxeke, led
the fight against exploitative social conditions even long before the day.
They organised themselves for political unity across gender and racial
barriers. Under her leadership, they organised an antipass movement in
Bloemfontein in 1913. In 1918, Charlotte Maxeke led a women’s deputation to
Cape Town to put the women’s case before the then Prime Minister, Louis
Botha.

In the 1920s, following World War I, women of all races - not the ones that
we have today who just complain and not come - began to slowly gravitate
towards the towns and cities. Working and living conditions in these
townships provided a fertile ground for the formation of trade union
movements. The harsh living conditions were also felt in rural areas as
political activism was experienced all over the country. During the same
period, around 1928, women in Potchefstroom rose in protest against monthly
fees of lodgers’ permits. And again in 1928, when the Liquor Act was
introduced, women organised resistance which began in Ladysmith and spread
throughout Natal, focusing on areas like Weenen, Glencoe, Howick and
Dundee.

It is important to know that the period after World War II opened another
difficult period with the South African economy having gradually changed
from a mining agricultural economy to a flourishing industrial economy.
Reserves by this time no longer provided a subsistence base for African
families who lived in extreme poverty whilst, on the other hand, urban
blacks in the townships lived under very difficult conditions. The cost of
living rose quite sharply to an extent that economic hardships increased
and women struggled to feed their families.

It is during this period that a group of young militant trade unionists,
professionals, peasants and ordinary women came together to fight against
these unbearable conditions. We are reminded of great names like Frances
Baard, Lillian Ngoyi, Bertha Mashaba, Dora Tamane, Florence Matomela; I can
list many of them.

To create a momentum for these struggles, in 1949 the ANC Women’s League
elected a dynamic leader, Ida Mtwana, who took over the leadership of the
women’s league. In the very same period, the youth league introduced its
programme of action. In 1953, the ANC elected a very dynamic president,
Albert Luthuli. The combination of these forces created a momentum which
ensured that, come 1956, there would be a coherent force which would resist
any imposition of unfair policies to them. This period witnessed a revival
of militant spirit which filtered through the organisation. Provincial
branches of the ANC Women’s League were established, incorporating township
women, working class women, and women in the trade union movement.

I’m trying by this to demonstrate that the process of fighting against
oppression was a protracted process, not just an event. Women became
prominent in these areas, especially during the antipass campaigns. The
protest which culminated in the 9 August 1956 march was sparked by rumours
of the new legislation which leaked in the press in 1950. This matter was
not new because - as I indicated earlier - it had been resisted under the
leadership of Charlotte Maxeke and had been shelved because of women
struggles.
After this announcement, meetings and demonstrations were held in a number
of centres, including Langa in Uitenhage, East London, Cape Town and
Pietermaritzburg. These, as I said, created a base for the protest that we
were to see in 1956. During this period, again, women united under the
leadership of women from different races and different provinces - Lillian
Ngoyi, Fatima Seedat, Dr K Goonan, Bettie du Toit, Hetty du Toit, Josie
Palmer, Helen Joseph, Henrietta Ostrich, Lucy Mvubela, Amina Cachalia,
Mildred Letsie; the list goes on. All of them stood up to protect the
rights of women and the rights of everybody in the country.

In September 1955, the then government announced that it would start
issuing reference books to black women in January 1956. According to this
law, black people – now including women - were forced to carry these books
and, at all times, they had to produce them. For instance, in the Western
Cape, where these permits had already been issued, the law said that in
certain boundaries established by government, no African would be hired
unless the Department of Labour determined that no coloured person was
available to do that work. Africans were declared foreigners in those
areas, and they would be removed and children would be sent to the
reserves.

As soon as this announcement was made, women jumped quickly and organised
themselves. As I have indicated, since 1912, a momentum had already been
created and that is why they were able to pull together such a successful
march. I will not delve into what happened on that day, save to say that
the march of August 1956 and all other activities before it were a good
indication that women had thrown off the shackles of the past.

Although the majority of people there were African women, coloured, white,
and Indian women also attended. The crowd was orderly and dignified
throughout the proceedings. After a solemn moment of silence, organisers
handed their bundles of signed petitions to Lillian Ngoyi, Helen Joseph,
Rahima Moosa and Sophie de Bruyn, who in turn deposited those petitions at
the Minister’s office.

Women had once again shown that the stereotype of women as politically
inept, immature and tied to the home was outdated and inaccurate. Albert
Luthuli, the then president of the ANC, paying tribute to these women, had
this to say:

   When the women begin to take an active part in the struggle, as they are
   doing now, no power on earth can stop us from achieving freedom in our
   lifetime.


It is indeed 54 years since the Women’s March, so where are we now? It is a
fact that, under the democratic state, space has been provided to deepen
women’s struggles for women’s emancipation, not complaints.

As a country we have made progress to improve access to the judiciary;
access to resources like clean water, sanitation and electricity; and
access to education and health. Indeed, the democratic government has
created an environment for the empowerment of women through a progressive
Constitution and an enactment of gender-sensitive legislation - hon member
Duncan, these things have happened. The democratic government has
established programmes for women’s development and enacted gender-sensitive
laws. It has established women empowerment institutions – that is why you
and I are here and we can really stand on this platform. [Applause.]

Indeed, these advances have improved the quality of life and status of
women. They have created a space for women’s voices to be heard on matters
of concern for their lives, their wellbeing and that of society; not
complaints and insults against other parties.

In 2009, Chief Statistician, Pali Lehohla, observed in Engendering
Statistics that:

   The early years of the 21st century have seen great improvements ...
It’s not I who am saying it; it’s your Chief Statistician –

   ... in the absolute status of women with gender inequalities decreasing
   quite substantially in a number of sectoral areas such as education and
   health.
But, indeed, we will be the first to admit that a lot more still needs to
be done. For instance, in the area of education, women and children’s
access to education is very critical, especially considering the world
figures which say two thirds of children who have been denied primary
education are girls, and 75% of the worst illiterate adults are women.

Whilst as a country we pride ourselves about the fact that this
administration has prioritised education as an apex programme, and that we
are doing very well with regard to Millennium Development Goals, MDGs,
which call upon us to ensure that everybody, including girls, can complete
the course of primary education, a lot still needs to be done. There is no
tool for development more effective than the education of girls. No other
policy other than education is likely to raise economic productivity, lower
infant and maternal mortality, improve nutrition and promote health.

I agree with members who raised - Ntate Dikobo - concerns about violence
against children because women, on an ongoing basis, have their movements
limited, and they are in constant fear for their lives. Another area of
concern which members have raised is that of poverty. Poverty is indeed
being feminised. It is wearing dresses and has a woman’s face.

Statistics by World Revolution in 2007 revealed that out of the 1,3 million
people living in poverty around the world, 70% of them are women.
Statistics after statistics give us a sad picture about the participation
of women in the economy. We are told that, whilst women do 66% of the
world’s work, they earn less than 5% of its income in return. Again,
indicators make startling observations that women work two thirds of the
world’s working hours, and produce half of the world’s food. Yet, they earn
only 10% of the world’s income, and own less than 1% of the world’s
property. Women, in general, do not own the means of production and they
still remain at the lowest rung in the job industry and the economy. This
is part of the commitment we made in Millennium Development Goal 1, and we
need to make progress.

I agree with members that our progress on the reduction of maternal
mortality and child mortality is quite worrying. It is very disturbing that
young women in their prime are most affected, and hence the campaign on
counseling and testing launched by the President and Minister Motsoaledi is
meant to address precisely that. So, hon member Dudley, we don’t say
untruths. Termination has no link with maternal death. It is a burden of
disease that has been scientifically proved by the Minister and statistics
that it is the one that is dogging us and creating this high rate of
maternal death. [Applause.]

So don’t run a campaign and spread untruths which are very dangerous for
our young people. It has nothing to do with termination; it has much to do
with the burden of disease, particularly HIV and diseases like high blood
pressure and sugar diabetics. That is where the problem is, and that is
what the Minister is trying to address. So let’s not spread untrue rumours.

Mrs Ditshetelo, it’s not true that we have high maternal deaths because of
bad treatment in our hospitals. It’s again the burden of disease that is
confronting us as a country, which all of us have to take responsibility
for and reverse. The reason that our health system is collapsing is the
burden of bad disease. We have more sick people and sick children who are
crowding hospitals. It has nothing to do with that. The truth is that all
of us, as South Africans, should take responsibility, encourage everyone to
go for counseling and testing and confront our biggest challenge - HIV/Aids
and TB. That is what we need to do. [Applause.]

Like the women of 1950, we have to work together as women. Let’s not shout
at each other and ask who was at the rally and who did what. It was an open
rally, you could have come. If you chose not to come, don’t make it
anybody’s problem. Let’s work together as a collective and make sure that
women join and participate in progressive structures. Let us also work with
other women for transformation because it is in our unity that our strength
lies.

We should take forward the campaigns on education; we should pay particular
attention to the development of young women; and we should take the
struggles to higher levels and stop bickering and saying all the
unnecessary things. But, I must say, most speakers were really constructive
and very encouraging. We must strengthen existing organisations, promote
gender equality, and work together to ensure that the commitments made by
government on the rights of women are implemented. Therefore I agree with
my comrade and say, “Malibongwe!” [Praise!] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 16:15.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Local Government: Municipal Systems Amendment Bill [B 22 –
             2010] (National Assembly – sec 75).

          b) Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

          c) Skills Development Levies Amendment Bill [B 25 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

    (2)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bills as section 76 Bills:

          a) Sectional Titles Schemes Management Bill [B 20 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).

          b) Community Schemes Ombud Service Bill [B 21 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).

          c) Higher Education and Training Laws Amendment Bill [B 26 –
             2010] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).

National Assembly
The Speaker

1.    Delay with tabling of report

      On 26 May 2010 the National Assembly adopted a Report of the Standing
      Committee on Appropriations on the Appropriation Bill (Announcements,
      Tablings and Committee Reports, 21 May 2010 p 1615).  The Report inter
      alia recommended that: “A detailed project plan (schedule) for the
      implementation of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related
      Matters Act… be tabled in the House within 30 days by the Office of
      the Speaker”. In accordance with this resolution a project plan should
      have been tabled by July.


      However, given the number of stakeholders involved in the
      implementation of the Act and the fact that members have been away
      from Parliament since mid-June, the report can only be submitted by
      the end of August 2010. This will allow time for the necessary
      consultations on the matter.

2.    Government plan to deal with xenophobic threats

       a) The following letter from the Minister of Police, Mr E N
          Mthethwa, was received on 26 July 2010 for the information of
          members of the National Assembly

          Mr M V Sisulu, MP
          Speaker of the National Assembly
          Parliament
          P O Box 15
          CAPE TOWN
          8000


          Dear Speaker


          Re: Government outlines plan to deal with xenophobic threats


          Having been appointed by the Cabinet to chair the Inter-
          Ministerial Committee on Xenophobia, this letter serves to advise
          you that we held discussions as the committee on the 8th July
          2010 to formulate a strategy to deal with this matter. We further
          urge the Speaker to ensure that all the political parties
          represented in the National Assembly to participate in Government-
          led programmes to deal with xenophobic threats.


          The following were agreed to:


              • Proactive facilitation of a societal dialogue: This has
                taken place in various areas around the country, comprising
                police, churches, community policing forums and NGOs.
                Communities need to blow the whistle against any criminals
                that are disguised behind xenophobia. Government has always
                and will always discourage covering up for criminals by
                community members. It also needs to be noted that the 2008
                attacks against foreign nationals never spread to areas
                within Soweto and this can largely be attributed to a
                critical role played by community policing forums.


              • Extension of the 2010 Fifa World Cup National Joint
                Committee: The swift police and justice approach that was
                witnessed during the World Cup will be adopted and
                continued, to respond to this issue of attacks and any form
                of criminality. Quick investigation, tighter sentencing and
                law enforcement agencies will not hesitate to act speedily
                and decisively against anyone found to incite violent acts
                against foreign nationals.


              • Strict monitoring of proliferation of businesses owned by
                foreign nationals and lack of regulation thereof: These
                trends have now shifted from communities and moved towards
                smaller towns and rural areas. Once they settle in these
                areas, they then get involved in the informal economic
                sector. Most of the foreign nationals regard South Africa as
                a viable economic sector.


              • Review and derive lessons from the May-June 2008 incidents:
                We will utilise all the lessons learnt during this period to
                inform our approach going forward.

              • Reinforce civic education in society and within law
                enforcement agencies: This is not a new phenomenon but
                speaks to our approach of re-skilling and re-training the
                South African Police Service, ensuring we have officers who
                defend the weak, uphold the Constitution and are committed
                to fighting crime. The same approach will be escalated by
                Government across society.


              • Development of a Government communication strategy: The IMC
                noted and adopted, with immediate effect, that Government
                Communication and Information System (GCIS) will spearhead
                an effect and aggressive communication strategy to counter
                and mitigate the risk posed by the unbalanced media reports
                which still instill fear about possible attacks.


          Government strategy, as outlined, is a multi-faceted plan to
          prevent any outbreak of violence against anyone, including
          foreign nationals, in South Africa.


          Hope you find this in order.


          Regards


          [Signed]
          Mr E N Mthethwa
          Minister of Police

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Auditor-General to Parliament on an investigation
        at the  Commission  for  Conciliation,  Mediation  and  Arbitration
        (CCMA) – June 2010 [RP 193-2010].

2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

     a) General Notice No 654 published in Government Gazette No 33333
        dated 29 June 2010: Publication of Implementation Guidelines: For
        general public comments, in terms of the National Environmental
        Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

     b) Government Notice No 579 published in Government Gazette No 33342
        dated 2 July 2010: Model Air Quality Management By-law, in terms of
        the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of
        1998).

     c) General Notice No 677 published in Government Gazette No 33348
        dated 2 July 2010: Bio-prospecting Benefit Sharing Agreement, in
        terms of the National Environmental Management: Biodiversity Act,
        2004 (Act No 10 of 2004).

     d) Government Notice No 596 published in Government Gazette No 33361
        dated 7 July 2010: Bio-prospecting, Access and Benefit Sharing
        Regulations, 2008, in terms of the National Environmental
        Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

    (e)     2009-2010 Yearly Report to Parliament in terms of section 26(1)
        of the National Environmental Management Act (NEMA), 1998 (Act No
        107 of 1998).

3.    The Minister of Economic Development

     a) Strategic Plan of the Competition Commission for the period 1 April
        2010 to 31 March 2013.

     b) Strategic Plan of the Industrial Development Corporation of South
        Africa (Corporate Plan) for the period 1 April 2010 to 31 March
        2013.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 30 July 2010 to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
        informing members of the Assembly of the extension of the
        employment of the South African National Defence Force for a
        service in fulfilment of the international obligations of the
        Republic of South Africa towards the United Nations (UN) and
        African Union (AU) as part of the AU/UN Hybrid Operation in Darfur
        (UNAMID):




        EXTENSION OF THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN  NATIONAL  DEFENCE
        FORCE FOR A SERVICE IN FULFILMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL  OBLIGATIONS
        OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA TOWARDS THE UNITED NATIONS (UN) AND
        AFRICAN UNION (AU) AS PART OF THE AU/UN HYBRID OPERATION IN  DARFUR
        (UNAMID).


        This serves to inform the National Assembly that  I  have  extended
        the employment of eight hundred and  fifty  (850)  members  of  the
        South  African  National  Defence  Force  (SANDF)  for  service  in
        fulfilment of the international  obligations  of  the  Republic  of
        South Africa towards the United Nations (UN) and African Union (AU)
        as part of the AU/UN Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions  of
        section 201(2)(c) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996.


        Members of the SANDF were employed for service in fulfilment of the
        international obligations of the Republic of South  Africa  towards
        the UN and AU as part of UN/AU  Hybrid  Operation  in  Darfur.  The
        employment of these members expired on 31 March 2010.


        The SANDF’s mission  in  the  Darfur  is  not  yet  completed.  The
        employment of 850 SANDF members is now extended from 01 April  2010
        until 31 March 2011.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof
        to the attention of the National Assembly.


        Regards


        signed
        J G ZUMA


    (b)     The President of the Republic submitted the following letter
        dated 30 July 2010 to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
        informing members of the Assembly of the employment of the SA
        National Defence Force for service in co-operation with the South
        African Police Services in the prevention and combating of crime
        and maintenance and preservation of law and order within the
        Republic of South Africa and to render support to government
        departments during the hosting of the 2010 FIFA World Cup:




        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR  SERVICE
        IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE  SOUTH  AFRICAN  POLICE  SERVICES  IN  THE
        PREVENTION AND COMBATING OF CRIME AND MAINTENANCE AND  PRESERVATION
        OF LAW AND ORDER WITHIN THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND TO  RENDER
        SUPPORT TO GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS DURING THE HOSTING  OF  THE  2010
        FIFA WORLD CUP

        This serves to inform the National Assembly that  I  have  employed
        seven thousand one hundred and twenty (7120) members of  the  South
        African National Defence Force (SANDF), to cooperate with the South
        African Police Services in the prevention and  combating  of  crime
        and maintenance and  preservation  of  law  and  order  within  the
        Republic of South  Africa  and  to  render  support  to  government
        departments during the hosting of the 2010 FIFA world cup over  the
        period of 26 May to 18 July 2010.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions  of
        section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South
        Africa, 1996.


        I will communicate this report to members of the  National  Council
        of Provinces and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof
        to the attention of the National Assembly.


        Regards


        signed
        J G ZUMA


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on  Water  and  Environmental  Affairs:
   Overview and Analysis of the Annual Reports  of  Water  Boards,  2008/09,
   dated 20 July 2010

The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Water  and  Environmental  Affairs,  received
briefings from the Department of Water (an  overview  of  the  oversight  of
water boards annual reports), and 13 water  boards,  which  highlighted  the
achievements and challenges  confronted  in  the  previous  financial  year.
Having considered the analysis  of  the  annual  reports  of  water  boards,
2008/09, the committee reports as follows:

1.    Introduction

On the 26 January 2010, the Minister of Water Affairs tabled Umgeni-,  Rand;
Pelladrift -, Namakwa-,  Albany  Coast-  Amatola  -Bloem-,   Bushbuckridge-,
Lepelle Northern-, Magalies-, Overberg-, Sedibeng, Botshelo-  and  Mhlathuze
Water Board. The annual reports were submitted with Financial Statements  to
Parliament in terms of Section 65 (1) (a) of the Public  Finance  Management
Act 1999 (Act No. 1 of 1999).
The Portfolio Committee requested  briefings  and  analysis  of  the  Annual
Reports of respective Water Boards for 2008/09.  The meetings were  held  on
4 and 5 and on 18 May 2010.

2.    An overview of the oversight of water boards by the department

Water  boards  are  established  and  regulated  by  the  Minister  of   the
Department of Water and Environmental Affairs in terms of the Section 28  of
the Water Services Act of 1997, the Public Finance Management Act,  Treasury
Regulations, Municipal Finance Management Act, the Division of Revenue  Act,
the Municipal Structures and Systems Act.

The department’s oversight over the  performance  of  the  water  boards  is
underpinned by the following:

|Policy statements         |Section 39 of the Water Services Act,  |
|                          |1997.                                  |
|Shareholder compacts      |Treasury regulation 29.2.              |
|Corporate plan and        |Section 52 of the Public Finance       |
|projection of revenue,    |Management Act, 1999 and Treasury      |
|expenditure and           |Regulation 29.1.                       |
|borrowings.               |                                       |
|Business plans            |Section 40 of the Water Services Act.  |
|Quarterly reports         |Treasury Regulation 29.3.1.            |
|Annual reports            |Section 44 of the Water Services Act   |
|                          |and Section 55(1) (d) and 65 of the    |
|                          |PFMA, 1999.                            |
|Tariff increases          |Section 42 of MFMA, 2003.              |
|Financial misconduct      |Treasury Regulation 33.3.1.            |
|procedures report         |                                       |
|Materiality and           |Treasury Regulation 28.3.1.            |
|significant framework     |                                       |

1. Overview of the water boards

In providing an overview of the water  boards,  the  department  highlighted
the following:

   • Water boards are separate legal institutions that have their own  board
     of governance, own assets and are required to be self funding.
   • They are  key  strategic  organisations  that  primarily  provide  bulk
     potable water services to water service  authorities  (municipalities),
     other  water  service  institutions  and  major  customers   within   a
     designated service area.
   • There are currently 12 water boards in  South  Africa  namely  Amotola,
     Bloem, Bushbuckridge, Lepelle Northern, Magalies,  Mhlathuze,  Namakwa,
     Overberg, Pelladrift, Rand, Sedibeng and Umgeni. There  are  two  water
     boards that have been disestablished, namely Albany Coast and Ikangala.
   • The water boards vary in size, activities, customer mix,  revenue  base
     and capacity.  Some have been around for more than  100  years;  whilst
     others are still considered to be new or emerging.
   • Most of the older and more established  water  boards  are  centred  on
     areas where there are significant urban development nodes (for example,
     Rand water, Umgeni Water, Bloem Water, etc.).
   • Some water boards operate in  more  demographically  diversified  areas
     where there is considerable urban or rural mix in the customer base.
   • Water boards  service  areas  typically  transcend  the  boundaries  of
     individual water services authorities and in a number  of  cases,  even
     provincial boundaries  (for  example,  Rand  Water  supplies  water  to
     Gauteng, parts of Mpumalanga, the Free State and North West Province).
2.3.  Relationship with the Minister

In terms of the legal framework governing the role of the Minister over  the
water boards, the following input was provided:

   • The Minister appoints  board  members  and  Chairpersons  in  terms  of
     section 35(1) of the Water Services Act.
   • The board is accountable to the Minister.
   • The Minister signs a shareholders compact with water boards and  raises
     issues of concern.
   • The Minister meets with new boards, when appointed and  meets  annually
     with the Chairpersons of water boards to discuss strategic issues.
   • The board members  performance  is  assessed  bi-annually  via  reports
     submitted to the Minister.
   • When the Minister  took  office  in  2009,  a  task  team  to  look  at
     governance problems at the water boards and this process is expected to
     be complete by end of May 2010.

2.4.    Responsibility   for   water   supply:    water   boards   vis-à-vis
municipalities

   • The responsibility for water and sanitation provision  rests  with  the
     municipalities as the water services authority.
   • Water boards provide bulk treated water to municipalities (WSAs).
   • Water service authorities have a prerogative to either use the services
     of the water boards as water services providers or not.  In some areas,
     there is no alternative, for example, in Gauteng. In other  areas  such
     as Gauteng, there is no alternative.
   • WSA’s determine their capacity to do this by  following  a  process  in
     terms of section 78 of the Municipal Systems Act.  If a WSA decides  to
     use a water board, then a contract must be signed (section  19  of  the
     Water Services Act), with regard to quantity, quality and the  delivery
     point of water.
   • A model bulk water service provider contract (fair  and  balanced)  was
     developed between the South African Association of Water Utilities  and
     the South African Local Government Association for this purpose.
   • In some instances, water boards act  as  retail  water  and  sanitation
     water services providers.
   • The financial performance of water boards are appraised through,  inter
     alia, the annual reports.
   • The officials at the department provide the Minister with  comments  on
     the annual reports.
   • The Minister notes the content  of  annual  reports  and  approves  the
     tabling of annual reports in Parliament.
   •  The  department  provides  water  boards  with  written  comments  and
     questions, with regard to their annual reports.
   • Individual meetings are held with  those  water  boards  where  serious
     matters require attention or intervention.

2.5.  Qualified/Clean Audits in 2008/9 financial year

The following boards received qualified audits:

   • Amatola.
   • Bushbuckridge Water (with emphasis of matter).
   • Namakwa (with emphasis of matter).

The following received unqualified audits with emphasis of matter:

     • Botshelo Water received a disclaimer of  opinion  from  the  Auditor
       General as it was unable to obtain sufficient evidence to provide  a
       basis for an audit opinion.
The following boards received unqualified audits:

   • Albany Coast
   • Bloem
   • Lepelle Northern
   • Magalies
   • Mhlathuze
   • Overberg
   • Pelladrift
   • Rand
   • Sedibeng
   • Umgeni

2.5.1.      Summation of Financial Performance for 2008/9
|               |Total ’09     |Total ‘08  |%       |
|               |              |           |differen|
|               |              |           |ce      |
|Volumes (kl)   |2 397 825 443 |2 311 264  |3,7%    |
|               |              |464        |        |
|Sales          |R7,7 billion  |R6,8       |12.5%   |
|               |              |billion    |        |
|Net income     |R1,3 billion  |R1,4       |-5.1%   |
|               |              |billion    |        |
|Fixed Assets   |R11 billion   |R10,1      |9.5%    |
|               |              |billion    |        |
|Investment     |R607 million  |R1,1       |-47.2%  |
|               |              |billion    |        |
|Current Assets |R5,3 billion  |R4 billion |31.5%   |
|Current        |R3,3 billion  |R1,9       |74.5%   |
|Liabilities    |              |billion    |        |
|Long term debt |R2,7 billion  |R3,9       |-30.7%  |
|               |              |billion    |        |
|Cash on Hand   |R1,9 billion  |R1,9       |0.4%    |
|               |              |billion    |        |

2.6.  Oversight of Water Boards Performance –  Financial  and  Non-Financial
Components

2.6.1.      Financial Components

    • The financial performance of water boards is appraised through  annual
      reports.
    • The Minister has noted the contents  contained  in  the  water  boards
      annual reports and approved their tabling in Parliament.
    • The department has held individual meetings with  those  water  boards
      where  there  were  serious   matters   that   needed   attention   or
      intervention.

2.6.2.      Non Financial Components

    • The total bulk potable water supplied by water boards amounted to 2.39
      billion kilolitres per annum.
    • The total authorised abstraction is 2.36 billion cubic metres.
    • There was under spending on CAPEX by an  average  of  14.5%  by  water
      boards, except for Rand, Sedibeng and Amatola.
    • Rand contributed 60% to the consolidated turn over, followed by Umgeni
      with 20% and 20% by the other 11 water boards.

2.7.  Achievements and challenges
The department noted the following achievements:
   • Most water boards are financially  sound  to  realise  their  short  to
     medium term obligations.
   •  No  state  guarantees  issued  to  support  their  expansion  of  bulk
     infrastructure.
   • Several water boards obtained Blue drop certification on drinking water
     quality.
   • An excess of 5.4% profit was achieved for the year ended in June 2009.

The following challenges were highlighted:

   • The refurbishment and extension of infrastructure loan was required.
   • A number of water boards experience water quality problems.
   •  Seven  (7)  Water  Boards  require   additional   authorizations   for
     abstraction.
   • Two (2) Water Boards have debt/equity ratios exceeding 100%.
   • Five (5) Water Boards have surplus/revenue ratio of under 10%.
   • Namakwa  and  Pelladrift  have  net  losses  and  are  not  financially
     sustainable - require solutions.
   • Staff retention and skills shortages are a problem at remotely  located
     water boards.
   • Not all Water Services Authorities have  Bulk  Water  Service  Provider
     Contracts.
   • Trade receivables are generally high due to debt owed to  water  boards
     by some municipalities.
   •  Failure  of  debtor’s  collection  in  weaker  water  boards   affects
     viability.
   • Poor municipalities use equitable share for other purposes, even  after
     water services are provided.

2.8.   Solutions

    • Audit the CAPEX plan to ensure that service delivery is  secured  over
      the medium to long term.
    • Water quality problems will have to be resolved with firm  application
      of  legislation  and  support  from  the  Department  of   Cooperative
      Governance and Traditional Leaders  (CoGTA),  as  most  of  the  water
      quality problems are, as a result of, municipal discharge
    • Namakwa will be provided with grant funding of R40 million (over three
      years from the current financial year)  to  refurbish  infrastructure.
      Once this is done, consideration will be given to merge  Namakwa  with
      another water board to benefit from economies of scale.
    • Outstanding water service agreement will have to be resolved with  the
      support  of  Department  of  Cooperative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs (CoGTA)
    • With regards to skills shortages at remotely located water boards, the
      water boards could consider pooling skills and deploying them to where
      needed
    • As a short term measure, get support of National Treasury and CoGTA to
      mediate with municipalities for debt payment.
    • In the long term, an amendment to DORA should allow for Department  of
      Water Affairs to  withhold  equitable  share  from  municipalities  in
      arrears


3.    Summary of submissions received from the water boards

3.1   Botshelo Water

Botshelo operates and maintains water treatments in Ngaka Modiri Molema  and
Dr Ruth Segomotsi Mmpati and Ngaka Modiri Molema District Municipalities  in
the North West province in terms of a  water  services  provider  agreement.
The board received a disclaimer with matters of  emphasis,  but  information
on the current interventions to turnaround the  situation  at  Botshelo  was
presented.  There had been 10 years of mismanagement in the  area,  but  the
continued support and oversight  offered  by  the  department  would  assist
Botshelo to return to financial viability.
Achievements

     •  Completed  water  services  provider   agreements   with   district
       municipalities and serves as a Water Service Authorities  (WSAs)  to
       seven local municipalities. Their turnaround strategy  was  accepted
       by the WSAs and provincial government  and  the  municipalities  had
       accepted the proposed new tariffs.
     • The board  successfully  recruited  qualified  technical  staff  and
       successfully implemented  its  Turnaround  Strategy  and  Plan,  and
       Employee Wellness Programme.
     •  Despite some challenges, water services were provided. Water supply
       to rural areas was  achieved  during  the  year  under  review  with
       minimal outages and accurate and  timely  meter  readings,  together
       with municipalities’ acceptance of billing procedures.

Challenges

     •  Delayed  payments  by  Water   Services   Authorities   and   local
       municipalities, non-payment of debts and a failure by municipalities
       to circulate by-laws regarding unauthorized connections.
     • The non-ownership of water infrastructure by the board, insufficient
       funding to properly maintain infrastructure, as well as  a  lack  of
       infrastructure to accommodate population growth.
     • Increase in Eskom tariffs.
     • An appraisal of facilities showed that  security  at  most  Botshelo
       facilities was lacking.

Financial performance

Owing to insufficient information on a number of audit items  and  balances,
including insufficient  audit   confirmation   by  the  Auditor  General  to
comply with IFRS, GAAP and Auditing Standards, rights  and  obligations  for
property plant and equipment, ineffective systems for  processing  of  leave
pay, Botshelo had to address these issues. This was currently in process.

The income statement showed that turnover and gross  profit  both  increased
by 17%, (R75.4 Million to R88.4 Million) and that employee  costs  decreased
by R2 million (5%) while other expenses decreased by R 7 million (38%).  BWB
was solvent and had a cash balance of  R26  million  and  its  debt  to  the
Department of Water Affairs was  reduced  by  R16  million.  Its  creditor’s
payment was 255 days.

 2. Amatola Water

Amatola is a state owned water utility established in November 1997  and  in
operation since 1998. Its  area  of  operation  is  45  794  sq.km.  It  has
experienced  growing  regional  presence  with  offices  in   East   London,
Queenstown, Port Elizabeth, Butterworth, Fort Beaufort and Sterkspruit.  Its
water production capacity was 102.74 megalitress of potable water  per  day.
It was awarded Blue Drop certification at Peddie and Sandile  Municipalities
and it operates 32 works for Water Services Authorities in the Eastern  Cape
Province (including Amathole DM, Chris Hani DM). Following  a  directive  by
the Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs, the board has  merged  with
Albany Coast. Amatola Water still operates schemes under the  Department  of
Public Works that still need to be transferred to it.

Achievements

     • A production capacity of 102.74 mega-litres  of  potable  water  per
       day.
     • Training of 90 female operators.
     • The establishment of a SANS ISO accredited laboratory in 2009.
     • The reduction of production and network losses from 5.15% to 3.76%.
     • A memorandum of understanding was concluded  with  both  Rhodes  and
       Fort Hare Universities.
     • It was a co-sponsor of the Drinking Water Quality Conference in Port
       Elizabeth in May 2009.
     • Ninety-nine percent (99%) of procurement was spent  on  Broad  Based
       Black Economic Empowerment.
     • It recorded a total growth in revenue of 28%, with a net surplus  of
       R9.72 million.  Capital expenditure amounted to R21 million.

Challenges

     • The board received a qualified audit due to non payment of  debt  by
       Chris Hani District Municipality.
     • A dramatic increase in business  growth,  a  shortage  of  technical
       skills, capital funding shortfall, high input costs (e.g. raw  water
       and electricity), grant dependent municipalities, low  volume  water
       supply schemes and short term support contracts with municipalities.


     • There had  been  a  contract  payment  dispute,  so  a  key  account
       management   approach   was   being   implemented   to    strengthen
       relationships   with   municipalities.   Ongoing    marketing    and
       relationship building with all district municipalities and key local
       municipalities were under way.

 3. Sedibeng
Sedibeng Water Board was established on 1 June 1979,  mainly  to  serve  the
Free State Goldfields and parts of the former Western  Transvaal.  In  1996,
its operational area was extended to include various other districts in  the
North West Province, as well as Central Free State and Eastern  Free  State.
Under Proclamation 612 of 1996,  Sedibeng  Water  also  obtained  managerial
responsibility regarding the provision of  essential  services  for  certain
districts in the  North  West  Province.  Since  then,  Sedibeng’s  area  of
responsibility increased from a mere 8,000 square km in  the  initial  years
to 86,000 square km, making Sedibeng  one  of  the  largest  water  services
provider operating across 3 provinces (Free State, North West  and  Northern
Cape).

Achievements

    •  Concluding   numerous   Service   Level   Agreements   with   various
      municipalities, while others were still under negotiation.
    •  Major  strategic  achievements  included  financial   viability   and
      sustainability. The organization was financially sound and viable.
    • In some regions, revenue and surplus targets were exceeded.
    • Water loss was kept to a minimum and the water quality met Class 1 and
      2 requirements.
    •  R24  million  was  spent  on   refurbishment   and   maintenance   of
      infrastructure.
    • BEEE expenditure was 81%.
    • There was scientific  support  to  water  and  waste  water  treatment
      plants.
    • Sedibeng co-coordinated and managed  the  Free  State  Drought  Relief
      Project.
    • Financial assistance was given to employees and there were 14  bursary
      holders.
    • Adult Basic Education and Training (ABET) was given to 77 employees.
    • There were 25 enrolments in  learnership  in  water  purification  and
      process operation.
    • About 80% of the unemployed learners who  participated  in  the  above
      programme were absorbed within the organisation.
    • Experiential training was done with 9 students. Training was conducted
      according to the works skills development plan.
    • Staff turnover was kept at 7.35%.
    • The Free State region achieved a zero disabling injury rate for  three
      consecutive years.
    •  HIV/AIDS  awareness  campaigns   were   undertaken   throughout   the
      organisation. Voluntary counseling and testing was made available  for
      employees.
    • The quality control laboratory maintained its accredited status  after
      being audited by the South African  National  Accreditation  Standards
      (SANAS) and an international auditor from the International Laboratory
      Accreditation Co-operation (ILAC).

Challenges

     • Cost recovery from municipalities, a lack of willingness from  Water
       Service Agreements to enter into a long term contract,  insufficient
       funding hampering service delivery, high  electricity  tariffs,  and
       poor raw water quality from the Vaal River, high  purification  cost
       and inadequate network capacity to some municipalities.

Financial performance

Sedibeng Water had another unqualified financial  report  for  2008/09.  The
board was solvent with R 374 194 million total revenue.

3.4   Rand Water
Rand Water is an organ of state reporting  directly  to  the  Department  of
Water Affairs. It is the largest water utility in Africa and is one  of  the
largest in the world, providing bulk potable water to more than  11  million
people in Gauteng, parts of Mpumalanga, the Free State and North  West.  The
areas of service provision  cover  18  000  km.  Rand  Water’s  distribution
network includes over 3 056  km  of  large  diameter  pipeline,  feeding  58
strategically located service reservoirs. The clients of Rand Water  include
metropolitan municipalities, local municipalities, mines and industries  and
it supplies, on average, 3 653 million litres of water daily.

Achievements

    • Rand Water ploughed back a considerable amount into communities within
      its  service  area  through  its  Corporate  Social  Investment  (CSI)
      programme, which is managed through the Rand Water Foundation and  its
      Corporate Social Responsibility Division.
    • Rand Water has invested in the following flagship projects:
         • The Race for Victory, an initiative of the Frances Volweg School
           in  Johannesburg  for  learners  with  physical   and   learning
           disabilities.
         • The Vaal Echoes of Love Care Centre in Sharpeville, Vereeniging.
         • The Thembisile Hani Local Municipality’s Siyathejana Project.
    • Rand Water has spent R2.6 million on donations to  various  non-profit
      organizations as part of its social  responsibility  initiatives  this
      financial year.
    • Rand Water Foundation has supported nineteen Small, Medium  and  Micro
      Enterprises (SMMEs) to a combined value of R2, 9 million.

Challenges

     • Sustainable tariff structure as the new tariff structure/methodology
       needed review.
     • Ageing  infrastructure  and  rolling  out  CAPEX  programmes  within
       resource constraints.
     • Experiencing steep increases in input costs  specifically  in  steel
       and energy.
     • Raising funds effectively in financial markets that are in turmoil.
     • Maintaining and improving Rand Water’s credit profile.
     • Default risk by major municipalities.
     • Deteriorating raw water  quality  as  a  result  of  poor  catchment
       management.

Financial performance

The board recorded revenue of R4 667 billion for 2009 and  total  assets  of
R7.9 billion. The gross  margin  decreased  from  54%  to  51%.  Rand  Water
received an unqualified audit report. The board had a five-year  CAPEX  plan
amounting to  R8.6  billion  that  would  focus  on  capacity  creation  and
projects already in creation.

3.5   Umgeni Water

Umgeni Water was established in  1974  as  a  bulk  water  supplier  in  the
province of KwaZulu-Natal. Umgeni Water is one of  the  largest  catchments-
based water utility in Southern Africa, with an  operational  gazetted  area
of 21 555 km² and infrastructure comprising of five dams, ten  water  works,
four waste water works and about 514 km of pipelines.

Umgeni Water supplied 403 921 22 during the  year  under  review.  Its  main
customers included eThekwini Metropolitan  Municipality,  Illembe,  Sisonke,
Umgungundlovu and Ugu District Municipalities, and the Msunduzi  and  Mngeni
Local Municipalities, amongst  others.  In  addition  Umgeni  Water  manages
seven dams, of which five are on behalf of the Department of  Water  Affairs
and two on behalf of Ugu District Municipality.

Achievements


    • There were five projects under construction, including  pump  stations
      and pipelines.
    • Umgeni provided 47 schools with sanitation structures  and  7  schools
      with running water.
    • Six thousand  three  hundred  (6300)  households  were  provided  with
      sanitation and 50 people were trained in community health.
    • There were also projects in rural areas.
    • The board also provided strategic  support  to  local  government  and
      worked with OR Tambo District Municipality to  develop  infrastructure
      plans for local municipalities.
    • Umgeni increased its profit by 34%, from R393 million in 2008 to  R527
      million in 2009.
    • There was a 6% increase in bulk water revenue owing to a 3% growth  in
      volume. Umgeni also implemented a 3% tariff increase on bulk water.
    • Umgeni Water achieved a positive operating  performance  and  improved
      its financial position, which resulted in an efficient  water  service
      delivery at affordable prices. Overall, average  waste  water  quality
      compliance from four treatment works was  more  than  80%.  The  water
      produced from water works and sold to municipalities complied with all
      the regulated standards for drinking water (SANS 241).

Challenges

     • The board experienced a number of problems associated  with  raising
       of cash or loans  under  tight  market  conditions,  water  resource
       inadequacy, climate change, raw water quality  and  the  sustainable
       funding of rural development.

Financial performance

The water board received an unqualified audit report and all  its  statutory
requirements had been met. The total Capital  Expenditure  (CAPEX)  for  the
year was R237 million. R219 million of this was spent on projects under  the
construction phase and R101 million was  spent  on  planned  maintenance  of
infrastructure. Umgeni Water’s total debt consisted  of  the  bond  of  R974
million and Development Bank of South Africa (DBSA) loans of R 964  million.


3.6   Namakwa Water

The Namakwa Water Board provides potable water for domestic  consumption  to
the towns of Steinkopf, Bulletrap, Nababeep, Okiep, Carolusberg,  Concordia,
Springbok, Kleinzee, as well as to the De  Beers  mining  operation  in  the
Namaqualand region. The Water Service Authority (WSA) in  the  area  is  the
Nama Khoi Municipality.

The Namakwa Water Board provides potable  water  of  more  than  3  000  000
kilolitres (kl) yearly, distributed  by  pipelines  in  excess  of  200  km.
However, the 200 km distribution pipes are very old  –  most  have  been  in
place for 32 years. So far only 20 km of the  200  km  long  pipelines  have
been replaced.

Achievements
    • Delivering water to communities, despite all the challenges facing the
      Board.
    • Contained costs notwithstanding Eskom tariff hikes.

Challenges

Short term financial assistance would help pay Eskom  and  other  suppliers.
Pumping  water  from  the  Orange  River  was  expensive.  The  board   also
experienced challenges with high Eskom tariffs, a  declining  consumer  base
and aged and  labour-intensive  infrastructure.  The  board  was  unable  to
secure short term financial assistance to pay suppliers such as  (Eskom  and
others) and its employees salaries. In addition, other challenges were

     • The metering equipment needs to be replaced.
     • The communication and telemetric control between reservoirs and pump
       stations needed to be replaced.
     • The housing for operators needed upgrading.
     • Vehicles for technical and repair personnel needed to be replaced.
     • The lifting equipment on the trucks needs to be repaired.
     • Access roads need to be upgraded as the pipeline was not  accessible
       for repairs.

Financial performance

Owing to a loss of R1 506 461 incurred  in  June  2009,  the  boards  annual
report recorded a qualification  from  independent  auditors.  Although  the
board was still solvent, there is  doubt  as  to  the  entity’s  capability,
while debts had increased and profitability and liquidity  remained  issues.
Owing to a number of factors, including  the  cessation  of  mining  in  the
area, an increase in overheads and a decrease in amounts of water sold,  the
board was no longer financially  viable.  The  urgent  replacement  of  some
infrastructure was needed to continue with  service  delivery.  The  Namakwa
Water Board incurred a net loss for the year ended 30 June 2009 of  R15  064
61.  The Board’s accumulated loss as at that date was R13  835  189.   There
exists significant doubt on the entity’s ability  to  continue  as  a  going
concern. The debtor’s days were sitting at 59 days in 2009.

3.7   Bushbuckridge Water

Bushbuckridge water  was  established  in  1997  in  accordance  with  Water
Services Act to provide water services to other water service  institutions.
The  supply  area  of  Bushbuckridge  Water  includes  Bushbuckridge   Local
Municipality and the  Nsikazi  area  in  the  Mbombela  Local  Municipality.
These areas are characterised as mainly rural  comprising  small  and  dense
villages. The area has a high population growth, low economic  growth,  high
unemployment rate, remote and scattered villages, and high  poverty  levels.
The board supplied 60.6 l/ca to Bushbuckridge Municipality  and  114.3  l/ca
to Mbombela local municipality.

Achievements

     • The board provided an 85% drinking water quality and  there  was  an
       improvement in organizational development, as well as 7% increase in
       potable water supply.
     • The board  worked  to  strengthen  the  organisational  capacity  by
       filling critical  vacancies,  increasing  efforts  in  training  and
       educating staff.
     • There were also improvements on  good  governance  through  improved
       legislation compliance, and improvements  in  stakeholder  relations
       and organized labour movements. Bushbuckridge Water aimed to provide
       sustainable water and sanitation services.
Challenges

     • There were issues of debt recovery owing to  a  lack  of  long  term
       Service Level Agreements (SLAs) with municipalities.
     • A lack  of  integrated  planning  between  stakeholders  within  the
       sector.
     • There was also a problem created by the transfer  of  infrastructure
       not being finalised by the Department of Water Affairs.
     • There was a chance of the board becoming insolvent hence Rand  Water
       has been requested  by  the  Minister  of  Water  and  Environmental
       Affairs to assist the board for a period of six months.

Financial performance

The external audit noted a lack of  recovery  of  invoiced  amounts.  Assets
were transferred to Bushbuckridge Water without the transfer  of  ownership.
R 644 654 was outstanding,  while  the  board  had  exceeded  its  borrowing
limits by R196 000. Furthermore, the board lacked a performance framework.

3.8   Bloem Water

Bloem was established as a water board in 1991, with the mandate to  provide
water services to the southern and central areas of  the  Free  State.   The
district  municipalities  serviced  are  Motheo  and  Xhariep.   The   local
municipalities of Mangaung, Kopanong, Mantsopa and Naledi  also  fall  under
their service area.  The strategic priorities and objectives included:

    • Ensuring universal access to safe and affordable basic water.
    • Managing financial affairs to meet current and future obligations.
    • Building, operating and maintaining infrastructure.
    • Ensuring sustainable and equitable water resources management.
    • Transformation and alignment towards an effective institution.
    • Pursuing African advancement and  enhanced  international  cooperation
      and redevelopment

Achievements

    • Providing potable water on a continuous basis.
    • Proper implementation of preventative maintenance programs.
    • Proper and timely implementation of demand and CAPEX plans.
    • Improving the ratio of assets to water provision.
    • Render support services to stakeholders, including community projects.
    • Rendering  water  supply  chain  services  with  stakeholders  through
      partnerships.
    • Skills development initiatives – internally and externally.

Challenges

     • An outstanding municipal debt of R30 and 12 million by Mangaung  and
       Naledi Municipalities respectively.
     • CAPEX and operational demands due to a directive  to  reduce  tariff
       increase by 5% by the then Minister of Water Affairs,  Ms  Hendricks
       in 2009 would impact on  future  requirements  and  decrease  future
       volume demands.
     • Lack of funding to local municipalities.
     • Operation and maintenance posed problems.

Financial performance

There was no qualification on Bloem Water's external audit  report.  Current
assets were marginally higher than the budget. There was continued  solvency
and ongoing liquidity. Cash positions remained stable. Debt ratios  remained
high due to CAPEX requirements. Water sales were lower  than  budgeted  for.
Bloem Water streamlined the pension fund in terms of  funding  the  deficit.
There was a net  profit  of  R44.2  million,  of  which  R42.8  million  was
transferred to capital replacement and  development  fund  as  well  as  the
insurance fund.

3.9.  Overberg Water

The board currently operates three  water  service  treatments  works.   The
area serviced by the Overberg Water Board is predominantly  agricultural  in
nature. There are a few minor industries and  mining  industries  among  the
other economic sectors serviced by the board.

Achievements

    • The board was able to conduct its business  on  a  fairly  sustainable
      basis.
    • It has commenced a much needed refurbishment  programme  to  modernise
      its infrastructure and to minimise risks. The main  pump  stations  at
      two of its schemes have been  completed.  Currently,  a  third  scheme
      makes it in a position to achieve substantial energy savings  as  high
      as 16%.
    • The board has also commenced with a modernising/expansion programme by
      making use of ’green’ technology. One of  first,  if  not  the  first,
      ultra filtration plant in the country is currently being installed  at
      the Rûensveld East plant.

Challenges

    • Maintaining the current level of service delivery  become  problematic
      due to the present economic state in the country.
    • Rapidly rising input costs, that is, the cost  of  energy,  chemicals,
      transport and human resources as well  as  the  declining  ability  of
      users to pay for services.
    • Agreements with municipalities limit the boards plan for the future as
      they do not know how costs would be recovered.
    • Some users apply for water allocations, and once it is done,  they  do
      not use the water, causing a loss of income for the board.
    • There is a need to increase the network.
    • Irrigation canals are in a bad state of repair.
    • Asbestos pipes are  causing  a  major  health  risk  and  have  to  be
      replaced.
    • Racial and gender issues are problematic but are addressed.
    • Cross subsidisation is being phased out and this may lead to the water
      boards requesting the department to reintroduce it, if it is advisable

Financial performance

The board is financially sound.  It achieved a  total  net  income  of  R2.4
million for the 2008/09 financial year.  From this income, however, it  paid
its loan of R1.2 million to the Department of  Water  Affairs.   Changes  in
working capital of R1 million had to be financed and this left  very  little
money to add to the reserve.

Its debtor’s day is at 73 days. The major portion of capital  employed  came
from equity – 59%. The other big contributor was an interest free loan  from
the Department of Water Affairs. This loan was made with the  initial  take-
over of the plants  from  government.  The  major  portion  of  its  capital
employed in PPE (property, plant and equipment) amounted to  59%.  The  next
big portion of 33% was in cash and investment.

3.10  Magalies Water

The Magalies Water Board operates in the provincial  areas  of  North  West,
Limpopo and Gauteng, and its head office  is  based  in  Rustenburg  in  the
North West Province. Its operational area covers  42  000  km2  through  the
Crocodile and Olifants major catchments.  The  Magalies  Water  serves  more
than 10 local and  district  municipalities,  which  include  Moses  Kotane,
Kgetlengrivier, Madibeng, Moretele and Rustenburg in the  Bojanala  Platinum
District Municipality in North West;  Thabazimbi,  Modimolle  and  Bela-bela
Municipalities in the Waterberg District  Municipal  area  in  Limpopo;  the
City of Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality  (CoT),  as  well  as  Nokeng  Tsa
Taemane Local Municipality in  Gauteng.  Magalies  Water  operates  7  Water
Treatment Works (WTW) and 4  Sewage  Treatment  Works  (STW).  Some  of  the
treatment works are owned by Magalies Water while other works  are  operated
by Magalies Water on behalf of the Rustenburg Water  Services  Trust  (RWST)
or the Roodeplaat Temba Water Services Trust (RTWST).

Achievements

    • The board obtained water quality compliance of SANS 241 Class 1 =  99,
      3% and SANS 241 Class 2 = 100% despite deteriorating raw water quality
      in our catchments.
    • Appointment of engineers for operations and maintenance of  water  and
      waste water purification plant on behalf of municipalities.
    • Appointment of a board to provide strategic support.
    • Completion of Drought Relief Programmes on  behalf  of  Department  of
      Water Affairs in the Municipalities.
    • Reduction of plant losses to below 5%.
    • Retaining ISO 14001 certification.
    • Participated in 2010 water security plan for host city in Rustenburg.
    • Conducting first customer service study  to  advance  customer-centric
      approach and Batho Pele principles.

Challenges

      • Effecting administered prices on long term  sustainability  of  the
        board.
    • Promoting affordability to end consumers. However, municipalities were
      not passing the benefits to end consumers.
    • Cost drivers increased by more than the government Inflation target of
      3%-6%, for example, electricity, chemicals, and raw water costs.
    • Meeting an increased  regional  domestic  and  industrial  bulk  water
      demand posed a challenge.
    • Refurbishment of Pilanesberg Water supply scheme (additional  70ML/day
      to total value of R1.2b).
    • Marikana-Mooinooi water supply scheme also needed upgrade  (additional
      estimated 90-120ML/day).
Financial performance

The board achieved an unqualified audit report and has no current long  term
borrowings. Borrowings would be considered if  there  was  a  cost  recovery
mechanism  in  place.    However,  Magalies  Water  has  committed  to   the
Pilanesberg Scheme that would require additional funding  requirements,  for
example the scheme exceeds current borrowing limits of R161m).  However,  an
application has been  made  through  the  Department  of  Water  Affairs  to
recommend increased limits from National Treasury at an additional of
R400 million.The board sold 74 983 428kl volumes of water in 2009 and  their
debt collection days were sitting at 117 compared to 88 days in 2008.

3.11  Lepelle Northern

Lepelle Northern Water (LNW) Board was established in 1997  consistent  with
the provisions of the Water Service Act, 1997.  The  scope  of  the  Lepelle
Northern Water covers Hoedspruit and Sekhukhune  in  the  South  Mogalakwena
municipal area in the west and  extends  to  Capricorn,  Vhembe  and  Mopani
district municipal areas.

Achievements

    • Provision of free basic water service to 11 949 households.
    • Water demand management, continued upgrade of  telemetry  systems  and
      water losses averaging only 3.5% on bulk.
    • Turnaround strategy implementation was successful on cost recovery.
    • Billing and meter reading support.
    • Successful re-commissioning of underground water supply.
    • Water Quality compliance with SANS241:2006 (95% Class 1 and 100% Class
      2)
    • Yard Connections installations in rural  Greater  Sekhukhune  District
      Municipality


Challenges

     •  Service  delivery  challenges  included   ageing   infrastructures,
       exceeding  abstraction  permits,   over   laden   treatment   plant,
       deteriorating raw water quality, outstanding bulk  service  contract
       in Mopani, and outstanding debtors by municipalities.
     • In terms of  reticulation,  there  was  a  lack  of  effective  cost
       recovery, water conservation and demand management, ageing  internal
       reticulation infrastructure, default on payment by  consumers,  lack
       of maintenance, and unauthorised or illegal connections.

Financial performance

Lepelle's  external  audit  report  for  the  financial  year  2008/09   was
unqualified. Its total revenue amounted  to  R226  900  million  and  a  net
surplus of R40, 823  million.  A  way  forward  encompassed  the  following:
concluding outstanding bulk water services contracts, resolving  outstanding
debt  and  late  payment,  rehabilitating  and  maintaining  infrastructure,
supporting municipalities  (with  cost  recovery,  water  conservation,  and
demand management strategies), building  capacity,  planning  retention  and
succession and intensifying technical support to municipalities.

12. Mhlathuze Water

Mhlathuze Water Board is  one  of  the  leading  water  utilities  in  South
Africa,  providing   a   world-class   service   to   its   customers.   The
organisation's commitment  and  focused  direction  in  providing  safe  and
dependable water services are indicative of  its  consistent  success.  This
organisation is based in the KwaZulu-Natal Province.   Its  area  of  supply
covers about 37,000km² stretching from the Thukela River in the South  Coast
and up the East Coast  to  the  Mozambique  and  Swaziland  borders,  around
Vryheid and back to the Thukela River. Within this region,  Mhlathuze  Water
has built and  operates  an  inter-basin  transfer,  major  water  treatment
plants, an offshore waste water disposal pipeline and it operates  treatment
and sewerage plants on an agency basis for local municipalities.

While Mhlathuze Water Board’s operational area and status have changed  over
the years, it largely continues to perform its activities  of  operating  an
inter-basin transfer scheme, treatment  plants,  an  off-shore  waste  water
disposal system and bulk water supply systems focusing on the  Richards  Bay
area.

Achievements

    • Successful partnership  with  the  Department  of  Education  and  the
      Department of Water Affairs on the School Water Services Programme.
    • Completion of the draft Water Regional Master  Plan  covering numerous
      municipalities.
    • A partnership with uThungulu for the Middledrift  Scheme  project  had
      been established.
    • There were negotiations  with  municipalities  to  expand  Mhlathuze's
      water services.
    • Tenders were submitted for the upgrade and  maintenance  of  KwaDukuza
      Wastewater Treatment Plant.

Challenges
Mhlathuze’s area of operation is largely rural and  poverty  stricken,  with
unemployed people who are unable to pay for  services.  There  are  few  big
businesses operating in the area with fewer prospects in attracting  skills.
Challenges included debt recovery  issues,  and  contract  expiry,  lack  of
development and ageing infrastructure, poor  access  to  water  due  to  low
rainfall and the global recession, while poorer municipalities  impacted  on
tariff negotiations.

Financial performance

    • The audit report was unqualified with no matters of emphasis.
    • In terms of revenue, there was an R34, 357(25%) increase  attributable
      to 3.6% (32%) mega-litres increase in raw water volumes and  increased
      off-take by Richards Bay Minerals.
    • Debtor collection days remained at 56.7.
    • Expenditure saw a 27% increase  attributable  to  increases  in  staff
      costs, energy and maintenance.
    •  Depreciation  also  contributed  by  way  of  the   B-Line   Diffuser
      replacement project.
    • Extraordinary expenditure was due to the Corporate  Social  Investment
      (CSI) project.
    • R12 million was used to assist uMgungundlovu District Municipality.
    •  An  investigation  by  the  Special  Investigating  Unit  (SIU)   was
      instituted on the affairs of Mhlathuze Water as  per  the  President’s
      proclamation: (Proclamation No. R.35, 2008)  A  report  had  not  been
      released yet.

13. Albany Coast Water

Owing to numerous challenges facing Albany Coast,  a  Ministerial  directive
was issued for Amatola Water to take over the  operations,  leading  to  its
disestablishment.
Challenges

     • Expenditure had exceeded the income.
     • There was a lack of maintenance and planning.
     • Tariffs did not provide for capital needs and  seasonal  demand  was
       not met.
     • Limited cash reserves impacted on operational costs.

Financial performance

    • Although Albany Coast recieved an unqualified audit from the  Auditor
      General for 2008/9 financial period, it was insolvent.  In  2008,  it
      had deficit of R184 125 and in 2009, this was at R1 059 050.
    • Total equity and liabilities 2008- R9 847 301.
    • Total equity and liabilities 2009- R10 245 435.
    • Long terms debts- R 124 785.
    • Short term debts- R 420 000.

3.14. Pelladrift Water

Pelladrift Water Board has been in existence since 1980.  It  provides  bulk
water to BMM and Khai-Ma:  Aggeneys,  Pella,  Pofadder,  Onseepkans  and  to
several neighbouring farmers, such as ‘Oasis in the  Wilderness’  Guesthouse
and game farm.

The board was  established  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Water
Services Act. Its main purpose was the establishment  of  sustainable  water
supply to the Black  Mountain  Mine  and  surrounding  areas.  In  2007,  it
concluded a Service Level Agreement  with  Khai-Ma  Local  Municipality.  To
date, supply interruptions guaranteed to be less than 36  hours  and  notice
to interruptions are provided at least 1-2 weeks prior,  else  preferably  1
month in advance.

Achievements

The  board  had  good  relations  with  the  newly  elected  Khai-Ma   Local
Municipality Council

Financial performance

For the 2008/9 financial year, Pelladrift received  an  unqualified  opinion
from the Auditor General, and noted the following:

      • The board did not plan to borrow any money in the near future.
      • Revenue will increase with new tariffs.
      • Black Mountain Mine accepted an 8% tariff increase in 2009.
      • Khai-Ma accepted a 7% tariff increase whilst 18% was requested, due
        to its indigent status.
      • Municipal rates will need to be increased over the  next  5  years,
        and Khai-Ma is considering 20% for the next 3 years.
      • Pelladrift Water would  fund  R19  million  capital  refurbishments
        projects in the 2009/10 financial year.
      • The board expected  to  achieve  accounting  breakeven  and  retain
        positive cash flow by 2012.

4.    Submission by National Treasury

The National Treasury provided the following inputs:

    • Annual reports of the water boards showed a declining profitability.
    • Tariffs did not reflect costs and so costs seemed to grow more than
      revenue.
    • Bad debt had increased, while water volume had increased only in a
      modest amount.
    • Therefore there was a lower surplus to fund capital.
    • Owing to high creditor fees, there was a high debt ratio.
    • The majority of the water boards could not sustain high debt levels,
      due to declining profitability, low reserves and weak cash flows.
    • Common challenges included ageing infrastructure, the increasing
      demand for water, lack of technical skills and the reduced quality of
      raw water

5.    Submission by South African Local Government Authority (SALGA)

The South African Local Government Authority ISALGA) presented a  number  of
challenges it faced, which included:

     • Debt repayment by and performance of municipalities.
     • The relationship between water boards and municipalities  and  their
       roles, incompetent  service  providers,  infrastructure  maintenance
       backlogs, inadequate financial provision for  free  basic  services,
       corruption and nepotism. Furthermore, some  municipalities  provided
       water services, but were not viable as Water Service Authorities.

Financial performance of the water boards

With regards to financial performance of the water boards, SALGA noted  that
investment in fixed assets would be financed  through  increased  debt,  but
there were no plans to receive  further  capitalisation  from  shareholders,
thereby resulting in interest cost increases and pressure  on  water  boards
to service debt repayments. This would then affect Bulk Water Tariffs.

The boards’ funding models needed to be reviewed. It was suggested that  the
water boards were operating less efficiently over time  which  was  in  turn
affecting the Water Service Authorities, resulting in an increase  in  water
tariffs of +10% above PPI. Other increases included  staff  costs,  chemical
price and significant energy costs.

SALGA recommended a PPI plus 3% for both raw water and  bulk  potable  water
increases for the Department of Water Affairs and  water  boards  requesting
increases above this  level.  The  scrutiny  for  this  proposal  should  be
carried out before 1 July 2010 and a pricing  policy  water  services  value
chain would be completed during the 2010/11 financial  year.  The  roles  of
boards’ shareholders and the water sector  regulators  had  to  be  urgently
established by the Minister as the department currently  played  both  roles
(regulator and implementer).

6.    Committees’ Response to Submissions

A number of issues, encompassing the following, were raised by  the  members
for further consideration:

    • Namakwa Water was in the same position as the previous year. This  was
      considered alarming, while the quality  of  water  in  that  area  was
      exceptionally poor.  Urgent  intervention  was  required  and  special
      attention from the department was requested. The committee  would  re-
      examine the issues  raised  in  six  months’  time.  Miscommunications
      surrounding the Namakwa situation seemed prevalent.
    • Appointment of councilors to serve on boards was problematic.
    • Ageing infrastructure backlogs.
    • There was no money collection document or policy for credit control to
      guide the municipalities.
    • The R23 billion backlogs in Gauteng for bulk  sanitation  were  called
      into question, as was the Minister’s announcement of the  R23  billion
      country-wide backlogs, which was considered to be an underestimate.
    • Proposed legislative  amendments  to  resolve  disputes  arising  from
      assignment  of  powers  and  functions  between  national  and   local
      government (including basic services).
    • An investigation and discussions is required  regarding  the  apparent
      duplication of activities  between  water  boards  and  water  service
      authorities to determine best way forward.

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water and  Environmental  Affairs
   on the proposed water tariff increases for 2010, dated 20 July 2010

The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Water  and  Environmental  Affairs   received
briefings from the Department of Water  Affairs  and  14  water  board,  the
South African Local Government Association (SALGA)  and  National  Treasury,
and having considered  the  proposed  water  tariff  increases,  reports  as
follows:

1.    Introduction

On 4 and 5 May 2010, the Portfolio  Committee  on  Water  and  Environmental
Affairs received  briefings  from  Department  of  Water  and  Environmental
Affairs, SALGA, National Treasury and 14 water boards,  comprising  Amatola,
Botshelo,  Bloem,  Bushbuckridge,  Lepelle  Northern,  Magalies,  Mhlathuze,
Namakwa, Overberg, Pelladrift, Rand, Sedibeng, Umgeni and Albany Coast.

2.    Briefing by the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs

Water boards are established according to Section 28 of the  Water  Services
Act, as separate legal institutions. The boards comprise  board  members  to
oversee the governance issues and assets and are required to be  financially
viable. The boards are also governed by other pieces  of  legislations  such
as the Public Finance Management Act,  the  Division  of  Revenue  Act,  the
Municipal Finance Management Act and the Municipal  Structures  Act.   Water
boards are mainly mandated to provide bulk potable water to  municipalities,
customers and other water institutions within a designated area.

Raw water tariffs are set in terms of the  pricing  strategy  by  the  water
boards. According to Section 42 of the  Municipal  Finance  Management  Act,
water boards must consult with the municipalities on their proposed  tariffs
increases and also request National Treasury and SALGA  to  provide  written
comments.  Furthermore, the  Act  stipulates  that  the  water  boards  must
submit:

   • Proposed amendments to water tariffs and comments received

The proposed tariff increases must be tabled in Parliament by  the  Minister
of Water and Environmental Affairs on or before 15 March of each year so  as
to take effect on 1 July of each year.  Neither the Minister nor  Parliament
has the mandate to approve or reject the proposed tariffs.

2.    Proposed tariffs for 2010

Table 1 below provides a synopsis of  the  proposed  tariffs  by  respective
water boards
|Name of Water   |Proposed tariffs for  |Average percentage     |
|Board           |2010                  |increase               |
|Albany Coast    |R 4.96                |8 – 8.8%               |
|Amatola         |R 4.96                |8 – 8.8%               |
|Bloem           |R 3.92                |10.00%                 |
|Botshelo        |R 3.64                |16.00%                 |
|Bushbuckridge   |R 3.45                |12.46%                 |
|Lepelle         |R 3.38                |6.50%                  |
|Magalies        |R 2.81                |11 – 25%               |
|Mhlathuze       |R 1.73                |18.00%                 |
|Namakwa         |R 9.11                |43.00%                 |
|Overberg        |R 3. 42               |9.95%                  |
|Pelladrift      |R 2.28                |20.00%                 |
|Rand            |R 3.97                |14.10%                 |
|Sedibeng        | R 5.86               |12.00%                 |
|Umgeni          | R3.47                |6.20%                  |

The department highlighted the following challenges noted  by  water  boards
during the tariff consultation process:

    • There were late submissions  of  written  comments  by  SALGA  to  the
      boards.
    •  Stringent  timeframes  and  lack  of  capacity  posed  problems   for
      municipalities to provide meaningful comments.
    • Consultation processes as contemplated under section 42  of  the  MFMA
      does not require consent, concurrence or agreement.
    • In the last financial year, many municipalities did not  pass  on  the
      reduction of tariff increases to the end-users.
    • Equitable share, aimed at subsidizing the indigent, was often not used
      by municipalities for the intended purposes  and  as  a  result,  many
      municipalities did not pay their water debt on time.

In relation to  the  above-mentioned  challenges,  the  department  proposed
that:

   • A three year tariff cycle would reduce the administrative burden.
Notwithstanding the difficulties experienced by the water boards during  the
tariffs consultation process, there had been  achievements  as  well,  which
include:

    • Water boards met timelines for consultation in terms of the  provision
      of the MFMA.
    • Submissions of documentation confirming evidence  of  consultation  by
      water boards with municipalities (customers), was also provided.
    •  Feedback  from  National  Treasury,  SALGA  and  municipalities,  was
      timeously provided. As a result, the minister tabled tariff  increases
      by the set deadline of 15 March.
    •  All  the  boards  were  financially   sound,   except   Namakwa   and
      Bushbuckridge.

The department’s analysis of the impact of  the  proposed  tariff  increases
reflected the following:

   • The increase would allow water boards to finance future CAPEX  and  be
     less reliant on loans.
   • Over the next five  years,  the  CAPEX  is  estimated  to  exceed  R10
     billion, whilst the total cash reserves amounted to R4.4 billion,  and
     the total debt was R3.9 billion.  The borrowing to finance  CAPEX  was
     estimated at R5.7 billion. Partial funding of CAPEX  would  allow  for
     the smooth inception of tariffs, specifically  in  the  initial  years
     when the newly funded infrastructure is not fully utilised.
   • Pressure  to  reduce  tariffs  could  result  in  a  higher  level  of
     borrowing, which would effectively increase  tariffs  to  unaffordable
     levels in the future.
   • From an operational point of view, the increase in  energy,  chemicals
     and labour costs has resulted in tariff increases, which  will  ensure
     sustainability of water boards and lower prices to customers.

3.    Submissions by the water boards
The water boards provided the following information in relation to  proposed
water tariffs:
|Water Boards|Input                                                     |
|Albany      |The consultation process was met with the relevant        |
|            |organisations as prescribed by the legislation. Amatola   |
|            |Water can absorb increases between 10% and 15%. The       |
|            |Department of Water Affairs advanced R2.7 million to      |
|            |assist with refurbishment. Plant refurbishment has a      |
|            |10-year maintenance contract factored into it.            |
|            |Furthermore, electrical power saving methodologies has    |
|            |been implemented and there was potential to increase water|
|            |volumes through private eco estate and housing needs of   |
|            |Ndlambe.                                                  |
|Amatola     |Amathole and Buffalo City municipalities agreed to 8.8 %  |
|            |increase in December 2009, as well as with National       |
|            |Treasury and SALGA in 2010. The recent merger with Albany |
|            |Coast Water Board (as result of non-viability of the      |
|            |entity into Amatola could provide of the necessary        |
|            |economies of scale. The board needs to borrow R100 million|
|            |for its CAPEX Programmes and explore other forms of       |
|            |funding.                                                  |
|Bloem       |Municipalities agreed to a 10% increase and above which   |
|            |was accepted by the National Treasury. Tariff increases   |
|            |for 2010/11 reflected an increase of 7% before reduction  |
|            |of tariffs for 2009/10 by 5%. Expected increases for      |
|            |inflation were higher, while operational and maintenance  |
|            |expenditure was also higher. The proposed tariff resulted |
|            |in the downscaling of required CAPEX projects. It also    |
|            |impacted on National Treasury requirements regarding the  |
|            |debt service ratios.                                      |
|Botshelo    |Botshelo Water Board proposed a 16% increase on the       |
|            |proposed tariff for 2010 to cater for electricity,        |
|            |maintenance, security and chemical price increases.       |
|            |Botshelo incurred what was perceived to be a relatively   |
|            |high charge of R1.67 per kilo litre at the major plants of|
|            |Mafikeng and Mmabatho. In order to discuss the tariff,    |
|            |Botshelo held a consultative meeting with its three bulk  |
|            |water clients and the outcome was submitted to National   |
|            |Treasury for approval. The R 3.80 tariff would enable     |
|            |Botshelo Water to fulfil its functions, obligations and   |
|            |duties and would ensure security and sustainability of the|
|            |plants and water provision. The majority of end users in  |
|            |Botshelo jurisdiction had access to 6 kl of Free Basic    |
|            |Water (FBW) per household per month and was likely to     |
|            |remain unchanged. Impacts of the tariff could be off-set  |
|            |by better control of water losses and improved cost       |
|            |recovery on the part of municipalities.                   |
|Bushbuckridg|In an effort to recover costs and make the Board          |
|e           |financially viable, proposed tariffs would off-set the    |
|            |costs of raw water charges and costs relating to staff,   |
|            |labour, energy, chemicals and maintenance. The proposed   |
|            |tariff for 2010 was R3.45 which consisted of a fixed cost |
|            |component (salaries and administration) as well as a      |
|            |variable cost component (raw water, electricity, chemicals|
|            |and maintenance). This would be reviewed in 2010/11. A    |
|            |proposed tariff increase of 12.46% would be imposed for   |
|            |the period July 2010 -June 2011 and was lower than the    |
|            |sector average increase.                                  |
|Lepelle     |Factors for tariff increase include; Increase in raw water|
|            |charges, increase in electricity costs, labour costs and  |
|            |capital investments. The board faced the following        |
|            |challenges in tariff setting:                             |
|            |Bulk                                                      |
|            |Ageing Infrastructure                                     |
|            |Exceeding abstraction Permits (high demands)              |
|            |Over laden treatment plant (upgrades)                     |
|            |Deteriorating raw water quality                           |
|            |Non payment of services by WSAs                           |
|            |Reticulation                                              |
|            |Poor cost recovery and water demand management            |
|            |Ageing internal reticulation infrastructure               |
|            |Default on payment by consumers                           |
|            |Lack of maintenance                                       |
|            |Unauthorised/illegal connections                          |
|            |Insufficient Water Demand Management                      |
|Magalies    |The Board considered numerous factors in determining the  |
|            |varying tariff increases. The operational costs were      |
|            |determined by the costs of raw water, staff and labour    |
|            |costs, electricity costs, cost of chemicals, maintenance  |
|            |costs, refurbishment costs and depreciation. Challenges in|
|            |the tariff setting included the tumultuous economy and the|
|            |reduction of consumer activities, which impacted the Capex|
|            |programmes. Consumers opposed the tariff increases and    |
|            |municipalities could not afford the implementation of the |
|            |Capex programmes.                                         |
|Mhlathuze   |The department requested a 12.6% tariff to the supply of  |
|            |bulk water.  The Board approved and proposed an increase  |
|            |to the department, as follows:                            |
|            |22% for purified water                                    |
|            |18% for raw water                                         |
|            |10% for effluent.                                         |
|            |The department approved tariff as proposed.               |
|            |                                                          |
|            |The Board encountered the following challenges during     |
|            |consultation:                                             |
|            |Negative economic conditions experienced by client played |
|            |a major factor during the consultative process.           |
|            |A lower rate was expected by the Board’s clients.         |
|            |                                                          |
|            |But, the tariffs were proposed due to aging infrastructure|
|            |which requires high capital expenditure; capital cost to  |
|            |be recovered through tariffs over 20 years; high energy   |
|            |cost increases, customer contracts; and unresolved        |
|            |objections to tariff increase.                            |
|Namakwa     |The NWB requested a 43% increase on tariffs. The tariff   |
|            |would be R9.14 and the shortfall would be 81 cents. During|
|            |consultation processes, the Nama Khoi Municipality        |
|            |requested a 10% tariff increase. The Department of Water  |
|            |Affairs approved the 43% tariff increase and urged the NWB|
|            |to bring the increase closer to 12%. The NWB warned that  |
|            |the tariff increase would result in less water consumption|
|            |and would hinder cost recovery                            |
|Overberg    |The higher the water use, the higher the unit cost of the |
|            |tariff. The use on the sliding scale is based on the      |
|            |number of households as supplied by and agreed with the   |
|            |municipality. The effective cost of water and the water   |
|            |tariff is therefore in the hands of the municipality – it |
|            |requires careful and sound planning and management from   |
|            |their side                                                |
|            |                                                          |
|Pelladrift  |The tariff set by the Board includes 26% increase due to  |
|            |increases in electricity costs and 7 % increase in raw    |
|            |water tariffs, salaries and aging infrastructure.         |
|Rand        |The RWB proposed a tariff increment of 14.1%, which was   |
|            |based on the cost of raw water, chemicals and other costs.|
|            |The increase was approved by National Treasury and        |
|            |Department of Water Affairs, but tough negotiations with  |
|            |customers were expected and an independent regulator was  |
|            |requested to assist in this regard.                       |
|Sedibeng    |The 12% tariff increase is recommended for maintenance and|
|            |operating of the infrastructure and assets. The tariff    |
|            |increase considers the possibility of enhancing the       |
|            |financial viability of the organisation in order to       |
|            |generate sufficient revenue to continue with the          |
|            |development of water infrastructure whilst operating and  |
|            |maintaining the existing one. The Board constantly invests|
|            |and considers activities that seek to acquire more assets |
|            |and assist in the operation and maintenance of water      |
|            |infrastructure as it focus on developing water supply     |
|            |services to the communities.                              |
|Umgeni      |After consulting with relevant people, Umgeni Water       |
|            |presented two tariff options. Consultations with the South|
|            |African Local Government Association (SALGA) and the      |
|            |National Treasury with a 6.5% tariff increase resulted in |
|            |a final submission to the Minister of Water and           |
|            |Environmental Affairs on 25 January 2009, which was later |
|            |tabled in Parliament in 2010.                             |

4.    Submission by South African Local Government Association (SALGA)

The role of SALGA is to represent, promote  and  protect  the  interests  of
local government in the  water  and  environmental  sectors.  The  following
obstacles were  highlighted  by  SALGA  in  relation  to  the  role  of  the
department and water boards in their  undertaking  of  their  work  on  this
critical aspect:

    • Late debt repayment to water boards by municipalities.
    • Poor performance by municipalities.
    • Corruption and nepotism resulting in the  appointment  of  incompetent
      service providers.
    • Poor infrastructure maintenance.
    • Indecisiveness and/or bad decisions, for example, long term  decisions
      regarding institutional arrangements for providing services.
    • Legislation has become a list of suggestions with no consequences  for
      non-compliance.
    • Inadequate financial provision for free basic services for the poor.
    • The majority of Water Services Authorities operated their water
      distribution businesses at a deficit or at break-even.
    • Inadequate financial provision for free basic services to the poor -
      providing for fewer at less than the cost of providing the service to
      a household.

Following a thorough analysis conducted by SALGA in  December  2009  on  the
proposed water boards  tariffs  in  order  to  effectively  represent  local
government, SALGA noted the following:

    • The Department of  Water  Affairs  has  obtained  approval  for  price
      increases, which were significantly higher than those  anticipated  in
      business plans of water boards. It is therefore  necessary  to  review
      the raw water tariff applied by the  department,  especially  the  Raw
      Water Pricing Policy and phasing of raw water increases,  specifically
      the portion of increases which relate to accounting adjustments to the
      value of fixed assets.
    • There should be a revision of proposed pricing for 2010/11  downwards,
      to PPI plus 3% and therefore phase in increases to meet  the  required
      return on assets over a longer period.
    • The investment in fixed assets was, according to the business  plans,
      to be financed through increased debt and there were no plans made to
      receive  further  capitalisation  or  equity   injection   from   the
      shareholder. This, according to the Water Services  Authority,  would
      result in severe increases in interest costs and  it  created  severe
      pressure on many  water  boards  to  service  debt  repayments  going
      forward. Both of these factors would create upward pressure  on  bulk
      water tariffs. Therefore, there should be a  review  of  the  funding
      models of the water boards; especially their apparent  overdependence
      on debt financing and these impacts on bulk water tariffs.
    • In light of increases in energy, labour and chemicals, SALGA  was  of
      the view  that  the  regulator  carefully  scrutinise  the  operating
      expenses of water boards before  making  decisions  on  the  proposed
      tariffs.
    • Most of the water boards  reported  a  decline  in  their  raw  water
      quality due to pollution and contamination of the  river  systems  by
      industrial, agricultural, and by human  waste  entering  the  rivers.
      This resulted in expensive disinfection  and  purification  measures,
      which increases the cost of  potable  water  to  the  municipalities.
      There was a need for the department to protect the national  resource
      from such degradation and local government would also assist.

Given the issues raised above, SALGA provided the following suggestions:

    • A PPI, plus 3% be allowed for both raw water and  bulk  potable  water
      increases.  This should be allowed for the department  and  all  water
      boards that have requested increases that are above this level.
    • There should be a thorough scrutiny on  proposed  submissions  carried
      out for each water board during the 2010/11 financial year in order to
      determine appropriate increases  for  specific  water  boards  in  the
      future.
    • A pricing  policy  for  the  entire  water  services  value  chain  be
      completed during the 2010/11 financial year.
    • The minister moves speedily to establish an  institutional  separation
      between the water  boards’  shareholder  role  and  the  water  sector
      regulator role, which are currently both  played  by  the  department.
      This makes the department both a referee and  a  player  at  the  same
      time.
    • The department should facilitate  the  implementation  of  appropriate
      long-term institutional mechanisms for sustainable service delivery.
    • A need exists to clarify the role of local  government  in  Integrated
      Water Resource Management and facilitate  effective  participation  of
      municipalities in Catchment Management Areas.
    • More advice and guidance is required with regards to  improving  local
      regulation of service provision.
    • Facilitate identification and implementation of priority interventions
      to improve water and waste water quality management by municipalities.
    • Develop a guide towards a transparent  and  appropriate  water  tariff
      determination methodology.

5.    Input by National Treasury

National Treasury outlined  the  legislative  framework  followed  by  water
boards when submitting their proposed water tariff process.  The  submission
should include the following:

    • Motivation for the reasons for the increase.
    • The way in which inflation targets will be met.
    • Other macro-economic policy considerations.
    • Steps taken to improve its competitiveness  or  efficiency  to  reduce
      costs.
    • Other objectives or targets in any corporate or other governance plan.

National Treasury noted that in most instances,  the  submissions  by  water
boards are often not detailed enough to provide for the requisite  analysis.
Corporate plans and Section 42 applications were often contradictory.

National Treasury submitted the following:

    • National Treasury supported the decision  of  the  Minister  of  Water
      Affairs to merge Albany Coast with Amatola.
    • Namakwa’s situation was not sustainable; therefore an alternative long
      term solution needs to be considered.
    • The Local Government Equitable Share (unconditional grant)  should  be
      ring fenced to enable municipalities to provide free basic services to
      poor households.
    •  With  regards  to  monitoring  payments  for  bulk  water  supply  by
      municipality, National Treasury followed Sections 41  and  44  of  the
      MFMA whereby water boards must, within  15  days  after  end  of  each
      month, report on  amounts  to  be  paid  by  municipalities  for  bulk
      resource, and arrears owing by municipalities and age profiles of such
      arrears.
    • National Treasury also reported that it  engaged  with  municipalities
      and water boards to facilitate settlement of  disputes  and  payments.
      National  Treasury  has  issued  guidance  to  all  water  boards   on
      mechanisms and processes to be followed in order to  resolve  disputes
      of a financial nature. For example, it assisted the following  boards,
      Bushbuckridge, Sedibeng, Lepelle, Bloem and Rand to recoup their money
      from municipalities.
It suggested the following recommendations:

      • Non-existence or poorly drafted  service  level  agreement  between
        water boards and municipalities should be reviewed.
      • Misalignment of water service authority functions, between district
        and local municipalities should be corrected.
      • There should be stringent  enforcement  credit  control  policy  by
        boards on municipalities delaying payment.
      • There is a need to strengthen the roles of sector departments in  a
        co-ordinated manner.
      • The Department  of  Water  Affairs  should  provide  assistance  to
        parties with service level agreement and technical  issues  related
        to water meters.
      • Improve oversight over  water  boards  and  enforcement  of  credit
        control policies.
      • The Department of Corporative Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs
        must  assist  with  authorisation  of  water  services  powers  and
        functions.

6.    Responses by  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Water  and  Environmental
Affairs

    • The failure by municipalities to repay the money  owed  to  the  water
      boards posed concerns. There were concerns  around  the  R1.4  billion
      municipal debt that was still outstanding. There was  a  concern  that
      the  figure  was  just  getting  bigger.  This  was  problematic,   as
      approximately R535 million of the R1.4 billion, was a debt  comprising
      more than 120 days. There was a need for  the  department  to  develop
      mechanisms to deal with the matter.
    • The minister had issued a directive for certain water boards  to  take
      over the provision of bulk water to municipalities. This was the  case
      of Amatola Water.
    • In some instances, there  was  no  consensus  between  SALGA  and  the
      Department of Water Affairs, to finalise the  proposed  water  tariffs
      for 2010.
      Concerns were raised around  the  clauses  in  the  Municipal  Finance
      Management Act which deprives parliament and the minister  to  approve
      or reject water tariffs; whereas they  have  a  bearing  to  the  poor
      communities the members are serving.

7.    Recommendations

The portfolio committee recommends the following:

   • There should be further engagement between the department and SALGA to
     reach consensus on the proposed water tariffs increases each year.
   • National Treasury should pay special attention on  how  municipalities
     were utilising their Equitable Share funding  allocations.  It  seemed
     that the funding was being utilised for their operations,  instead  of
     prioritising infrastructure.

Report to be considered.

3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water and  Environmental  Affairs
   of the Water Institute of Southern Africa Conference (WISA) 20 July 2010

1.    Introduction

A holistic focus on water issues is central to sustainable  development  and
poverty  reduction  agendas.  Members  of  the   committee   attended   this
conference  in  Durban  on  18  –  21  April  2010  to  achieve  a   greater
understanding of the current issues in the field of  water  and  sanitation.
The conference comprised water service specialists,  business  and  academia
and the members gained knowledge  that  was  current  and  relevant  to  the
strategic objectives of the work of the committee.
2.    Objectives of the Conference

The aim of the conference was to provide a platform for:

     • Discussions amongst sector policy makers, water sector  professions,
       government departments, state entities, civil  society,  educational
       and  research  institutions  on  issues  related   to   integration,
       application of scientific engineering, knowledge and skills in water
       sector management.

3.    Keynote Address by Deputy Minister Ms Mabudhafatsi

Water is high on the global agenda because it is key to social and  economic
development, and therefore also important on the South African  agenda.  All
sectors are dependent on water. The Industrial Policy for South Africa  also
recognises the importance of water in its economic sense.

Although South  Africa  has  not  done  well  in  achieving  the  Millennium
Development Goals of halving the backlogs  by  2015,  it  has  succeeded  in
providing water and sanitation to many poor  households  by  2005.  However,
there are still people without clean and potable  water,  therefore  service
delivery efforts need to be increased to ensure universal access.

The following challenges confront the water sector:

    • Water security involves diligent planning, and management of the water
      cycle including the effects of climate change and monitoring.   Scarce
      water resources impacts  on  social  and  economic  development.  This
      requires water use efficiency  and  water  demand  management  at  all
      levels, as well as the re-use of water, including getting people aware
      of water conservation as a way of life.
    • The poor quality of the water resources impacts  on  our  environment,
      the quality of  life  and  the  economy.  Various  interventions  were
      undertaken including the Local  Government  Turnaround  Strategy,  the
      Wastewater   Treatment   Plants   Intervention   Programme,   improved
      monitoring and auditing.
    • Acid mine drainage remains a worrying factor.  There  is  a  need  for
      appropriate long term solutions  to  effectively  control  and  manage
      this, including smart technologies,  improved  governance  and  sector
      accountability, ownership and commitment.
    •  Due  to  ageing  infrastructure,  most  completed  projects  are  not
      functional or rather water is not coming out of the taps due to ageing
      infrastructure and other technical problems.

There is  a  need  to  reflect  on  how  to  speed  up  water  delivery  for
consumption, poverty  alleviation  and  economic  development.  A  realistic
reflection will  be  achieved  only  if  delegates  were  honest  about  the
challenges faced by the sector, not wasting time pointing  fingers,  and  by
being defensive. It was important to reach  a  consensus  about  the  sector
challenges and that should be used  as  a  means  for  future  planning  and
turnaround strategy.

4.    Presentation of Research Papers

4.1   Water quality management as key component of  catchment  management  –
Mr P Wiechers
This paper focused on wastewater quality management as a  key  component  of
catchment management. This concept illustrated three catchments namely,  the
Vaal River, the Mvoti to Mzimkulu River  and  the  Great  and  Little  Lotus
rivers catchments. It also covered various aspects ranging  from  wastewater
quality management, policies, legislation and enforcement, as  well  as  the
variety  of  catchments  management   practices.   The   presentation   also
highlighted lessons learnt and proposals for  future  priorities  and  needs
for optimizing wastewater quality management.

There  are  currently  19  water  management  areas  in  South  Africa.  The
establishment is stipulated in the National Water Act  by  the  creation  of
catchment management areas. The  Department  of  Water  Affairs  is  primary
responsible to ensure water quality management of the authorities  under  it
and ensuring effective management,  which  included  the  following  aspects
namely:

    • Continuous improvement of water quality management.
    • Being proactive, dynamic, efficient and effective in its  delivery  of
      Water Quality Management services to the public.
    • Providing the necessary policies  and  systems  to  ensure  integrated
      sustainable management of water quality.
    • Promoting cooperative governance across all spheres of  government  in
      terms of Water Quality Management.
    • Ensuring a fully capacitated, loyal workforce to support the  DWA  WQM
      functions.

In order to ensure efficient and effective  Water  Quality  Management,  the
following initiatives were proposed:

    • Prevention of waste  production  and  pollution  of  water  resources
      wherever possible.
    • Minimisation of pollution at source by minimising  unavoidable  waste
      production through: recycling/reuse  of  waste  or  water  containing
      waste;  detoxifying;  neutralisation;  and/  or  treatment  of  waste
      streams;  and/or  introduction  of  cleaner  technologies  and   best
      management practices ("housekeeping").
    •  Disposal  of  waste  and/or  discharge  of  water  containing  waste
      according  to  the  precautionary  principle.  If   there   were   no
      alternatives to the disposal of waste and/or the discharge  of  water
      containing waste, the precautionary principle applies.

After the Department of Water Affairs had conducted  assessment  studies  on
waste water quality management at a provincial  level,  the  department  was
dissatisfied with the performance of wastewater quality  management  in  all
nine provinces.

Treated effluent discharges from  sewage  works  and  industrial  wastewater
treatment works had an impact on the  quality  of  water  in  the  receiving
environment. Therefore,  it  was  imperative  for  relevant  authorities  to
closely monitor the impact posed by these discharges, to  in  order,  ensure
compliance with discharge standards. Furthermore, long term trends  need  to
be observed to ensure that there was no  significant  deterioration  of  the
receiving water over the long term. Although the immediate  impact  may  not
be significant, deterioration was foreseen over the longer  term.  With  the
global  economic  recession,   local   authorities   and   industries   were
increasingly under  stress  to  maintain  the  required  discharge  effluent
quality standards.

The presentation also highlighted  challenges  and  opportunities  posed  by
catchment management in South Africa, which include:

    • A need for more integration in  water  and  wastewater  services,  for
      example, catchment management could be linked with:  land  use;  fresh
      water demand minimization, and, wastewater reuse.
    • Technical  catchment  management  solutions  should  inform  catchment
      committees’ choices, for example, with decisions on land-use  changes,
      and by creating multiple land-use opportunities.
    •  Catchment   management   should   critically   address   social   and
      institutional processes operative in the catchment.
    • Long-term sustainability for urban catchment management can be assured
      by linking with quality-of life considerations, such as the  provision
      of recreational amenities, conservation and restoration.

Following the studies conducted in the four catchment areas,  the  following
findings were presented:

      The Vaal River Catchment

In the catchments along the Bloemhof Dam, effluents from  urban,  industrial
and mining activities have resulted in high levels of salinity of  the  Vaal
River, whilst in the lower catchment, irrigation return flows are the  major
contributor to river salinity. Furthermore, water pollution has resulted  in
a significant change in physico-chemical  conditions  in  the  river  water.
Sewage  discharge  destroyed  the  river's   ecosystem.   An   environmental
organisation known as, Eco-Care Trust, had committed to the conservation  of
fish in the river.

      Mvoti-uMzimkhulu River Catchments

Problems experienced in Mvoti- uMzimkhulu were related to  industrial  water
pollution.  High levels of chemical  poisons  were  reported  in  the  Mvoti
River near KwaDukuza/Stanger, which resulted  in  an  immediate  banning  on
fishing activities, swimming or drinking water near the Sappi paper mill.  A
multi-national pulp and paper company advised fishermen not to eat any  fish
or other marine creatures from the river  mouth  until  further  tests  have
been conducted. The company also acknowledged that some  of  the  pollutants
had the potential to cause cancer and endocrine system  health  problems  in
humans and animals, depending on the dose and duration of exposure.

      Great and Little Lotus River Catchments

The Great Lotus  catchment  has  a  population  of  about  380  000  people.
Approximately 24% reside in informal settlements, while 4% live in  informal
housing in the site and  service  areas.  The  informal  population  of  the
Greater Lotus River catchment is growing  especially  rapidly,  due  to  its
desirable location near to job opportunities, and large areas of  "municipal
open space". The Great Lotus River is characterized by poor  water  quality,
with high nutrient loading, as well as very  high  faecal  coliform  counts.
This is due to raw sewage effluent overflowing from blocked sewers into  the
storm water  drains,  occasional  sewer  pump  overflows,  as  well  as  the
inadequate  or  non-existent  sanitation  characteristic  of  the   informal
settlement areas. Despite recent efforts by the local authorities  at  sewer
upgrading, the microbial counts in the storm  water  do  not  appear  to  be
dropping.

   2. Municipal  Regulatory  Performance  Management  Systems  (RMPS)  Water
      Services Compliance Assessment, by Department of Water Affairs


As the custodian of the nation’s water resources and  water  sector  leader,
the objective of the  Department  of  Water  Affairs  is  to  improve  water
management in the country. Local government is responsible for  delivery  of
water  services  to  householders   and   regulation   of   water   services
authorities. Therefore, the role of the Department is to regulate,  monitor,
evaluate, report and publish performance of water services  authorities.  It
is against this background  that  the  department  introduced  the  National
Water Services Regulation Strategy in 2008, in  order  to  elucidate  actual
activities and performance. This meant that a performance mechanism or  tool
had to be developed, known as the Regulatory Performance Measurement  System
(RPMS), which is a  regulatory  initiative  (such  as  the  Blue  Drop/Green
Drop). It is intended to  measure  water  services  authorities  on  11  key
performance indicators  that  were  initially  developed  in  the  Strategic
Framework for Water Services (DWAF 2003) and expanded in the  NWSRS  and  is
being currently rolled out in the nine regions  in  order  to  promote  best
practice in the sector.

The objectives of the systems are as follows:

    • Improve business practice in relation to water  services  delivery  in
      local government.
    • Improve local government compliance with national standards and norms.
    • Improve DWA regulatory processes through ensuring that response to non
      compliance are standardised across the country.
    • Ensure that data collected from municipalities is verifiable, accurate
      and useful so that it can benefit local government  through  strategic
      feedback on problem areas.

4.2.1 Data collection process

The data collected during the first implementation phase of  the  system  in
2007/8 financial year, followed a bottom up approach whereby RPMS  workshops
were held in the five  regions,  namely  Northern  Cape,  Limpopo,  Gauteng,
Western Cape and Free State with water  services  authorities.  Data  sheets
accompanied by manuals were distributed to the municipalities prior  to  the
workshop.

In 2008/9, a similar process was followed.  It  should  be  noted  that  the
following challenges were noted:

    • Responses from the  water  services  authorities  were  slow  in  some
      instances, and deadlines had to be extended.
    • While significant progress has been made  in  some  regions,  overall,
      consistency remains a problem owing to high turnover of staff at  both
      regional offices and more particularly at WSAs.
    • Continuity is a key aspect of annual measurement, and it is  important
      that effective handover processes are in place for managing the system
      at the regional office, and interacting with the system at WSAs.
    • Most WSAs are  unable  to  supply  the  data,  which  will  allow  the
      measurement of their non revenue water – which, given the emphasis  on
      climate change and the fact that millions of South Africans  currently
      do not have access to water and sanitation, is a major potential  area
      of improvement.

In conclusion, although the RPMS was  in  its  infancy  as  a  system,  some
significant results have already been achieved.

   3. Progress on the  Haartbeespoort  Dam  Integrated  Biological  Remedial
      Programme, Mr Venter

The programme was introduced by the Department of Water Affairs  to  address
the imbalances and unhealthy  biological  conditions  in  the  dam.  Due  to
eutrophication that results in hypertrophic conditions in the dam,  the  dam
was under severe pressure. The programme comprises 25 main projects  and  18
sub projects. To date, the following initiatives have been implemented,  and
these include:

   Biomass (Algae and Hyacinth)


    • Pumps were installed in the dam that allows for the removal  of  algae
      into allocated downstream areas of the dam wall. In addition, floating
      algal booms have been installed at various locations, namely,  Oberon,
      Westlake and the mouth of Saartjies to  prevent  further  movement  of
      algae.
    •  Hyacinth  was  removed  manually.  There  were  currently  46   local
      previously disadvantaged people employed  on  the  contract  basis  to
      increase  employment  numbers  around  the  area.  Training  has  been
      provided on the use of pumping equipment, as well  as  on  health  and
      safety.
    • Concerns were raised over huge amounts of litter flowing into the dam,
      which hindered the removal of hyacinth.
    • To date, approximately 100 tons of  compost  has  been  produced  from
      algae;  the  compost   will   be   used   for   soil   rehabilitation,
      implementation  of  artificial  wetlands  and   shoreline   vegetation
      establishment.

   Food web restructuring

A fish harvesting project focusing on the fishing of coarse fish in the  dam
has been implemented. Madibeng Conservancy Holdings was contracted  in  2009
to harvest the averages required to catch up with  the  backlogs  and  reach
target figures by the end of March 2009. The only challenge of this  project
was to secure contractors,  equipment,  and  loss  of  netting.  The  agreed
average of fish harvest per month is 3.7 tons of fish per week.  Should  the
contractor fail to meet this average, the population of  coarse  fish  would
increase. This would impact  on  the  remedial  efforts  already  made.  The
projects managers were investing in  other  cost  effective  electro-shocker
options for the project.

      Sediment removal

The DWA Team conducted sediment contour  surveys  of  the  dam.  Preliminary
indications confirmed that the  phosphate  amounts  were  between  1500-2000
tons. This implies that close to 10-years worth of  nutrients  were  trapped
in the dam. The utilisation of these sediments once removed, were  currently
being investigated and discussions were being held with surrounding  farmers
and mines within Haartbeespoort Dam area with regards to  implementation  of
various projects at various sites. It has been discovered  that  the  sludge
has a potential to assist the remediation of  the  mines.  There  were  also
discussions with the mining sector to determine the potential  use  for  the
recovered  sediments  which  may  include  soil  care,  mine  tailings  dams
rehabilitation, compost production and landfill.

4.5.  Workshop on the Review of the National Water  Resources  Strategy;  Ms
Gwala

The purpose of the workshop was to obtain inputs  from  the  delegates  when
reviewing the second  edition  of  the  strategy.  The  first  strategy  was
developed in 2004. According to the National Water  Act,  it  is  stipulated
that the strategy should reviewed every five years.

To date, the following achievements since the implementation  of  the  first
strategy have been achieved namely;

    • Equitable access to water and benefits.
    • Development of water resources infrastructure.
    • Forecasting and balancing of water demand and supply.
    • Efficient and effective water use through the establishment  of  water
      management institutions such as  catchment  agencies  and  water  user
      associations.

The department envisaged having the strategy  completed  in  the  coming  18
months.  Various  stakeholders  participated  in   the   review,   including
technical  experts,  policy  makers,  and  local  government.   High   level
strategic workshops and meetings will be held in five provinces.  A  project
steering committee and project management has been established.  The  review
will assess the extent to which the alignment of water resources  and  water
services provision activities has been streamlined.  It  will  also  address
the gaps identified in the first strategy.

A communication strategy will also  be  developed  in  order  to  create  an
understanding of what the revision of the strategy entails. This  will  also
communicate the importance  of  the  revision  and  its  role  in  terms  of
integrated water resources management and associated benefits.

With regards to the implementation plan  of  the  strategy,  the  department
will allocate responsibilities for the implementation  of  the  strategy  to
different  line  functions  within  the  department.  The  funding  will  be
allocated over a period  of  five  years.  This  will  be  followed  by  the
introduction  of  a  performance  management  framework   with   appropriate
indicators.

4. Conclusion

The knowledge gained was current and relevant to  the  strategic  objectives
of the committee.


