---
title: 'National Assembly - 24 March 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-03-24
---

WEDNESDAY, 24 MARCH 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 10:30.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC:

   Outcomes of engagements with British government and other stakeholders
                            during official visit

1.    Mr H T Magama (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:


      (1)   What were the important outcomes of his engagements with the
            British government and other stakeholders during his official
            visit to the United Kingdom from 2 to 6 March 2010, and


      (2)   how has the visit strengthened bilateral relations with the
            United Kingdom?                                    NO761E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, let me begin by thanking you
and the House for allowing me to postpone Question Time last week so that I
could attend the Zimbabwean peace process on 17 and 18 March 2010 in
Harare, Zimbabwe, as facilitator.

The time was well spent. The leaders and parties agreed to a package of
measures to be implemented concurrently, as per the decision of the
Southern African Development Community Troika in Maputo. The implementation
of this package will certainly take the process forward. The leaders have
instructed their negotiating teams to attend to all questions and
outstanding matters during their deliberations on 25, 26 and 29 March, and
to report back to the facilitator by 31 March.

I used the opportunity of attending the inauguration of the President of
Namibia over the weekend to brief the SADC Troika Chairperson, President
Armando Guebuza of Mozambique, as well as the SADC Chairperson, President
Joseph Kabila of the Democratic Republic of Congo.

We certainly look forward to a speedy resolution of the impasse to ensure
the full implementation of the Global Political Agreement. Hon Speaker, I
thought I should thank you for that understanding, together with the House.
[Applause.]

With regard to the question of our visit to the United Kingdom, the most
important outcome was the consolidation and further strengthening of the
excellent relations that already exist between our two countries. There was
specific emphasis on co-operation on our priorities, such as education,
health, the fight against crime and creating decent jobs.

The visit expressed, unequivocally, our readiness to host the 2010 Fifa
World Cup and allayed fears regarding security around the World Cup event.
In this regard South Africa and the United Kingdom signed a memorandum of
understanding with the police and other co-operation partners during the
World Cup.

We took more than 200 businesspeople along with us in order to strengthen
economic ties and we underlined the importance of this relationship. They
met with British companies to discuss opportunities in various sectors. The
value of the total trade between the two countries in 2008 was R74 billion,
and the United Kingdom is South Africa’s largest foreign investor.

The meeting with the South Africa-United Kingdom Business Forum and other
public engagements provided an opportunity to reiterate government’s
position on nationalisation. We reiterated that South Africa remains an
attractive destination for investment.

On education, the two countries will develop links between further
education and training colleges. This will help South Africa to tackle
unemployment through skills development. We are also going to establish a
South Africa-United Kingdom Next Generation Forum to deepen links between
young people.

We resolved to work with Fifa and the Global Campaign for Education in
their 1Goal campaign, aimed at harnessing the power of the 2010 Fifa World
Cup for the benefit of education for all. This should be one of the
greatest spin-offs of the World Cup on African soil. I urge members of this
House to support this worthwhile campaign.

The UK reaffirmed its commitment to supporting the fight against HIV and
Aids in South Africa, and is supporting our public health system in a new
£25 million programme. This is to enable the achievement of key targets,
such as cutting the rate of mother-to-child transmission and halving the
number of new infections.

With regard to multilateral relations, we concurred that the UK and South
Africa would work together towards the reform of international financial
institutions to make them more effective, accountable and legitimate. We
also welcomed the UK’s support for permanent African representation on the
United Nations Security Council. This will enable the UN Security Council
to better address issues of peace and security across the world.
The United Kingdom and South Africa agreed to work together through the G20
and the United Nations to make 2010 the year of action in combating
poverty. This will include agreement on a global action plan on the
Millennium Development Goals at the UN Summit in September 2010. Both the
UK and South Africa welcomed the new High Level Advisory Group on Climate
Finance and called for developed countries to provide finance from 2013.

The state visit has shown that ties between South Africa and the UK are
getting stronger, and we will continue to explore areas of co-operation
that will help us achieve our developmental goals. I thank you, hon
Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr H T MAGAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr President, your reply is indeed a
far cry from the reports we received at home about matters that were
unrelated and irrelevant to the important tasks which were the primary
purpose of your visit.

The issue of Zimbabwe is reportedly one of the biggest areas of interest
for the people and the government of the United Kingdom. Do you think the
latest developments and signs of progress in Zimbabwe regarding the talks
between the parties, facilitated by yourselves, augur well for your
attempts to get the international community, especially our partners such
as the United Kingdom, to support the peace process?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, well, I think, certainly, it will
go a long way. The issue of Zimbabwe was frequently a subject of discussion
with different sectors in the UK, particularly with government and
business. We debated a great deal, particularly around the issue of
sanctions – whether the sanctions were helping the processes in Zimbabwe or
not.

Certainly, the British leadership has a very strong view that sanctions are
still important and are important in helping. We hold a different view, and
we advanced this view very strongly. By the time we left they were saying
that they would think about this, because they could see the sense of it
and appreciated the fact that as we belong to Southern Africa we have the
advantage of knowing the situation better.

I am therefore very confident that the progress we made in Zimbabwe should
help the world, particularly those who have applied sanctions, to see the
need to help us succeed in Zimbabwe as quickly as possible. So I do believe
that the latest developments will certainly be helpful in that direction. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Dr D T GEORGE: Thank you, Speaker. Thank you, Mr President, for your
feedback. Such visits give us an opportunity to showcase the many great
things that South Africa has to offer the world in terms of trade and
investment. The key issue, however, is the credibility of your message.

Investment bankers followed the visit with great interest. Yet many remain
sceptical as to the commitment to push through difficult measures, and also
fear that the political difficulties within the tripartite alliance will
result in additional spending and tax hikes.

You mentioned nationalisation, Mr President. During your visit you stated
emphatically that nationalisation was not on the cards, yet the ANC Youth
League president Julius Malema continues with this debate. [Interjections.]
What government fails to understand is that investors perceive this and
many other statements from the ANC to be an attack on property rights, the
basic building blocks for a sound economy and the very reason why people
invest in economies such as ours – and we want to attract investment.

Mr President, what steps will you be taking to ensure that the message
regarding our economy, emanating from the ANC and its potential future
leadership, is coherent, noncontradictory and sends the right signal to
investors whose money to fund essential projects, such as Eskom
infrastructure, we are hoping to attract? Thank you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, hon Speaker. We have dealt with
this question before - very sufficiently – that government policy is not
for nationalisation. This is what we explained as well when we were in
Great Britain. There is no confusion. The issue is very clear. That is why
the response by the financial institutions to South Africa has been
positive. I think the issue is very clear.

In our last discussion we separated the question of policy from that of
whether South Africans belonging to the ANC Youth League or whatever are
entitled to raise their questions and feelings about issues. And I hope the
issue was clarified very thoroughly.

We cannot ban people from raising certain issues. I said that was the
history in the past: If you talked about nationalisation you would go to
Robben Island, even if you were just talking about it. We can’t do that.

I said that those who hold different views, as you do, should engage Julius
Malema. Prove to him that he is wrong. He is talking in the media; you talk
to the media as well. Engage him. [Applause.] Engage the country and say,
“Malema is wrong; this is the correct thing we need to do.” It is a public
debate. Debate with Julius Malema. [Interjections.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, I thank the President for the reply. I want to
ask a question about sanctions against Zimbabwe. My question is slightly
different from what my colleague has asked.

I want to know why you think that targeted sanctions against President
Mugabe and his allies serve only to divide the already fragile power-
sharing government, as these sanctions were imposed on Mr Mugabe and his
allies before the existence of the power-sharing government. Why do you
think it causes division when the sanctions were already in place before
the power-sharing government came into being?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, the answer is precisely in what the
hon member said. Targeted sanctions were applied to the Zanu-PF government
before the unity government came into being. There was then a process of
negotiations which led to the Global Political Agreement. Once the Global
Political Agreement was made, it meant that the government in Zimbabwe had
changed. On the basis of the agreement, it was no longer a Zanu-PF
government and was now a joint government between three parties.

I think that distinction is very important for us to hear. If you apply
sanctions to a government of one party and you apply exactly the same
sanctions to a government of unity, the situation has to change. We are
using an instrument that was aimed at a government of one party.

The net effect of that, as President Mugabe has put it across – and I
raised this issue even when I was in the UK – is that you have a government
of unity that is expected to implement the agreement. However, half of it
is functioning, can do everything and can go everywhere to ensure that it
works; and half of it can’t function and can’t travel.

The targeted sanctions right now are dividing the unity government. That is
the point. It therefore creates a problem for that unity to jell, to work
together. This is the reason we don’t need these sanctions now. Give this
unity government a chance. It is not exactly the same as it was before. Why
apply the same instrument to a new entity that you applied to a different
entity? This is the debate that is being put across.

We need the sanctions to be lifted, so that there is a chance for all of us
to help Zimbabweans solve their problems. It must function to its full
capacity. At the moment the Zimbabweans say it isn’t. That is the debate;
that is the difference. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Mr President, for
your answer. The hon President did indicate that there were 200 businessmen
in the delegation. I do trust, Mr President, that they were not government-
sponsored and that they paid their own way to the UK and back.

My question, hon President, through you, Mr Speaker, is: Is the hon
President aware of any deals – firm deals – that were struck between
businessmen of South Africa and foreign investors which would create jobs
for people in South Africa? I ask this, because the President did indicate
that there was R74 billion worth of trade between the UK and South Africa.

However, in many instances, you find foreign investors investing in
companies here in South Africa with the intention of making profits and not
with the intention of employing as many people as possible. They come here
and create industries which use a lot of technology.

So my question to the hon President is: Would he encourage foreign
investors to invest in operations in South Africa which will ensure that
people in our country get jobs?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: We will certainly encourage them to do so.
In so far as which deals were signed, I don’t know. They did not report to
me. There were interactions in respect of which both sides were happy. The
interactions helped to lift the level of engagement between the British and
South Africans.

I don’t think we could have said, “Come around and tell me what deals were
signed.” We didn’t. Certainly, it was successful. They were all happy. I
even had an opportunity to meet South African businesspeople who are in
Britain, to discuss with them different matters about their own
investments. However, I don’t think I would have then said at the end of
the discussions, “Please bring everything here.”

There was definitely a report given on the final day of the meeting by both
sides, showing areas of agreement and areas in which they believed they
would be doing new business. [Applause.]

   Particulars regarding recently announced review of state-owned entities

2.    The Leader of the Opposition (DA) asked the President of the
    Republic:

    (1)    Whether the review of state-owned entities which he had
          announced recently would look at the impact of government’s
          propensity to appoint only persons of a certain political
          organisation to public entities; if not, why not; if so, what are
          the further relevant details;


    (2)    whether the findings will be tabled in Parliament; if not, why
          not; if so, what are the relevant details;


    (3)    whether the review will involve an assessment of each individual
          state-owned entity; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
          details;


    (4)    why was the review of all state-owned entities not announced in
          his state of the nation address?         NO605E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Mr Speaker, as members would recall, the
Medium-Term Strategic Framework which we released last year states that we
should integrate state-owned enterprises into our planning processes and
improve the monitoring and evaluation of their performance.

With that in mind, we have decided to set up a two-pronged review of state-
owned enterprises, SOEs, which will culminate in a united government
position on the role of SOEs in supporting government’s developmental
agenda in the period ahead. The two processes are complementary and will
culminate in a single synthesised report for consideration and
decision–making by Cabinet.

The first part of the review will be internally undertaken in government
under the leadership and oversight of the Interministerial Committee, which
is co-chaired by Ministers Barbara Hogan and Pravin Gordhan.

Broadly, this part of the review should make recommendations on a number of
issues which include the following: One, how government can strengthen
alignment between its development objectives and the strategic role to be
played by SOEs in the economy in the period ahead; two, co-ordination of
infrastructure investment by SOEs to ensure that the country has the
capacity ahead of demand, ensuring that it is co-ordinated with the roll-
out of the required infrastructure; three, how to ensure an effective and
transparent regulatory process for SOEs; four, strategies for utilising SOE
investment as a means of localisation and industrial development;  and
lastly, the revival of the role of state-owned enterprises in skills
development and training.

The second part of the process will be undertaken by an independent panel
of experts assisting the Presidency and the interministerial task team. The
terms of reference are still being finalised. It is, however, envisaged
that this process will, amongst other issues, focus on reviewing current
governance arrangements relating to SOEs in South Africa; undertaking an
audit of current practices regarding planning and decision-making within
SOEs, as well as between SOEs and government; and undertaking a critical
assessment of the role SOEs have played in supporting government’s
development objectives.

The two complementary streams of work will be overseen and co-ordinated by
the Presidency. Once completed, the work will be submitted to the
Presidency for synthesis into a final report that will be presented to
Cabinet before its recommendations are adopted and implemented as
government policy.

In answering some of the specific questions raised by the hon Leader of the
Opposition I would say that, one, executives at state-owned enterprises are
appointed on merit; two, we have not yet considered the issue of the
tabling of the review in Parliament, but will do so once our initial
processes have been completed; and lastly, the main thrust of the state of
the nation address was to communicate the new outcomes approach and the new
way of doing things in government in order to speed up service delivery and
change the way government works. We did indicate as well that most of the
details of the work would be in departmental Budget Votes. I thank you.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, over the past decade the
departure of numerous less than competent CEOs from failing South African
parastatals has cost the South African taxpayer at least R262 million. The
government continues to implement its policy of cadre deployment in state-
owned enterprises, despite the fact that this policy has been identified as
negatively affecting service delivery at local government levels.

In this regard, a report from the Department of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs says, and I quote:
   The lack of values, principles or ethics in these cases indicates that
   there are officials and public representatives for whom public service is
   not a concern, but accruing of wealth at the expense of poor communities
   is their priority.


This is not different to state-owned enterprises. I would like the hon
President to tell this House whether he will ensure that cadre deployment
no longer results in the destabilisation of parastatals. Furthermore, could
the hon President tell this House whether he will ensure that the failure
of these enterprises is not used as a disingenuous reason to further
entrench state-centred control, especially if this is in contrast to the
recommendation of the independent panel that he referred to, as well as to
outcomes-related evaluations? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Mr Speaker, while the ANC has a cadre
deployment policy, it deploys capable people in positions, including people
who are not from the ANC. At one point we even deployed an American who
came and worked in these enterprises. However, even at that particular time
the situation did not indicate that we had an employee from the United
States who, as well as earning a lot of money, was deployed by the ANC. The
problems remained.

The ANC inherited these enterprises and they were not rosy. In the past
they had been very exclusively run by a very particular set of people in
this country. That’s part of the reason that we are doing the review. We
want to deal with a problem that we found there. This is a problem that has
been very difficult to resolve.

We will always ensure that people of merit are employed in any situation.
We are not going to exclude ANC people simply because they are cadres of
the ANC. [Applause.] We have said on numerous occasions that we are looking
at deployment in terms of merit, regardless of which party one belongs to.
I don’t think people should be punished or not be employed, because they
are ANC cadres.

In fact, in other democracies, if a new party comes into power, everybody
else is removed and the new party comes in with its own cadres. This
happens in democracies. [Applause.] One of those democracies is the United
States, one of the leading democracies in the world. As a new party comes
into power, others pack their bags and go. There is not even a debate about
it.

Let us discuss the issue of merit. What we should be doing is to persuade
government to employ people of merit. We should not be concerned about the
ANC deployment policy as we currently are. Not every person who is in
government is an ANC cadre. I think we must deal with this issue from that
point of view.

We agree on the fact that we need to employ people of merit. However, this
business of saying that the ANC must not have its own people working for
government, as if it is a rule in democracy, is false. We are, in fact, a
better democracy than others. In a democracy there is not one standard of
what happens with regard to public servants. That issue is very clear and
we should be clear about it. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs J D KILIAN: Mr Speaker, we need further supplementary questions.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, we have the following speakers: Mr B H Holomisa,
followed by Rev Meshoe, and the last speaker will be the hon Oriani-
Ambrosini.

Ms M P MENTOR: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: I am on the speaker’s list
and I pressed the button ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, please take your seat. You are not on my speaker’s
list. [Interjections.] I did say that the people I’m going to take are the
ones that appear on my screen, not on your screen. The people who appear on
my screen are the following: The hon Holomisa, the hon Meshoe and the hon
Oriani-Ambrosini.

Mnu B H HOLOMISA: Somlomo, siyamamkela uMongameli ekubuyeni kwakhe
eZimbabwe. Besisicinga ukuba uMongameli ebebalekiswa lolu bhukuqo-mbuso
beluzanywa apha yiCope kule veki iphelileyo. [Kwahlekwa.] Kodwa ke amajoni
akhe amkhusele apha kule veki iphelileyo. [Kwahlekwa.] (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Mr B H HOLOMISA: Hon Speaker, we welcome back the hon President from his
visit to Zimbabwe. We thought that the hon President was running away from
the attempted coup by members of Cope last week. [Laughter.] However, his
soldiers protected him. [Laughter.]]

My question to the hon President is whether he agrees that the insistence
on appointing or deploying ANC cadres to parastatals or obliging investors
to team up with ANC-aligned companies will affect investor confidence and
create the image that the state is corrupt.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Mr Speaker, I think I have just dealt with
the issue of ANC deployment policy. I think if ANC people are able to show
merit, they should be employed as well. With regard to companies that come
to invest, they are encouraged to find local partners. Those partners could
come from the UDM; they could come from anywhere. I also don’t think it
says ANC people must not be party to that simply because they are members
of the ANC.

Once one has been in charge as government or as the ruling party, the ANC,
and he or she then interferes in that process, then – if there is
information to that effect – that would suggest that one is engaged in
corrupt activities. I would imagine they are all encouraged to look around.
People are looking around for such opportunities from the inside. All South
Africans have a right to do so.

However, if we have somebody who tells a company that is coming to invest
here to partner with a particular person and not others, then that’s
corruption. I would agree with the hon member that that is not a good
practice and it should not be encouraged. Everybody should have an equal
opportunity to participate; not because he or she belongs to a particular
party. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Mr Speaker, the ACDP supports the decision of the hon
President to appoint a team drawn from outside Cabinet to review the state-
owned entities that have been plagued by leadership and financial crises.

What we would like to know is whether this company has tendered for the
contract and how many other companies were interested in doing the job.
Furthermore, we would like to know what the estimated cost of the review is
as it has been reported in the media that the President has indeed
appointed a company.
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Mr Speaker, my response to the hon member is
that I have not appointed any company to do this job. Furthermore, I did
not do this by announcing that there is a job that needs to be done and,
therefore, we need companies to apply in order to go through the tendering
processes; not at all.

I have said I will appoint, as a President authorised by the Constitution,
a group of people or a commission to do this job.

I’m very clear that I want to do this review in an effective manner and not
based on who comes forward and says he or she has the skills. I have not
yet done so; I’m in the process of doing so. I am currently working on the
terms of reference.

The final leg of this process will be people outside of government. Yet
again, I have decided as such because I did not want the government to do
this kind of work on its own or by itself. I believe that this will ensure
that there is a balance, as well as there being people who could be more
objective rather than subjective.

However, government’s participation, in the form of the information that
will be in the basket for the scrutiny of those specialists, is very
important. So, it’s not companies which will be doing the job; I will do
the appointment. Thank you. [Applause.]
Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr Speaker, we praise the President for the
initiative. However, we would like to express a concern that while this
initiative will be taking place, the status quo will be frozen.

The question is: How do we explain to people in rural areas that resources
meant for them are going to be frozen in order, for instance, to spend
R2 billion worth of guarantees for Denel? These are guarantees for
obligations that no commercial entity would back. Also, how do we justify
that this Parliament cannot have sight of the secret contracts between
Eskom and the aluminium smelters for very special prices, which again takes
away resources from those who need them?

Isn’t there a replacement or urgent political action which the President
and the Minister could take now on matters, such as cutting Denel loose
from the financial purse of the state?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Mr Speaker, I’m very sorry; I’m not sure
whether I understood the question very well. [Laughter.] I might not answer
correctly. I couldn’t get it clearly. Could the hon member repeat it for
me? I’m trying to ...

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr Speaker, in terms of the rules on
clarification, I will repeat the question again. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Let’s hear the question.

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr Speaker, pending the review, Denel, our arms
manufacturer, which is at a perpetual loss, is going to receive R2 billion
worth of guarantees which no commercial bank would extend to it. Pending
the review, Sasol is giving electricity away at very cheap prices in terms
of a secret contract that this Parliament cannot have sight of with the
aluminium smelters.

In light of these points, what explanation can people like us give to
people in rural areas and those who will suffer regarding the loss of
resources, otherwise available, to attend to their needs by the state?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Mr Speaker, I have now clearly heard the
question. I think, hon member, that’s precisely the reason that we are
doing a review. We want to deal with those kinds of problems. We are not
saying that because we are starting a review, everything must come to a
standstill. These SOEs have been working and they are continuing to work.
We are going to be reviewing them as we proceed with everything else. We
can’t stop business because we are doing a review.

It is the review and recommendations that are going to help us to deal with
such issues; if those are indeed existent problems. We can’t pre-empt the
very task we are giving to those who must do the review. We want
recommendations.

There has been a lot of debate about such issues in the past. We are just
saying that we must bring closure to that and, therefore, we must do a
review. In the end, we will be able to take the kinds of decisions that
will satisfy all of us in terms of the manner in which the SOEs are
operating. Thank you.

   Query regarding awarding of building projects to a certain company and
               steps to ensure transparency of tender process

3.    Ms A Mda (Cope) asked the President of the Republic:

    (1)    Whether, in view of problems surrounding service delivery by
          local government, he has called for an investigation into
          allegations that several municipalities in Limpopo province
          awarded contracts exceeding R140 million to a certain company
          (name furnished); if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
          details;


    (2)    whether he has been informed that building projects awarded to
          the said company by the province and certain local governments of
          Limpopo were not completed or collapsed; if so, what are the
          relevant details;


    (3)    whether he will instruct the Interministerial Committee on
          Corruption to take urgent steps to ensure transparency of the
          tender process so that communities can know who applied for a
          tender, who had been appointed and why the tender was awarded to
          a specific company; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
          details?                                                  NO720E

The SPEAKER: Hon members, before the President answers Question 3 asked by
the hon A Mda, I would like to restate what I said earlier, namely that a
maximum of four supplementary questions are allowed. The member who put the
original question gets the first opportunity to ask a supplementary
question. The other three questions I take are the ones that appear on my
screen. [Laughter.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Mr Speaker, one of the key priorities of
this government is to fight crime and corruption. Since the fourth
democratic administration took office in May last year, there have been
numerous examples of actions taken in pursuance of this priority. It is
essential that all cases are swiftly, thoroughly and impartially dealt
with.

Hon members will appreciate that it is not appropriate for the relevant
agencies to announce the details of any cases before investigations are
completed. It is important not to prejudice the cases or to undermine the
rights of the people concerned. If any member of this House or, indeed, any
member of the public has information that would assist in the investigation
of any alleged corrupt activity, they are urged to provide that information
to the relevant authorities.

I have not been informed of the said building projects relating to the
company referred to. The Interministerial Committee on Corruption will, as
part of its mandate, look at ways and means of improving tender processes
where necessary. It will consider the work flowing from the Multi-agency
Initiative on Supply Chain Management which is led by the National
Treasury.

Should there be areas that are identified that suggest a lack of
transparency in the procurement processes in government, these will surely
be attended to. It must be noted, however, that the problem with tender
fraud does not generally arise out of a lack of transparency, but from
noncompliance with otherwise transparent policies. All the recommendations
from the team led by the National Treasury will be considered and decided
upon. I thank you.

Ms A MDA: Mr Speaker, while I fully agree with the President that there are
issues of compliance – like the ones that we are talking about now, which
have been breached – section 217 of the Constitution stipulates clearly
that contracts for goods and services must be fair, equitable, transparent,
competitive and cost-effective.

This was not the case in the SGL Engineering Projects tenders. Noting that
this was not the case, would the President inform us how he will attend to
this matter, if, upon investigation, it comes to a point that compliance
and the Constitution itself have been breached in this matter.

I would assume that the President, as a custodian of that Constitution, is
duty-bound to take this matter as seriously as he committed himself to
doing during his state of the nation address last year, and that this year
he will root out and fight corruption up to its end. I still count on your
word. Thank you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Mr Speaker, certainly I will act where there
is corruption. I repeat that. However, I will act with regard to the
information before me. I think if there is concrete information of what has
happened, let it come to government. We have a lot of agencies to act on
and deal with the matter. If the matter is dealt with in the media and
accusations are made while we don’t have concrete information, it’s going
to be difficult to investigate allegations that are not concretely
presented.

For example, I don’t have the details of what happened to this tender that
the hon member is talking about. Is what has been alleged true? Those who
have the information should bring forward the information in order for the
matter to be investigated. I think it would be very important that somebody
supplies that information. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, the second supplementary question will be asked
by the hon Mentor, the third by the hon Holomisa, and the fourth will be
asked by the hon Doman.

Ms M P MENTOR: Mr Speaker, my question was related to state-owned
enterprises, SOEs. I thank you very much for the opportunity, but I will
not ask a follow-up question. Thank you.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Mr President, seeing that your staff have let you down in
collecting the evidence which would have helped you to answer this
question, I would like to request you to ask them to provide tax clearance
certificates or, rather, let me put it the following way:

Babuze ukuba ingaba le nkampani iyisikwa na isiqinisekiso sokubamsulwa
ngokubhekisele kwirhafu. Ndiyamxhobisa kuba uphoxwe ngabasebenzi bakhe.
Fundani umbuzo lo. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Ask as to whether this company does receive tax clearance certificates. I
am equipping him because he has been disappointed by his employees. Read
the question.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

Mnu B H HOLOMISA: Ngoko ke sicela ukuba ubathume, ubaxelele ukuba bajonge
ukuba ingaba inaso kusini na isiqinisekiso sokuba msulwa ngokubhekiselele
kwirhafu. [Laphela ixesha.]

UMONGAMELI WESIZWE: Somlomo, ndicinga ukuba le nto isabuyela kwakulaa nto
bendiyithethile ukuba maluze ngaphambili olu lwazi. Ukuba bendinokuthi
ndithumele abasebenzi bam rhoqo xa kuthe kwathethwa nokuba yintoni nokuba
kuphi na ngamaphepha, loo nto ingathetha ukuba bangaligqiba lonke eli lizwe
behamba befunana namahem-hem. [Kwahlekwa.] Maluze ulwazi olucacileyo;
ndakululandela kwaye ndiluphande xa luzile. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr B H HOLOMISA: Therefore we request you to send them and tell them to
ascertain whether it has tax clearance certificates or not. [Time expired.]


The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, I think this goes back to what I
said earlier, that this information must be brought forward. If I were to
ask my officials to make a follow-up each and every time things are
mentioned in the newspapers, then that would mean they would have to travel
throughout the country chasing rumours. [Laughter.] Clear information must
be brought to the fore and I will do a follow-up and investigate. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, the next speaker on my list is the hon Doman. The
hon Mentor didn’t take her slot; it will now go to the hon Swart.

Mr W P DOMAN: Mr Speaker, Mr President, the failure of this company has
dealt a serious blow to service delivery in the Limpopo province. One of
our committees last week stood at the bridge in the North West province
that was left incomplete. Therefore, we as the DA, request that government
does a full investigation into these allegations that the ANC Youth League
president Julius Malema and partners irregularly acquired substantial local
government tenders in Limpopo.

A full investigation will yield the facts and will clear up the matter.
This matter is an opportunity to clearly demonstrate that no one is above
the law. A full investigation is necessary because the whole country, and
especially the poor in that province, wants to know why this company, SGL
Engineering Projects, didn’t properly deliver.

Also, we would like to know the extra costs that that province has now
incurred in order to deal with all the incomplete work. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Mr Speaker, in addition to the public
allegations, which the person we are referring to has denied, all we are
requesting is concrete information. I’m not certain that we, as government,
can follow every story in the newspapers – just every story.

I’m saying: Let somebody provide us with concrete information. The
newspapers don’t say: Here is the matter and as this newspaper I’m saying
“X, Y, Z”. They give the story for everybody to read. The story could be
put in any other way. Other people deny the facts.

Somebody has to go to the police with a case and urge the police to deal
with it. The point I’m making is: If the issue is of so much concern, why
aren’t we provided with the information that people have? Receipt of that
information will then compel us to undertake the investigation. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Mr Speaker, arising from the hon President’s response, the
Minister of Finance announced during the Budget Speech that a major site of
both wastage and inefficiency is in our procurement system. He went on to
say that even where there is absolutely no corruption, we sometimes give
contracts to people who cannot implement them.

The Minister of Finance also said that greater transparency and
accountability in procurement systems will be a key focus of reform in the
period ahead. The ACDP clearly supports this, and the President alluded to
the steps that would be taken in this regard with the Interministerial
Committee on Corruption.

Now, generally speaking, when one has shoddy workmanship or incomplete
building projects and the results are collapses, leaking houses and
schools, or crumbling roads and bridges, one has legal recourses to take
against those companies. Would the hon President give an indication that
where this occurs, the state will take legal action to recover damages and
repair those deficiencies, particularly given the budgetary constraints and
service-delivery protests that we are faced with? Thank you.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Mr Speaker, as the hon member and all the
speakers who are very keen on this one have said, this happened in Limpopo.
I’m sure the provincial government, in terms of the normal activities of
government, will deal with this matter if it is a problem.

The point I’m making is that if hon members say the President should
investigate this as a specific issue, then hon members should provide
information to help us to do so. Why are hon members having difficulty in
helping us? Thank you. [Interjections.]

Mrs J D KILIAN: Speaker, on a point of order: Before we move to the next
question, can I just make sure that the National Assembly Table clears the
waiting list on your screen, so that we start on a clean slate.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I’m looking at the screen and it’s clear right
now. I’m not sure what your screen looks like. Mine is very clear.
[Laughter.]

Mrs J D KILIAN: Speaker, I asked because we all know that, by your own
admission, hon member Ms Mentor admitted that she actually wanted to ask a
follow-up question on the previous question.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, we are not discussing Ms Mentor; we are discussing
the questions here.

  Effectiveness of measures contained in Framework Agreement in protecting
                 citizens worst affected by economic crisis

4.    Ms Z S Dubazana (ANC) asked the President of the Republic:

    To what extent did the measures contained in the Framework Agreement
    that was announced in 2009 succeed in providing a safety net for
    citizens who were worst affected by the impact of the global economic
    crisis?                                  NO762E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker and hon members, the Framework
Agreement that was concluded a year ago between government and our social
partners has provided relief for many citizens who have been affected by
the global economic crisis. The measures that have been introduced include
the following. In February 2009 government announced that there was an
amount of R87 billion for infrastructure programmes. This was increased to
R846 billion in the 2010 Budget Speech. Through the Expanded Public Works
Programme and other associated measures, many have been able to obtain work
opportunities.

You will be aware that South Africa introduced its first ever Training Lay-
off Scheme, with R2,9 billion being made available for its implementation.
The scheme is aimed at providing companies with an alternative to the
retrenchment of workers during a period of industrial slack caused by the
recession in order to enable employees to continue having an income,
employment security and skills acquisition.

This scheme has been actively promoted as an alternative to retrenchment.
The Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration, the CCMA,
incorporated the Training Lay-off Scheme into a holistic approach in order
to prevent job losses. In total, 15 000 jobs have been saved since the
scheme was introduced.

Another key intervention includes R6,1 billion set aside by the Industrial
Development Corporation, the IDC, in the form of special loans for firms in
distress, and R2 billion has been allocated by the Unemployment Insurance
Fund, the UIF, to the IDC to be loaned to firms in distress.

Partners also approved development sector packages through the National
Economic Development and Labour Council, Nedlac, for industries in
distress, such as the automobile, clothing and textile industries, and the
capital equipment, transport equipment and metal fabrication sectors.

The Framework Agreement Leadership Group also agreed to strict conditions
for businesses that use state funding in order to prevent abuse. The
conditions include constraints in relation to executive pay, restrictions
on retrenchment, commitment to local procurement and social dialogue
between labour and business at the workplace.

In a move to further save jobs, the SA Revenue Service seized 750 tons of
clothing and textile products that had been smuggled into the country from
raids on 88 premises. These were conducted as part of a nationwide
enforcement initiative. An estimated 1 400 jobs have been saved as a result
of these actions.

As a key poverty alleviation measure, the child support grant is now being
extended to children up to the age of 18 years. Children over the age of 15
years who receive the child support grant are expected to be at school or
college, and measures will be taken to monitor this. Thank you, hon
Speaker. [Applause.]

Ms Z S DUBAZANA: Hon Speaker and His Excellency, your reply was quite
informative and educational. However, the ANC would like to know from the
hon President how these measures are going to be monitored, so as to ensure
the effective implementation of these stimulus packages. Thank you, hon
Speaker.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon member, in my response to the question I
did indicate what measures are going to be taken to ensure that we monitor
this. I even said that at some point we would take very strict measures to
ensure they are not abused, so that is going to be done through the system
of the same partnership that we establish together. Thank you, hon Speaker.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Which Swart is this? Is it hon M Swart?

Mr M SWART: Ja, dit is die “swart gevaar”. [Gelag.] [Yes, it is the “swart
gevaar”. [Laughter.]]

Mr M SWART: Hon President, in the progress report addressed to you in
respect of the Framework Agreement with regard to measures undertaken to
improve infrastructure investment, the following statement was made:

  The government has recognised that corruption reduces the impact of
  public programmes, contributes to higher than necessary costs and may
  also result in poor quality work, which requires construction to be
  redone.


All parties are committed to rooting out corruption. My question to you, Mr
President, is that contracts for infrastructure work in Limpopo were
granted to companies of Mr Julius Malema, where he is a director, and where
work done by him will have to be redone owing to the collapse of a bridge.
Will the increased costs incurred be investigated by the government? If
not, why not? And if so, when?

And I want to know whether this company owes money to any other company.
Also, there are many default companies that will be placed on the tender
register to disqualify them from future tenders, so will such companies be
required to pay damages?

It is simply not good enough to say that we must bring the evidence to
light, because it is the government’s responsibility to investigate, since
it is the government that awarded the contracts. [Interjections.] Thank
you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, with regard to the question of
poor workmanship, the government has been acting. If there is a bridge that
has fallen down, I am sure that action will be taken. There is no doubt
about it. Those companies have been taken to task. This company’s results
were in very specific areas that have certainly been reported on, and I am
sure that by now the government in the province will have taken action.

Mr S N SWART: Hon Speaker, this is a case of “pikswart” as opposed to
“swart gevaar”. [Applause.] Arising from your response, hon President, it
is clear that the Framework Agreement wasn’t an entirely unnecessary
response to the global economic crisis and clearly the ACDP supports that
framework, particularly the notion of the social pact between government,
business and labour. However, it is crucial, as you pointed out, that the
action plan is implemented and monitored, and we were encouraged yesterday
to learn during the Economic Development Budget Vote that the primary phase
of the Training Lay-off Scheme will be rolled out more actively.

However, we as the ACDP were concerned to learn that certain companies in
distress were unaware of the Training Lay-off Scheme. This followed an
oversight visit by MPs. Is there, hon President, sufficient public
awareness around the interventions, such as the Training Lay-off Scheme? Is
there further action that one can take to make companies that are in
distress aware of the interventions that can assist in preventing further
job losses? Thank you, hon President.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I believe that there was
sufficient publicity on this matter and if there were companies that were
not aware, it is just unfortunate. We announced this in public more than
once – at the level of the President as well as in the department and
Nedlac.

I am sure those companies that are not aware, must have very poor listening
devices to not hear what is happening out there. If they were in trouble,
really looking for something, they would have been aware. It was a public
matter that was discussed many times.

Here in this Parliament, questions were asked, as they are being asked
today, and responded to. I don’t know what else to do, but of course, once
we become aware as Members of Parliament, we should help to tell these
companies. Certainly, we will help to provide information.
Ms C M P KOTSI: Hon Speaker, during the state of the nation address in
2009, Mr President, you promised the poor and the most vulnerable that half
a million jobs would be created for them by the end of the year. The
Framework Agreement stands on two main pillars: To protect and to expand
decent work.

Why then were a million jobs lost during the same period and why, even as
we speak today, was intervention not done? Are your Ministers failing you
or perhaps not giving you reports as to whether they have done what you
have actually asked them to do, Mr President? [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, I think on the jobs that we
promised we gave a report here, and it was very clear as to what happened.
I don’t think we need to go back to that. Owing to the recession, all
companies in all countries suffered job losses.

What I have just talked about here is what we did as a country in a joint
agreement to save jobs, and I have indicated the jobs that we saved. This
does not mean that there were not jobs lost, and I think we all saw that
issue become public, in that we lost more than 900 000 jobs, probably more
than a million. It was because of the situation that faced all of us.

Under the circumstances, we did our best. Many countries have been saying
South Africa was able to face this crisis in a very unique fashion. No
other country was able to do so. I don’t think that we could have done
otherwise. We did what we could do. Thank you. [Applause.]

 Particulars regarding consideration of applications for pardon and reasons
                     for refusal of certain applications

5.    Mr J H van der Merwe (IFP) asked the President of the Republic:


    (1)    In respect of his refusal of 230 applications for pardon and 154
          pending outcomes of the 384 applications that were made to him in
          terms of section 84(2)(j) of the Constitution, what are the
          reasons for the refusal of each of the applications;


    (2)    whether he has called for any additional information and/or
          documents other than the information contained in the
          applications themselves to assist him to exercise his powers to
          grant or refuse pardon; if not, why did he refuse the offer of
          additional information by the applicants’ attorney; if so, what
          information and documents were placed before him to enable him to
          exercise his power in each of the applications?     NO758E
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, as the hon Van der Merwe
correctly stated, section 84(2)(j) of the Constitution of the Republic of
South Africa states that the President is responsible for “pardoning or
reprieving offenders and remitting any fines, penalties or forfeitures”.

This is a power that has its origins in the prerogative powers of the
English monarch, but those powers are exercised by the presidents of many
countries, for example the United States of America, the Russian
Federation, France, Italy and Ireland.

As the hon Van der Merwe is aware, this is a power exercised by the
President as head of state and not as head of the executive. The
Constitutional Court has held that this is a power that flows directly from
the Constitution itself and, unlike the other powers of the President “they
do not derive their authority from and are not dependent on legislative
enactments”.

The Constitutional Court has also found that the pardoning power “is not a
private act of grace” in the sense that the pardoning power in a monarchy
may be.

   The court held that –

      It is a recognition ... that a power should be granted to the
      President to determine when in his view the public welfare will be
      better served by granting a remission of sentence or some other form
      of pardon.

Lastly, whilst this power is not constrained by any legislation, the
Constitutional Court has made it clear that any conduct by the President in
exercising his or her pardoning powers that undermines any provision of the
Constitution is reviewable.

With regard to the applications that the hon Van der Merwe has  referred
to, I considered each application individually, on its merits.

I took into account all the information and documentation supplied by each
of the applicants, many of whom were represented by the hon Van der Merwe’s
law firm.

I also considered all other relevant factors and information, including
advice and recommendations from my advisers and other relevant officials.

I concluded that 230 of the applications for pardons should not be
granted. I do not at this stage intend to supply reasons for my decisions.
I shall do so at a later stage, should it become necessary.

I will consider the remaining 154 applications at the same time that I work
on the applications considered by the Multiparty Reference Group set up by
former President Mbeki. I thank you, hon Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr Speaker, I am speaking on behalf of Mr Van der
Merwe. He sends his apologies to you and the President as he is undergoing
an operation.

The SPEAKER: Go ahead, hon member.

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr President, although this is a presidential
power, we are less inclined to accept that the President does not need to
motivate in this regard, and we will take the matter further in terms of
section 5 of the Promotion of Administrative Justice Act, which requires
all actions to be motivated in writing.

Beyond the legalities is a long process, Mr President, which really begins,
inter alia, with all your initiatives. It is the process of catching and
solving that which the Democratic Republic of the Congo process could not
accommodate, rightly or wrongly. It is a process that arises with regard to
the unsolved unexplored aspects of the black-on-black conflict in KwaZulu-
Natal.

So, the question, Mr President, is: How do we complete this process beyond
the legalities? It is something which remains open in the records of
history and since this has taken ... [Interjections.] ... perhaps you can
tell us how we can complete it. [Time expired.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I am dealing with the issue as
it came to me legally and I am responding to it on a legal basis. How could
it be tackled differently? It is a matter that needs all of us, not just a
single person. You even head a multiparty group that was supposed to help
in this regard. I am sure that when we complete all the legal things, we
might have to adopt different ways of solving this problem. I don’t think I
could provide the answer on my own. As you know, these issues occurred
between parties, therefore they will need parties to talk about them.

When people are in prison, they need government interference, but if we
want a political solution, then I am sure people will have to discuss that
against the background of the information before them. We could generalise
the issue – that it was political violence, etc. The provision was made
that those who were serving and who undertook this, should then apply.
That’s what we are dealing with. It has to be legal and that’s what we are
responding to, not the political processes.

I don’t think I would be able to answer your question on what must be done,
because I don’t have all the answers. I am sure it needs all of us to come
up with a solution to deal with the matter. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J SELFE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thanks to the hon President for his
very comprehensive reply. I am sure that the President would agree that he
has the power as head of state to grant pardons, and while this might
advance the public benefit, it also has the potential to undermine the rule
of law and the authority of the courts. This is particularly true if the
person being pardoned is very controversial.

Mr Speaker, the President was quoted on 2 March 2009 as saying that he
would consider granting a pardon to his former financial adviser Mr Schabir
Shaik. I want to know whether the President will give the House the
assurance that he will not grant Mr Schabir Shaik a pardon.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I don’t know why we should deal
with this pardon before it comes to the President. Why should we? What we
said is that any pardon that comes before me, depending on the
circumstances and information of any prisoner, comes with supporting
information that the particular person must be released.

If the person qualifies to be released in terms of the information given,
why is that person not released? Is it because he is so-and-so? That was a
question I was answering at the time when this was posed to me, that you
can’t deprive a person of a pardon if there is sufficient evidence just
because that person is so-and-so. I said: If there was sufficient evidence,
why shouldn’t the person be released? I am referring to anyone, not
specifically to Schabir Shaik.

We should not prejudge issues. It is unfair even to the individuals,
because we begin to influence anyone who is going to be looking at this
issue by debating the issue of a person before it comes up for discussion.
Let the matter come before the President and the President will exercise
his powers according to the Constitution, not according to who the person
is or in front of whom he is appearing. [Applause.]

Mr D A KGANARE: Hon Speaker and hon President, while section 84(2)(j) of
the Constitution certainly gives the President the responsibility for
“pardoning or reprieving offenders and remitting any fines, penalties or
forfeitures”, I believe that this is a responsibility that should go with
the President having to properly apply his mind and serve the course of
justice.

Would the President indicate whether he sees it as his responsibility to
pardon his friend Schabir Shaik and, in order to make it palatable to the
people of South Africa, then link this pardon to those of prime evil
people, such as Eugene de Kock, and the murderers of Chris Hani, namely
Janusz Walus and Clive Derby-Lewis, to serve as a diversion? What
interpretation does the hon President give to this responsibility?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, I have just answered the
Schabir Shaik question. Really I did. I don’t see why I should repeat it.
The hon member should have said that his question had been answered.
Absolutely. [Laughter.] I don’t think I should repeat it. [Applause.]

Nom J B SIBANYONI: Somlomo ohloniphekileko noMongameli, kwamambala indlela
ophendule ngayo iyazwakala begodu iyathokozisa. Ilandelela yombuzo wami
nginasi, ngiyayidzubhula: (Translation of isiNdebele paragraph follows.)

[Mr J B SIBANYONI: Hon Speaker and President, the way you responded to the
question is clear and I’m satisfied. My follow-up question is as follows:]

If the 230 applications were successful, bearing in mind that they didn’t
qualify under the special dispensation, would their release have
contributed to any unity or reconciliation in our country?

Concerning the second part of the question, when the President disposed of
the cases – the 230 applications – had the Constitutional Court already
delivered its judgment, or was it before the Constitutional Court delivered
its judgment? Thank you, Speaker.

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: There are cases I dealt with and others I
didn’t, precisely because the court still had to pronounce on some of them.
Therefore, they had not necessarily been dealt with at that time.

Supposing we were to grant all people ... You know that there was violence
for many years and that those people were in prison and served their
sentences.

As to the question as to whether that would have contributed to unity, I
can’t give a definite answer. We solved the question of violence. There is
no violence now. We are now living in peace. If you were to ask that
question, it would be as if there were still some problems.

There are no problems now. Matters were settled, and I am sure if they
qualified they would have been released. Their families and their parties
would have been very happy as well, because they would not have to come
back and do the work.

I don’t think it will make the impact that you are talking about. It would
just be a normal kind of reunion with their families and their parties, and
we would continue as we are. Thank you. [Applause.]

     Particulars regarding ambit of proposed national debate on morality

6.    Mrs P de Lille (ID) asked the President of the Republic:


    Whether the national debate on morality (details furnished) that he
    called for will include the morality of persons in and connected to the
    Government benefiting financially from tenders; if not, why not; if so,
    what are the relevant details?
           NO750E

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, our Constitution promotes the
concept of unity and diversity and encourages us to be tolerant and to
respect one another’s cultures, languages, religions and other
distinctions.

I intend to initiate a national debate on morality, so that we can better
appreciate the values that are shared across the diversity of our cultures.
It is an opportunity also to understand those practices and values that are
peculiar to certain cultures. The content of the debate and the matters
that would be raised during the course of the debate will depend on what is
important to the people of this country.

In my view, any discussion of a nation’s morality should also promote a
culture of adherence to the rule of law, and should strongly condemn the
abuse of power in any form, something which we as government promote.

We should also promote a culture of honesty and integrity in all spheres of
society. Therefore, the principle we should establish is that no person
should be able to derive undue financial benefits from the state, by virtue
of the public position they occupy. This applies to elected public
representatives and members of the Public Service.

This has been the principle that has guided our efforts over the past 16
years, through legislation and regulations, to prevent the abuse of public
funds. We continually examine these measures, and where there are
shortcomings, we take steps to address them.

We should be cautious, however, that our efforts to strengthen these
provisions do not inadvertently undermine the rights of any citizen to
engage in legitimate business activities, including with the state.

We must also be careful not to make sweeping statements that place
legitimate business activities in the same basket as those that may be
unlawful or unethical. I am certain that in the course of this debate, such
distinctions will become clearer, and we will be better equipped as a
nation to promote behaviour that we can all agree is ethical and proper.

What has been the problem is that some seem to regard their cultural belief
as the only one that is correct, and tend to use this to judge others and
impose their value system on them. Where do they get this authority to
judge others? Therefore, we need a common conversation to arrive at a
commonly shared determination. I thank you, Speaker.

Mrs P DE LILLE: Speaker and hon President, the reason why we are suggesting
that these issues must be included in that debate, is that normally the
response by the ANC, in the case of Chancellor House where they are
benefiting directly from the increase in electricity prices, is that it is
legal.

The other response is that when the Minister benefits from state
enterprises, it’s legal; when Ministers overspend on accommodation and
cars, it’s legal.

Now, let me tell you why it is not illegal. It is because the ANC refuses
to live up to its promise to the High Court in Cape Town five years ago,
when it said it would enact legislation that would regulate party-political
funding. The ANC also refuses to implement its own Polokwane resolution, Mr
President. The ANC also refuses to support an ID motion that has been
before this Parliament for almost two years now.

Now, your debate on morality, Mr President, will be stillborn if we
continue to have one set of ethics and morals for political leaders and
another set for the rest of South Africa. My question is: Are you prepared
to instruct the ANC to enact legislation that will make all of this dubious
behaviour illegal? Thank you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, I think the hon speaker has, in
fact, raised the important point that the matters that she has referred to
are not illegal.

It is precisely for that reason that we say: Let us have a debate so that
we can ascertain what it is that we all agree are the correct things to do,
as South Africans, and what are not the correct things to do. If it suits
somebody, then people stand up and condemn others, and if it doesn’t suit
them, they don’t do so.

That will include, of course – once the discussions have taken place –
whether people think we need legislation and if legislation is a result of
what has happened before. I don’t think we should stop doing so. However,
let us clarify our minds as South Africans. What is it that we think is
right? What is it that we think is wrong?

I think that the very debate I am talking about will even help to deal with
those issues. I think that’s what I am saying. Thank you.

Mr T BOTHA: President, political morality would suggest that it is
incorrect for the ruling party to be a player and a referee in determining
the quality of services and the tariff levels whilst, at the same time,
being a beneficiary of such interventions, as is the case with Eskom and
Hitachi.

Would the President not agree that a combination of these practices and the
continued irregular awarding of contracts to senior party politicians,
including members of the executive, are morally wrong and tantamount to
corruption? What action would the President take in this regard?

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, I think the hon member’s question
is almost in the same vein as the last question I answered. He is going to
get an opportunity to raise the issues in the debate and then say what
needs to be done, so that we establish the standards and a platform from
which all of us can agree that if one does this, then one is doing the
wrong thing.

This is because you can’t have a practice that has no regulation and no law
and, once it is done, you then say it is corruption or tantamount to
corruption. You are judging it on what basis? And this is what I am saying:
We need to establish this as a country. You will contribute to the debate.
The debate is coming.

Mr B W DHLAMINI: Speaker ...

... Mhlonishwa Mongameli, kuyiqiniso ukuthi umzabalazo wethu abanye
bawubiza ngokuthi umzabalazo womhlaba wonke “internationalised”. Endleleni
yokulwela inkululeko sahamba sicoshacosha imithetho yobuqotho “values”
neyokuziphatha “morals”. Okunye okungokwethu sakulahla kangangokuthi ezinye
zezinto eziwubu-Afrika uma uzihlanganisa nezinto zaseNtshonalanga
kubasengathi ubugebengu.

Njengokuthi nje uma uNxamalala edlula KwaPhindangene, bese kuthi inkosi
yakwaButhelezi imhlabise imvu, yisintu leso kithi. Kodwa ngokwemithetho
yobuqotho yaseNtshonalanga, sekufanele umemezele, ubike ngoba kuzobakhona
ukusoleka, kubesengathi kukhona okunuka santungwana.

Siyazibuza–ke ukuthi kule nkulumompikiswano yokuvuselelwa kwezimilo kukhona
yini esizokucosha okuyimithetho yobuqotho neyokuziphatha ezokwazi ukuthatha
okwase-Afrika, ngoba phela singama-Afrika asibona abantu baseNtshonalanga.
Sizithola sisenkingeni nje ngoba ezinye zezindlela esiqhuba ngayo izinto
akuzona ezalapha ekhaya kodwa sizebolekile. Ngiyathokoza (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... hon President, it is true that our struggle for freedom is a struggle
of the whole world and is referred to by others as an internationalised
struggle. Whilst we were in the struggle for freedom, we adopted some ways
of life, namely values and morals. And in the process we discarded some of
our values in the sense that if you bring together some of our African
values and  Western ones, the results become criminalised.

For example, if Nxamalala pays a visit to the KwaPhindangene household, and
then the iNkosi of the Buthelezi clan slaughters a sheep as a welcome
gesture, to us that is humanity. However, according to Western values, this
should be declared in public because there will be some suspicions as if
there is something fishy about it.

Therefore, we ask ourselves whether, in this debate on moral regeneration,
there might be any values or morals which we can adapt to those of African
origin, because we are, in fact, Africans and not Western people. We find
ourselves in trouble today just because we deal with certain issues, which
are not ours, in a foreign manner. Thank you.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker ...

... isikhulumi esihloniphekile, sesiyiphendule ngokwaso inkulumo. Enye
yezinto edala ukuthi sithi akube khona ingxoxo yikho lokho - ukuthi
kunezinto ezingamasiko ezenziwa abantu abathile, kanti kukhona abathile
abazibukela phansi nabacabanga ukuthi uma uzenza usuke ukhohlakele. Kodwa
ube ungakhohlakele ngokosiko lwakini. Yikho phela lokhu engikushoyo ukuthi
asiyivuleni le ngxoxo ixoxwe le ndaba. Kufanele ukuthi abantu baphefumule
basho ukuthi bathini ngalolu daba. Lokhu sikwenzela ukuthi kulungiswe
izinto.

Ingabe siyokuhlonipha nini ukuthi uMthethosisekelo wethu uthi siyisizwe
esibumbene kodwa esinamasiko nezinto zethu esizenzayo eziyimikhuba yethu
ezahlukahlukene? Ngoba sifuna kuhlonishwe okunye, okunye kungahlonishwa.

Le ngxoxo-ke engithi ayibe khona phakathi kwesizwe, ayiveze lezo zinto.
Bezwakale abakwaDlamini ukuthi eyabo imikhuba ithini, nokuthi iyahlonishwa
yini? Uma ngabe ingahlonishwa, kungani ingahlonishwa? Kungani kuhlonishwa
eyakwaSwart? Uyayibona into enjalo nje. Kungani kuhlonishwa eyakwaSingh?
Usukhulumile Sibalukhulu, ngikuzwa kahle, ngena engxoxweni zivele lezi
zinto. Ngiyabonga Somlomo. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... the hon speaker has already responded to the debate. That is another
factor which is the reason for our call to have this moral regeneration
debate – that there are some things which are practised as common customs
by people, whilst there are other people who look down upon them and think
that they are immoral when they perform these customs, even though they
would not be regarded as being immoral in their own culture. That is why I
am saying we should open this debate and discuss this issue. People need to
air their views about this issue. We are doing this to correct issues.

When will we respect the fact that our Constitution states that we are a
nation united in diversity, with diverse cultures and customs that are
performed differently? I am saying this because we want some people’s
cultures and customs to be respected, but not those of others.

The debate I want the nation to engage in should then highlight such
issues. Let us hear the Dlaminis tell us about their customs and whether
those customs are respected. And if not, why are they not respected? Why do
we respect the Swarts’ cultures and customs? You see such things. Why do we
respect the Singhs’ cultures and customs? You have said a mouthful,
Sibalukhulu, I get you. Get into the debate and highlight these issues.
Thank you, hon Speaker.]

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: Mr Speaker, given some of the facts – the revelations –
that we have discussed in the House here today about political leaders and
members of the executive who have been entrusted with the responsibility of
delivering services and opportunities to the people of this country, but
who have instead used their political connections for the purpose of
personal enrichment, would the hon President concede that this government,
and in fact any government, is the last body that should control, seek to
dictate and influence people’s so-called morality?

State-led efforts to control what citizens think and believe in the privacy
of their own homes are the preserve, actually, of authoritarian
governments.

Has the hon President, in fact, only made this call for a national debate
on morality as a direct consequence of the negative public reaction to
certain revelations about his personal life? If not, why not; and if so,
what are the relevant details?

Finally, does the constitutional principle of freedom of speech not empower
South Africans with the freedom to hold whatever opinion they choose,
without the government attempting to influence those opinions, based on
certain narrow provisions? Thank you. [Applause.]

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Speaker, no, the fact that I say there must
be a debate is not influenced by any publicity. I’ve had this view for a
long time, and I think I have said it in public when I spoke about this for
the first time.

Last year already, I felt we needed to enter into debate and by so doing we
are not dictating. The problem is that there are South Africans, from
different professions or whatever, who give themselves authority and the
right to judge others – that’s a problem – and degrade other people’s
practices, beliefs and everything because they hold certain beliefs, and
that’s not correct. That’s the point I am making.

Let us debate this. Let us accept what our Constitution says, namely that
we live in a country of diversity. How do I get respect if I share a
particular belief which you do not share? Should you stand up and say this
is totally out of order; this person is wrong, even criminalise the
activities of somebody else? We are saying – I am saying – that that is
wrong. Let us debate this and agree that this is what has happened.

Also, let us be guided by our history. As you know, in South Africa, some
of the things we did as South Africans, were said by some to be were
barbaric; that we must be stopped, and other values imposed on us. I don’t
think we have had an opportunity to speak. I am saying for the first time:
Let us speak. What is it that we do? At times people in this country were
forced to do their own thing on the quiet, because they were afraid;
because they were declared abnormal, as not being right.

One of the things we did in 1994 was to liberate religion and beliefs, to
say everybody has a right to worship, in whatever way. Before that you
couldn’t worship anything, except if you were a Christian. Then you were
recognised. If you were a Muslim, everything you did was recognised. There
are many other things we did not address then. We addressed this aspect.

I am saying the debate must help us to address those issues, so that South
Africans should know that what they say publicly about certain cultures at
times injures those people who are practising them, and they have nowhere
to go. I am saying: Let us set the standard. Let us utilise democracy and
free debate to address those issues, and people are going to have every
right to express their views in whatever way.

That’s what I am encouraging, so that we do not injure other people’s souls
without realizing it, because we believe what we believe in is superior, is
everything. What you believe in, I believe is nonsense; I do not like it.
That’s what I say we must deal with, as a country, so that we cement the
unity and diversity and have cohesion and respect for other people’s
beliefs and cultures. All that I am calling for is that we debate and come
to an agreement. I think it is the correct thing to do for us as South
Africans. I think the time has come to do so. Thank you.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
  CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON DIRECTIVES ISSUED IN TERMS OF SECTION 97(4)
                OF THE CHILD JUSTICE ACT (ACT NO 75 OF 2008)

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
 CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT ON REGULATIONS RELATING TO THE CHILD JUSTICE ACT
                             (ACT NO 75 of 2008)

Mr N A RAMATLHODI: Mr Speaker, allow me to express my heartfelt gratitude
to members of my committee for being so exemplary in working together in
the spirit of camaraderieship or comradeship.

May I also thank the staff for the sterling service that they are giving to
my committee. It is now my singular honour and privilege, Mr Speaker, to
present to the House the report on regulations relating to the Child
Justice Act as tabled, as well as directives pertaining thereto.

In nature, most, if not all, living beings take care of their young. This
is so because it is generally recognised that the future of any species
depends in no small measure on the survival of its young. We as the human
race are no exception to this rule. In fact, we have even greater
responsibilities in this regard, given our superior make-up in relation to
other beings.

Amongst other things, we are social beings with an unrivalled social
consciousness and the ability to reduce our thoughts to both the spoken and
the written word. In today’s world, given the vast knowledge base we have
built up over the centuries, we in fact hold the destiny of the world in
our hands. This adds to our burden of obligations as human beings.

In order to have social cohesion, we have introduced rules which govern how
we relate to one another. Law represents perhaps the highest form of the
rules governing modern-day society. This law is supposed to apply to the
whole of society, regardless of one’s age, race, colour or gender.

However, we do know for a fact that in the real world the law applies
differently to people in court, with positions that they occupy principally
in the economy in relation to the whole of society. This is particularly so
in a society divided by social and economic classes, a society torn apart
by racial barriers, a society suffering the scourge of gender divisions and
a society such as ours.

The result is that as a country, we have embarked on a historic voyage away
from the apartheid legal system and the jurisprudence underpinning it, to a
democratic and people-centred legal system. In this regard our vision is of
a secure, stable and prosperous South Africa, at peace with herself, and at
peace with the world.

Transformation is the word we use broadly to describe the process of change
to that strategic end. Each piece of legislation we pass, each oversight
activity we embark upon, should therefore be seen in that context. A
summary of the Child Justice Act can easily be styled – handled with care –
by creative minds.

Like adults, children too often break the law. Given their immaturity and
vulnerability, they could be said to be fragile goods on the train of our
criminal justice system. Once they commit a crime and get caught, they join
an army of adult offenders on board the train of the criminal justice
system.

These regulations and directives regulate how they should be handled from
the moment of arrest until they disembark from the system. The big ideals
are to ensure that the system does not apply adult standards and procedures
to children, whilst ensuring that children take responsibility for their
own actions.
I now proceed to formally table these regulations and directives for
adoption by the House. We have noted the challenges with regard to the
regulations given, that this is multidepartmental legislation. In terms of
the co-operation that is required from all the departments, there is a lot
which still needs to be done to ensure the maximum effectiveness of this
Act before the launch on 1 April.

Furthermore, the Act requires the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
Development to develop a national policy framework for child justice. The
framework must be adopted and tabled in Parliament in accordance with the
requirements of the Act. Thank you very much, Speaker. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Directives issued in terms of section 97(4) of the Child Justice Act (Act
No 75 of 2008) approved.

Regulations relating to the Child Justice Act (Act No 75 of 2008) approved.

The House adjourned at 12:27.


