---
title: 'National Assembly - 11 May 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-05-11
---

TUESDAY, 11 MAY 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____
The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancy which occurred in the National
Assembly owing to the resignation of Mr M A Mangena on 1 May 2010 had been
filled by the nomination of Mr K J Dikobo, with effect from 1 May 2010. The
member had made and subscribed the oath in the Speaker’s office on 11 May
2010.

The Speaker further announced that the vacancy which occurred in the
National Assembly owing to the resignation of Mr B W Dhlamini on
4 May 2010 had been filled by the nomination of Mr K P Sithole, with effect
from 4 May 2010.
                                    OATH

Mr K P Sithole, accompanied by Mr R N Cebekhulu, made and subscribed the
oath and took his seat.

                   CELEBRATION OF INTERNATIONAL NURSES DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that International Nurses Day is celebrated around the world
        on 12 May on the anniversary of Florence Nightingale's birth;


     2) further notes that the International Council of Nurses commemorates
        this important day each year with the production and distribution
        of the International Nurses Day (IND) Kit;


     3) recalls that International Council of Nurses (ICN) has celebrated
        this day since 1965 and in January 1974 a decision was taken to
        celebrate the day on 12 May on the anniversary of the birth on 12
        May 1820 of Florence Nightingale, who is widely considered to be
        the founder of modern nursing;


     4) recognises that today nurses combine science and care to provide a
        healthcare service that not only saves lives, but also builds on
        the legacy of the compassion of Florence Nightingale; and


     5) expresses its gratitude to all nurses in South Africa as they are
        the backbone of our health system.

Agreed to.

   DEATH OF 23 PEOPLE IN A BUS ACCIDENT BETWEEN DE DOORNS AND TOUWS RIVER

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr E J LUCAS: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

   (1) notes that -
        (a)      on 5 May 2010 23 people died when the bus that they were
             travelling in crashed into the concrete barrier along the N1
             highway between De Doorns and Touws River and rolled down the
             steep hillside between the double-lane highways; and


        (b)      the bus was overloaded, the licence of the bus had expired
             and the bus had been declared unroadworthy last year;


     2) expresses its sincere condolences to the families of those who lost
        their lives in the accident; and


     3) calls upon the relevant authorities to put measures in place to
        ensure that such accidents are avoided in future.

Agreed to.

                           DEATH OF SHEENA DUNCAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes with deep sadness that one of South Africa’s anti-apartheid
        stalwarts, Sheena Duncan, died on the morning of 4 May 2010 at the
        age of 78;


     2) further notes that Duncan was a founder of the Black Sash and
        earned respect for her independent thinking and commitment to
        fighting for justice and that she represented the exploited masses;


     3) recalls that Duncan, as a leading woman activist, gave support to
        hundreds of detained anti-apartheid leaders in the 1980s and that
        these included leaders of the banned African National Congress
        which was then represented by the United Democratic Front (UDF),
        civic, youth, media and women’s organisations;


     4) believes that Sheena Duncan will be sorely missed for her
        contribution and principled commitment to the fight against
        apartheid oppression, which led to the realisation of the dream of
        a democratic and non-racial South Africa;and


     5) conveys its heartfelt condolences to the Duncan family, their
        relatives and friends.

Agreed to.

                  CHARLOTTE MAXEKE HOSPITAL IN JOHANNESBURG

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that the Charlotte Maxeke Hospital in Johannesburg is the
        first hospital in South Africa to have its own school playground
        for chronically and terminally ill children and that the playground
        had been planned and designed by a panel of medical staff and
        specialists to take into account the physical frailties of the
        children, enabling them to continue learning and developing while
        in hospital;

     2) further notes that 90% of the school’s pupils are in hospital
        because of cancer or liver failure;

     3) commends the hospital school, which caters for children from Grade
        R to Grade 12, on this initiative and the excellent example set;

     4) acknowledges that this achievement embraces public-private
        partnerships to the benefit of the people of South Africa; and
     5) congratulates the Minister of Health, Gauteng’s MEC for Health and
        Social Development, Ms Ronel van Biljon, principal of the
        Johannesburg Hospital School, and,  the chairman and CEO of
        Medscheme.


Agreed to.

                DEATH OF NIGERIA’S PRESIDENT UMARU YAR’ ADUA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the House –


     1) notes with profound sadness the death of Nigerian President Umaru
        Yar'Adua, who passed away on 5 May 2010 at the age of 58, after a
        long battle with kidney and heart ailments;


     2) further notes that President Yar'Adua had been absent from the
        political scene since November 2009, when he left for medical
        treatment in Saudi Arabia, from where he returned to Nigeria in
        February, but remained too sick to govern;


     3) remembers that President Yar’Adua’s journey into politics began
        when he became an active member of and mobiliser for the defunct
        Peoples’ Redemption Party (PRP) and that he was one of the founding
        members of the Peoples’ Front, a political association under the
        leadership of his elder brother, the late Major-General Shehu Musa
        Yar’Adua, during the Babangida transitions programme and that this
        association later became the Social Democratic Party (SDP);


     4) further remembers that during his tenure as the governor of Katsina
        state, there had been unprecedented development in that state in
        the educational and health sector, provision of rural and urban
        roads, electrification of rural and urban areas, water supply and
        agriculture;


     5) recalls that he had proved to be prudent, accountable and
        transparent in his leadership and that the state now enjoys a
        surplus of N6.56 billion from an empty treasury and backlogs of
        debts which he met as a governor in 1999 and that, as a result, he
        had won the National Primary Education Productivity Merit Award in
        2004 and the Central Bank of Nigeria best Governor Award under the
        Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme in 2005;

     6) further recalls that the South African government had the privilege
        of hosting the late President Umaru Yar'Adua and his delegation in
        June 2008;


     7) acknowledges President Yar'Adua as a genuine peacemaker, whose
        initiatives, humility and respect began to bring confidence to the
        peace process in Nigeria; and


     8) conveys its deepest sympathy to his family, friends, colleagues and
        the people of Nigeria and assures them that the prayers and
        thoughts of the House go out to them during their time of mourning.

Agreed to.

   EXTENSION OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON PROTECTION OF INFORMATION LEGISLATION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the House –

        1) notwithstanding –
           a) Rule 214(6)(c), which provides that an ad hoc committee
              ceases to exist if it has not completed its task by the date
              set for the completion of its task; and


           b) a resolution adopted by the House on 18 March 2010 that the
              Ad Hoc Committee on Protection of Information Legislation had
              to report by 7 May 2010;

        2) condones the continued existence of the ad hoc committee; and


     3) extends the deadline by which it has to report to 30 September
        2010.

Agreed to.

     EXTENSION OF DEADLINE OF REPORT OF AD HOC COMMITTEE ON CO-ORDINATED
                        OVERSIGHT ON SERVICE DELIVERY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the House, notwithstanding the resolution it adopted on 18 February
   2010, resolves to extend the deadline by which the Ad Hoc Committee on Co-
   ordinated Oversight on Service Delivery under the theme: “Working
   together to ensure the delivery of quality service to communities’’ has
   to report, to 4 June 2010.

Agreed to.

APPOINTMENT OF ACTING CHAIRPERSONS TO CHAIR MEETINGS OF EXTENDED PUBLIC
                                 COMMITTEES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the House ratifies the decision of the Speaker, taken in terms of
   Rule 2 of the Rules of the National Assembly and published in the
   Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports on 3 May 2010, p 1156, to
   appoint Acting Chairpersons to chair meetings of Extended Public
   Committees.

Agreed to.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


Debate on Vote No 2 - Parliament:

The SPEAKER: Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President, Ntate Kgalema Motlanthe,
hon members and esteemed guests, we are exactly one year into the Fourth
Parliament of our young democracy. This year has been characterised by
robust, wide-ranging, informative and, at times, entertaining debates. The
atmosphere is, I would argue, one of heightened engagement and commitment
to making a difference. This is a healthy development which, I hope, we can
harness, direct and benefit from.

The Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act that we are
implementing now provides Parliament with a window of opportunity in
respect of our oversight work. Our focus has sharpened, and this budget
will show how we intend to direct our energies and resources and also build
on the legacy of previous Parliaments. We must be responsive and proactive
as we seek to play an increasingly meaningful role in addressing the hopes
and aspirations of our people.

Deputy Speaker, it will be recalled that when I addressed this House during
the debate on Parliament’s Budget Vote for the 2009-10 financial year, the
global financial crisis was at its peak. During this period, our own
economy shrank by about 1,8%, with mining and manufacturing output
decreasing by 17%, and, critically, more than 900 000 jobs were lost.

However, this year we have seen better than expected recovery from the
economic crisis, with a projected economic growth of 2,3% for 2010 rising
to 3,6% by 2012. This morning, in his Budget Vote, Minister Pravin Gordhan
said: “Revenue was about R8 billion more than expected, and expenditure a
bit less. The budget deficit was 6,7% of the gross domestic product, GDP,
which was rather better than the 7,3% that was anticipated, even though it
was considerably wider than the 1% of GDP recorded in 2008-09.”

Minister Gordhan also mentioned that “Nationally and internationally,
economic and financial developments continue to present formidable
challenges, both to our understanding of the growth and development process
and to the practical implementation of policy and government programmes.”
As our country, government and people grapple with these challenges, our
work in Parliament continues to be to hold the executive to its promises
and to work with them in lessening the hardships faced by the most
vulnerable amongst us. Accountability and representation lie at the heart
of democracy. Parliament is the central institution of any democracy
through which the will of the people is expressed, laws are passed and
government is held to account. Addressing the needs and concerns of our
people must continue to be our primary objective.

We have started this fourth Parliament by setting strategic directions as
expressed in our policy imperatives for 2009 to 2014, which was tabled in
November 2009 and approved by the Parliamentary Oversight Authority this
year. This Parliament will focus on the following five priorities:
strengthening the oversight function; increasing public participation;
strengthening co-operative government; widening the role of Parliament in
international relations; and continuing to build an efficient, effective,
and powerful institution of democracy. In this regard, we seek to ensure
that Parliament develops into a strong institution that plays a significant
role in democratic governance.

The first strategic policy priority is to establish mechanisms and
processes for more effective oversight over the executive and to create a
dedicated capacity for enhanced content support for committees, as well as
a skills development programme for Members of Parliament. The
implementation task team responsible for implementing the oversight model
is expected to report on its progress to the Joint Rules Committee by the
end of August 2010. Hon Chairperson Bapela will talk more about this issue
later on.

The Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act, a key new
oversight tool, enables Parliament to hold government accountable. For the
first time, the South African Parliament has the power to amend the Budget,
thus giving us the teeth to do effective oversight work. The challenge now
is for committees and individual Members of Parliament to put their
shoulders to the wheel and turn theory into practice and potential into
concrete results. The Act is also not just about the Budget and
Parliament’s power to amend the Budget. In fact, I would argue that this
Act prescribes a whole new approach to the budgetary process as it enables
Parliament to interrogate the strategic deployment of resources by
government. As such, knowledge and familiarity with this legislation and
with budgetary processes is a key requirement for every member of this
House. [Applause.]

While the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act does not
confer on Parliament’s carte blanche to amend the fiscal framework,
strategic focus or even actual Budget allocations, the hand of Parliament
to influence these is, however, considerably strengthened and enhanced. As
already mentioned, the key challenge in the implementation of the Money
Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act is to ensure that every
member and every committee of this House has a detailed and thorough
understanding of the working and expectation of this legislation. This is
indeed one of the focus areas in the capacity-building programme for
Members of Parliament. I understand that a two-day orientation workshop for
members on the Money Bill will take place on 19 and 20 May, and I urge all
members to make the time to attend.

The Act also makes provision for the establishment of a parliamentary
budget office. This office will provide independent, objective and
professional research, advice and analysis to Parliament on matters related
to the Budget and other Money Bills. We need to ensure that in setting up
this office, we take the opportunity to learn and benefit from other
parliaments around the world that have already established similar budget
offices.

Another key instrument for oversight is, of course, questions posed by
Members of Parliament to the President and the executive. The Leader of
Government Business, as we all know, is responsible for the co-ordination
of the executive’s interaction with Parliament, and together we have
addressed the backlog of unanswered questions, which has led to some
improvement in this regard. This, of course, is an ongoing process.
Secondly, the quality of questions and replies, as well as the timeframes
within which questions are replied to, is also under discussion, and we are
expecting substantive improvements in this regard too.

The second strategic policy priority focuses on increasing public
participation in the work of Parliament, especially in committees. We have
realised the critical need to broaden public involvement in Parliament
beyond our engagement with organised civil society organisations.
Parliament must find ways through which ordinary citizens, even in the
remote parts of our country, have access to Parliament and its processes.

Strengthening co-operative government is the third strategic policy
priority for Parliament. The Speakers’ Forum, comprised of the Presiding
Officers of the National Assembly and all Speakers from the provincial
legislatures, strives to promote coherence, co-operation and
interdependence between national and provincial legislative sectors. In
addition, Parliament aims to embark on an ambitious project to increase its
contribution to nation-building through enhancing unity and democracy in
our country.

The fourth strategic priority for our Parliament seeks to improve and
strengthen Parliament’s role in international relations. It also envisages
a greater role for Parliament in the formative stages of international
agreements and treaties. There has been a growing recognition that
Parliament’s role in international policy development must extend to more
than mere ratification of treaties. Consultation between Parliament and
government prior to and during negotiations of international agreements
should take place as a matter of course.

The need for Parliament’s active participation in this process is also
recognised by the executive. This was further affirmed in the Budget Vote
for the Department of Trade and Industry, and there, Minister Davies
recommended that Parliament reviews its Rules to assert its constitutional
power in ensuring greater participation during the negotiation phase of
international trade agreements entered into by the executive. The Oversight
Model currently being implemented also recommends that an oversight and
accountability mechanism be established to give effect to this role of
Parliament in international affairs.

In addition to ensuring Parliament’s participation in international
affairs, we also believe that strengthening regional and international
institutions will assist in advancing regional co-operation and thereby
help to consolidate Africa’s position on international issues. We recognise
the need to strengthen our regional and continental parliamentary bodies
such as the SADC Parliamentary Forum and the Pan-African Parliament, which
we host in South Africa. We also need to endow these institutions with the
necessary political, material, financial and human resources necessary to
carry out their mission.

The fifth strategic policy priority is to build an effective and efficient
Parliament which subscribes to good governance, a high standard of
professional ethics, and efficient use of scarce resources. The Financial
Management of Parliament Act, which came into effect on 21 April 2009,
requires of us as public representatives to uphold the highest standard of
professional ethics in the management of public finances. The primary
message that I believe members and management of Parliament must take from
this Act is to ensure that Parliament is an example of best practice in the
management of public funds.

Parliament’s Accounting Officer, in the person of the Secretary to
Parliament, must ensure that unauthorised, irregular, fruitless and
wasteful expenditure is prevented and that appropriate steps are taken
where such has occurred. Financial misconduct by any official of Parliament
will be dealt with seriously and to the full extent of the provisions of
the Act.

I now wish to turn to the actual allocations in the 2010-11 financial year.
This year, Parliament received a total allocation of R1,572 billion, an
increase of just over 6% relative to last year’s budget allocation. This
represents 1,92% of the total national Budget. This figure of
R1,572 billion is divided into five programme areas. The allocation for the
administration of Parliament is R317 million; the allocation for
Legislation and Oversight is R282 million, and of this, R45 million goes to
committees, which represents a R10 million increase for this financial
year. The allocation for Public Participation and International
Participation is R87 million. The allocation for Members’ Facilities is
R211 million. Members’ remuneration is a direct charge against the National
Revenue Fund and amounts to R393 million.

Parliament spent 94% of its total budget allocation during the 2009-10
financial year. This is a marked improvement when compared to previous
financial years. Parliament’s retained revenue has decreased significantly
from R322 million in the 2006-07 financial year to R142 million in the 2009-
10 financial year.

However, there are certain areas of our budget in the past financial year
where underspending was particularly problematic. In reviewing the previous
budget performance, the total allocation to committees of the National
Assembly in the 2009-10 financial year, excluding internal management and
joint committees, was R12,4 million. Preliminary indications are that
committees spent only 69% of this allocation. This budget performance is
attributed largely to the fact that this was a transitional year. Much of
the year was spent on establishing new committees and in planning
activities of the committees. If we agree - and I believe we do - that
committees are the engine rooms of Parliament, where the actual work of
Parliament is carried out, then any underexpenditure in functional area is
certainly undesirable and in fact unacceptable.

The fourth Parliament only began to fully function in June 2009 after the
induction of MPs and the establishment of committees. I must also point out
that the-one-size-fits-all approach to the allocation of funds to
committees, about which committees have rightly complained, is under
review. It is recognised that these are some of the reasons for some
underspending.

It is also important to emphasise that underspending could also be viewed
as the result of bad planning and budgeting or the lack of capacity to
spend effectively. In fact, underexpenditure of public funds is viewed with
the same seriousness as overexpenditure since unspent allocations could
have been utilised for other purposes. Where there are management problems
or bottlenecks in the allocation and release of funds for committee work,
this must be rectified as a matter of urgency.
I am encouraged that most committees, if not all, of the National Assembly
have embarked on strategic planning processes and crafted strategic plans.
We need to see the planned programmes of committees to know what additional
resources, if any, are required and how these will be spent.

We have recognised the demands for better tools of trade and have attempted
to address your requirements. Hon Skosana will again speak about this
issue. We hope that the increased support and more to come will enhance
your productivity. The wellbeing of members and staff of Parliament is, of
course, a concern of the management of Parliament.

Before concluding, it would be remiss of me not to mention the 2010 Fifa
Soccer World Cup kicking off in a month’s time. The National Assembly has
on three occasions shown our commitment to the event by passing two motions
and hosting a joint debate with the NCOP on preparations for the Fifa World
Cup. In June, before kickoff, the National Assembly will again have a
debate on the World Cup, and it is hoped that the Fifa leadership,
including Sepp Blatter and the Bafana Bafana squad will attend. In fact, to
prepare members for their oversight work during the tournament, the
Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation, I am told, has organised a one-
day training workshop at the Cape Town stadium. The training will focus on
two issues. One is the optimum use of the vuvuzela, and the other is
techniques of the diski dance. [Laughter.]
In a month’s time, we will host the first Fifa Soccer World Cup on the
African continent. As the world converges on our shores, we will be
transformed from a rainbow nation to a rainbow of nations in arguably the
world’s biggest, most significant and most colourful sporting festival.
South Africa, and indeed the rest of Africa, is all geared to welcome the
world to a rich experience of culture, vibrancy and traditional African
hospitality.

Our thoughts and, yes, even prayers are with Bafana Bafana. You will join
me in hoping that Bafana Bafana will lift the trophy and make us proud.
However, it doesn’t matter which team wins; in the end, the beautiful game
of soccer will be the winner. I thank you. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy President,
hon members and distinguished guests, Parliament is a prime institution of
representative democracy in our country. It consists of different parties
with diverse ideological orientation and constituencies. However, all
parties in this Parliament agree with our strategic objective of creating a
nonracial, nonsexist, united, democratic and prosperous South Africa in
which the value of all citizens is measured by our common humanity.

We have all endorsed the strategic priorities of government. This means
that nation-building, social cohesion and delivery of quality services to
all South Africans, both black and white, should be common concerns of all
of us. This institution should, therefore, serve as a critical forum and
resource for the expansion of transformational policies.

The ANC is also committed to respecting the Constitution, the independence
of the judiciary, regular multiparty elections, equality before the law,
and the strengthening of Chapter 9 institutions.

The fundamental role of Parliament is that of nation-building, legislation
and oversight. Through its committees, Parliament should participate in the
strengthening of representative and participatory democracy, the processing
of legislation and ensuring sound public finance management. Our oversight
model requires the establishment of mechanisms and processes for increased
oversight.

We have characterised this institution as an activist Parliament, and its
constituency offices as one-stop centres which should be optimally used for
the outreach of Parliament. These one-stop centres or parliamentary
constituency offices must form part of a public involvement strategy
focusing on public education, social mobilisation for nation-building,
social cohesion and provision of information and mechanisms for popular
participation and accountability.

The current budget allocation to Parliament should serve as a resource to
support the nation-building heritage initiatives, the needs of Members of
Parliament, constituency work and research capacity that will bolster the
quality of debate and strengthen the oversight role of Parliament. In
addition to the ability to generate information, the ability to challenge
reports and question information supplied by the executive remains a
challenge for this Parliament.

Parliament must connect with the people and act as their voice. It is a
central institution in the advancement of the policy of both representative
and participatory democracy. Accordingly, it must not only serve as an
important platform for monitoring and advancing the priorities of
government, but must also connect with the people through one-stop centre
parliamentary constituency offices to ensure popular participation. These
offices should also facilitate development to ensure that people become
their own liberators from poverty and underdevelopment. The ANC has the
primary responsibility to resource Parliament and improve the role it plays
towards building a developmental state based on the Freedom Charter and our
Constitution.

Working together with other spheres of government, Parliament needs to
foster increased co-operation to ensure the socioeconomic upliftment of our
people. Our Parliament is one that is robust but constructive in its work
for the better life of our people. In this regard, Parliament stands for
the aspirations and needs of our people in a programmatic manner. This
means that legislation and decisions that are taken and passed by the
people’s Parliament must result in the achievement of our five priorities.

The ANC manifesto endorses the principle of accountability and oversight
role of deployees of the ANC to accelerate service delivery to create a
better life for all South Africans. The work of public representatives
needs to focus on strengthening linkages between people and their elected
representatives. The visits of the ANC to service delivery hotspots have
shown that the people have confidence in this government. They are still
looking towards it for better and quality service delivery.

People require public representatives and officials to connect with them,
report back and communicate the challenges facing government. Such
interactions - as we have seen, for instance, with Orange Farm, Diepsloot
and Kya Sands - helped to address the so-called “service delivery protests”
and restored the confidence of the affected communities in this government.
This was an affirmation of the critical role of an activist Parliament.

On 25 May 2010 Parliament will celebrate Africa Day. This celebration will
be used to raise awareness about the African Agenda and renewal and the key
role of unity and co-operation for peace-building and development on the
continent. The celebration will also highlight the importance of
establishing friendly societies on the continent and beyond.

The recent enactment of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related
Matters Act of 2009 has deepened Parliament’s authority as enshrined in the
Constitution. The Act gives Parliament the powers, for the first time since
1994, to amend the Budget, thereby ensuring that it is synchronised with
the priorities our people have set for us. The Act allows Parliament to
establish a budget office and appoint a director who will oversee its
management, as the Speaker pointed out.

The work of government has become complex; it sometimes requires Rules to
be amended, a dedicated support system and the necessary skills. The
continued development of members and the preservation of knowledge are of
critical importance. These developments should be aimed at empowering
members for oversight-related work in plenary, committee processes and
constituency work.

Parliament is elected to represent the people, ensure government by the
people under the Constitution and represent provinces in the national
sphere of government. In this regard, Parliament has a responsibility to
ensure that public forums form part of democratic processes by
understanding the role of Parliament and its involvement in the processes.
This places an obligation on Parliament to ensure that democratic processes
are well known and that they reach all citizens of our country. Thus,
Parliament in its nature is a nation-building institution.

Taking Parliament to the people, announced or unannounced visits, matters
of public hearings during the processing of Bills and the invitation of the
contribution of experts and civil society strengthen the people’s
Parliament and deepens participatory democracy. Parliament is constituted
by the National Assembly and the NCOP. Therefore, the practice of taking
Parliament to the people must involve both Houses and not only the NCOP as
it is currently the situation.

Our position emphasises the need for effective oversight and the building
of a strong activist Parliament. This implies that Parliament is expected
to play a vigorous oversight role over government departments to ensure
accountability in the use of budget and necessary interventions for the
acceleration of service delivery. Effective parliamentary oversight has
thus become all the more crucial to ensure that these new responses are
devised and implemented with full transparency and accountability.
Parliamentarians are in regular contact with electorates and are well
placed to ascertain their views. They can subsequently raise people’s
concerns in Parliament and ensure service delivery.

The work and impact of Parliament must be realized in such ways that people
are keenly made aware of the role of Parliament. Constituency offices must
be optimally used for the outreach of Parliament. These must form the
centre of a public involvement strategy focusing on public education, the
provision of education and the provision of mechanisms of participation and
accountability.

The ANC manifesto endorses the principle of accountability and oversight
role of deployees of the ANC to accelerate services for a better life of
all our people. The collective work of Parliament and that of individual
members needs to focus on strengthening linkages between people and their
elected representatives. Our public representatives must be assisted to
hold public hearings and involve the public in legislation and issues
before Parliament. Committees must ensure mechanisms of working within
communities to enhance the understanding of the role of Parliament in
society as a whole.

Our democracy is both representative and participatory, and the
Constitution provides for public participation processes of Parliament. The
current public participation processes have to be reviewed to ensure that
all sectors of society, including the rural, the poor and the youth are
provided with greater access to committees, public hearings and the overall
processes of Parliament. Parliament, as a central institution for
advancement of representative and participatory democracy, must provide a
platform for robust debate, constructive information, the provision of hope
and aspirations for the nation and the contestation of ideas in order to
make responsive and legitimate decision for a better life for all our
people.

Section 45 of our Constitution states that a Joint Rules Committee must be
established for the purpose of making Rules and Orders concerning the joint
business of the Assembly and the Council. This matter will be given
appropriate attention. In this regard, the Joint Rules Committee is the
appropriate body to advise Parliament, in respect of the joint business of
Parliament, on the manner in which it conducts constitutional mandates.

The vigorous oversight role of Parliament will eventually eliminate the
quantum of qualified audits. Irrespective of merits and demerits of such
qualified audits and circumstances thereof, this situation has a bearing on
service delivery to our people. In the same vein, our understanding of
oversight role, transparency and accountability should not be seen as a
matter of conflict. We need to work together in dignity and respect each
other’s mandates.

We must ensure that our Parliament is respected by our respective
constituencies, both the ruling party and the opposition parties. Let us
put the interests of this institution at heart primarily more than any
other sectional interests. Our Ministers should remain vigilant in doing
their parliamentary business, particularly in areas of questions to the
Ministers. In this context, members put questions to the executive for oral
or written reply. Questions may be put to the President, Deputy President
or Ministers. We also know that questions and replies constitute the
oversight function, including the tabling of reports in Parliament by
institutions accounting to it.

Indeed, annual reports are tabled by national departments, state
institutions supporting constitutional democracy and other entities. Our
oversight model requires government officials and Ministers to appear
before them. The importance of oversight’s overarching role includes
activities such as report scrutiny, briefings to committees and budget
processes. These must advance quality service to the people and social
justice.

The ANC is committed to good governance and quality service to our people.
As a ruling party, it seeks to enhance accountability and high performance
standards by its deployees. We all have to comply with created mechanisms
to ensure the developmental improvement of services that are rendered to
our people.

The promotion of ethical and democratic values and leading by example is
rooted in the ANC traditions. We are in the forefront in leading society in
the fight against corruption. Our movement and government must work towards
ensuring anticorruption values in continental and international structures.
Our election manifesto prohibits politicians from tempering with tender
adjudications and calls for transparency in tendering systems. This is to
ensure stronger accountability of public servants involved in tendering.

Section 35 of the ANC constitution urges cadres of our movement to improve
the capacity to serve the people and to build contact with the people. We
need to raise the profile of the ANC deployees and accountability to
Parliament. Our sincere conduct will debunk some public perceptions that
view Parliament positions as a source of personal riches. It will debunk
the myth that associates Parliament’s positions with the issuing of
contracts to commercial companies and individuals. Our Parliament must be
seen as an institution that is led by people with moral and political
integrity.

In conclusion, the ANC as an organisation will promote accountability and
greater performance of its deployees in all spheres of government. We need
to improve services to our people in the broader scheme of things. The
challenges of service provision arise not fundamentally from a shortage of
people, but from problems of skills and systems to deploy its human and
financial resources. Deputy Speaker and Deputy President, the ANC supports
Budget Vote No 2: Parliament. I thank you very much. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr Deputy
President, I am very happy that the Speaker referred to accountability
lying at the heart of democracy and therefore the first strategic priority
that we have is one of strengthening our oversight function.

You will forgive me if I concentrate on that for one moment. Section 42 of
the Constitution gives Parliament a number of core functions, one of which
is that of scrutinising and overseeing executive action. Section 55
mandates us to provide for mechanisms for that oversight and to make the
executive accountable.

Parliament, I believe, has formally acted on this mandate by adopting in
2009 the oversight and accountability conceptual model. This model spelt
out a number of mechanisms and processes to effect the oversight, including
portfolio and select committees, Budget Votes, questions, members’
statements, notices of motion, etc.

Parliament’s strategic document for the 2009 to 2014 period recognises that
one of Parliament’s core objectives is to oversee and scrutinise the
executive. It incorporates the conceptual model and recognises the need to
develop and strengthen the oversight function and establish a strong
culture of overseeing executive action.

I think the words “establish a strong culture” are important. You see, Mr
Speaker, we have, as I have indicated, a constitutional imperative – and we
have developed an excellent model – and we can strengthen mechanisms. But
unless we develop a strong culture of exercising oversight, we will have no
more than a façade of democracy. And this culture is one which has to be
accepted and adopted, not only by Members of Parliament, but, most
importantly, by members of the executive over whom oversight is exercised.

It is that culture which I want to address, because the culture, I believe,
is far from being well established in this House. On the contrary, if there
is a culture it is one of timidity in the willingness of many members in
this House to hold Ministers to account, and in respect of many Ministers,
there is an unwillingness, if not a hostility, to openly subject themselves
to that oversight and accountability.

Questions to Ministers, both written and oral, are an excellent example.
You referred to them as vexed questions, Mr Speaker. They are recognised in
the strategy document as one of the key mechanisms to exercise oversight
and ensure accountability. Yet many Ministers do not take their
responsibility seriously at all. It is a matter of record how many written
questions are either not answered within the timeframe set out in the
Rules, or, worse still, not answered at all.

As of yesterday, 515 questions asked this year by the DA are out of time.
We are still waiting for answers to 114 questions of last year. Even when
questions are answered – and this is particularly the case with oral
questions – the answers are very often either nonanswers, flippant,
frivolous or an exercise in obfuscation.

But questions are not the only problematic area. Many Ministers seldom, if
ever, appear before portfolio committees. One Minister has recently refused
to appear in future before Scopa, the Standing Committee on Public
Accounts, Parliament’s pre-eminent watchdog.

The time set aside for members’ statements in the House is poorly attended
by Ministers. These statements to the House are supposed to be the
opportunity for Ministers to respond on current, topical issues affecting
their portfolios. This process is more often than not a waste of time,
because very often the appropriate Minister isn’t there and a substitute
Minister very often doesn’t know the subject and sometimes, even if the
appropriate Minister is there, that Minister plays to the gallery as
opposed to engaging in a constructive exchange with the member concerned.

So, notwithstanding the section in the Constitution, notwithstanding the
oversight and accountability model, notwithstanding the Rules which have
been developed over a period of time, if the culture of oversight and
accountability is weak, then the very Constitution itself is subverted, the
models and Rules we have produced are abused and become cynical exercises,
and the integrity and credibility of the very institution to which we are
elected get called into question.
It is clear we all have to go through a distinct attitudinal change. We
need to be vigorous in exercising oversight. And Minister Manuel is
foremost in exhorting us to do just that, but Ministers also have to accept
oversight and be willing to be brought to account. This requires a cultural
shift.

Let me say as an aside that it is not acceptable for a Minister in future
to refuse to appear before a committee and then cite some dubious technical
reason to justify such nonappearance. I would have thought that section 56
of the Constitution, which gives the right to a committee of Parliament to
summon any person to appear before it, is sufficient in this regard. This
refusal, though, exemplifies the cultural change that is needed. We look
forward, Mr Speaker, to your intervention to rectify this attitude, to
reinforce the culture of oversight and to assert the supremacy of this
Parliament.

The Oversight and Accountability Model is an excellent document. We need to
live that document in the context in which it is written, but we also need
to extend it.

We need to ask ourselves what the mechanisms are for us as parliamentarians
to exercise oversight over our own institution. In the running of
Parliament, how acceptable and accountable are the presiding officers? Two
bodies are important in this regard. In respect of parliamentary business,
it is the Joint Rules Committee, and in respect of parliamentary oversight
of services and administration, it is the Parliamentary Oversight
Authority. Both bodies meet infrequently. The Joint Rules Committee has met
only three times during the Fourth Parliament.

During the Third Parliament the DA forwarded mechanisms to enliven debate,
promote the debate of current issues and enhance oversight in this House.
We submitted these proposals again in the Fourth Parliament, because they
were not debated in the Third Parliament. However, these proposals have yet
to see the light of day on any agenda, at any time and in any forum. A
sense of inertia pervades.

In respect of the Parliamentary Oversight Authority, it too has met only
four times in the life of the Fourth Parliament. When meetings are held,
they are set down for a limited period of time and the agendas are always
full. There is little time for anything other than a superficial
examination of the documentation provided, and little scope for real
interrogation and monitoring of the policy directives for various services
and facilities of Parliament and the levels and extent of their
implementation.

Parliament is essentially run by presiding officers, and yet there is no
public mechanism, either inside the Parliamentary Oversight Authority or
outside, for the raising of questions about aspects of the administration
of Parliament. In effect, there is little oversight and exceptionally poor
mechanisms to ensure accountability.
By way of example. An article appeared in the Cape Argus in September last
year alleging that a secret cartel ruled the tender process in Parliament.
What public mechanism is there for us to interrogate this allegation and
perhaps set the record straight? That which we demand of executive members
in respect of their portfolios, we do not demand of our presiding officers
in respect of their responsibilities.

Parliament also needs to look at its own internal decision-making process.
The Parliamentary Oversight Authority has essentially three advisory
entities: the Quarterly Consultative Forum, the Chief Whips’ Forum and, of
course, the Administration. Speaker, I have been a Chief Whip now for three
years, and I have come to see the whole process of decision-making as a
totally frustrating one. One often sees good suggestions coming out of the
Quarterly Consultative Forum that go to the Administration for a report.
They then go back to the Quarterly Consultative Forum, then go to the Chief
Whips’ Forum, then go back to the Administration, then come back to the
Chief Whips’ Forum, occasionally go up to the Parliamentary Oversight
Authority, who kick it back down to possibly the Chief Whips’ Forum, that
then go back to the Administration. The whole process goes on like a merry-
go-round or a bad game of football - lots of passing the ball, but no goals
being scored.

Mr Speaker, this is something that we have to address as there seems to be
an inability by ourselves as Parliament to actually take decisions in this
regard. Quite frankly, anybody who originally proposed anything which had
to go through these forums has to emerge totally confused, exhausted and,
frankly, have given up hope. This is the reality. We seem, as I said,
completely unable to take decisions.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the point I am making is simple. The strategy
document is correct. We need to strengthen the culture of oversight and
accountability, both in respect of the executive and indeed ourselves, and,
in so doing, we need to take a hard look at our own governance model. I
thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Chairperson, the year 2010 is a
significant one for the continent of Africa and for our country in
particular, as we prepare to host the most important event, the Fifa World
Cup, in just 30 days.

Parliament’s theme this year is also about one of our icons, who was
released in February 20 years ago. It says: “Celebrating Mandela’s Legacy –
Nation-building”. Throughout the world, the name of Mandela is echoed and
reflected repeatedly.

We have a central role to play in ensuring that we exemplify his qualities
of leadership, and it is necessary to draw on the relevant lessons learnt
from this greatest icon of our time. We have learnt that he is firm in his
convictions and consistent in his principles. He remained solid in pursuing
the ideals of a nonracial, nonsexist, united, democratic and prosperous
society. He put the interests of the nation above his own.

In a constitutional democracy such as South Africa, all arms of state are
bound by the Constitution. The governance structure outlined in the
Constitution provides the mechanisms through which governance, “based on
the will of the people”, is ensured.

We urgently need to develop a common understanding on oversight, what it is
and what it entails, and we should not be having any pronouncements such as
those witnessed recently on whether the executive or any other public
entity should or should not account before parliamentary committees.

The Constitution is categorically unambiguous in Chapter 5, section 92,
which must be read with section 93, and I quote:

  Members of the executive are accountable collectively and individually to
  Parliament for the exercise of their powers and the performance of their
  functions ...

And to –

  ... provide Parliament with full and regular reports concerning matters
  under their control and respond to recommendations or decisions of
  committees and the House.

However, the Constitution also compels Parliament to develop mechanisms and
rules to execute its mandate of effecting accountability and overseeing the
executive, or any organ of state. Such mechanisms exist in the form of
portfolio, select and standing committees, with certain powers. It is
therefore our duty to ensure that the authority of Parliament is asserted,
respected and fulfilled. Members of Parliament must ask difficult
questions, but those questions must be of quality, must question without
fear or favour those issues arising from the reports that are submitted to
Parliament, and if there is any wrongdoing, corruption or lack of delivery,
such issues ought to be raised.

We need to maximise our value on oversight and accountability to include
the scrutiny of reports coming to Parliament, as in the budget information;
the performance information – the Auditor-General will be providing such
audits with effect from this year - financial information, as in the
monthly and quarterly reports, which is about the real money spent; and
compliance information, which is about follow-ups, ensuring that there is
compliance and that decisions that are taken by Parliament indeed are
effected. Where there is undermining of such decisions, the Speaker should
recommend that censure be applied to those responsible. We then also have
to ensure that in the scrutiny of financial and other aspects, Scopa
reports are also included.

We should also clarify the role of Scopa with regard to Ministers appearing
before it. The Joint Rules Committee must enhance the Rules to reflect on
the issue. The Public Finance Management Act says accounting officers are
the officials in the departments, but in that Act emphasis is also placed
on the fact that political authority and responsibility rests with
executive members.

Therefore we should resolve these unnecessary tensions by proposing as
follows. Firstly, Ministers should be invited to observe the proceedings,
to take note on issues which sometimes they may not be aware of in their
own departments, to enable them to take leadership on those issues as
arising from the floor. Secondly, Ministers should appear before Scopa in
instances when they are implicated in evidence before the committee, to
come and answer questions on those implications. Thirdly, Ministers should
appear before the committee if in two consecutive years, recommendations
adopted by this House are not effected in their departments. Therefore,
leadership will then be required from them to appear before Scopa to come
and answer on these particular issues. [Applause.]

An amount of R45 million has been allocated to the committees of Parliament
in the current budget, which covers a total of 54 committees, that is, 51
committees with oversight functions and 3 committees in-house committees,
totalling 54 committees in both Houses. Only R45 million has been
allocated.

We have also set aside an amount to cater for the new committee that is
still to be established, a committee on The Presidency, whatever name it
will assume. A task team has already been established and will be meeting
next week to consider proposals from the NA Table and those submitted by
parties, which will oversee The Presidency, in particular the Ministry on
Performance Monitoring and Evaluation, including the National Youth
Development Agency, the Ministry of National Planning, and other functions
in The Presidency, such as the War on Poverty, Asgisa, Jipsa – if those
programmes are still there – and so forth. The proposals will then lead to
the establishment of a committee that oversees The Presidency. So, we have
set aside that committee to be the 55th committee.

We welcome the increase from R135 million in the financial year 2008-09 to
R145 million, which is R10 million more available to committees. However,
the amount is not enough, hon Speaker, as committees ought to do oversight,
oversight, oversight. [Applause.]

A number of only ten Bills have been submitted to Parliament this year, and
therefore law-making is no longer an increasing activity for portfolio
committees. Oversight ought to be the increasing activity for portfolio
committees. [Applause.] Therefore, the amount of money allocated is not
enough.
Take the example of Gauteng. Gauteng has 11 oversight committees, and they
are receiving R32 million. Each committee gets up to R2 million. Some of
our committees, unfortunately, with the number that we have, will get
R600 000, some R700 000, R800 000, up to R1 million. Unfortunately, we
cannot give you more, because the money is too little. So, we will try to
engage the authorities that the money needs to be increased in that
direction. It is not me who is allocating the money; so, don’t blame it on
me. I just receive and then allocate.

All committees will be able to spend their allocated money, hon Speaker. As
you have raised, only 69% was spent. The issue here arises on programming
itself. I have already engaged the Office of the Chief Whip. We hope that
we shall work together - the Chief Whip in the NA, the Chief Whip in the
NCOP and the Chief Whips in the provinces - for co-ordination so that when
oversight happens, we don’t stampede; as the Deputy President of the
Republic always says, “there is too much stampeding on oversight”.

We seem to be oversubscribing and going to the same project or the same
province so many times because there is no co-ordination. We shall have to
work on that co-ordination so that as we increase our oversight, indeed we
are able to address the stampeding that has been occurring. Programming
must allow for more space for such visits to occur so that we don’t prevent
committees from exercising that function. That is why there is
underspending because each time they apply, we say they can’t go. Hence
they were unable to spend their money.

Also, Speaker, the support that we give to the committees and to Parliament
as a whole must be a professional service if we are ambitious about
achieving on all these programmes. It must be the type of support that has
quality. The current support requires overhauling and adaptation to be more
efficient and effective, service-delivery oriented, professional and
competent. My office has already raised the matter with the Secretary to
Parliament in terms of what needs to happen. We hope that in August when we
come back, we will be able to receive a report. I have proposed that there
needs to be a skills audit, whether we have employed the right people for
the right jobs, with the required skills that are needed, or something
somewhere is not working. [Applause.]

Every week I receive two to three complaints from chairpersons and parties
in Parliament complaining about services, lack of Minutes, quality reports
not being there and so forth. So we really need a turnaround strategy if we
are to achieve on quality oversight going forward.

We also need to enhance the capacity of members, as we have already alluded
to. I also want to say that the oversight model is pointing to the very
issue of building capacity for MPs. One of my responsibilities assigned is
the introduction and maximisation of e-Parliament towards an e-democracy
programme. We have already sent information and forms to all parties to
check among their own members whether all of us are computer literate or
not. Based on the information when they were registering, 85% of members
are not computer literate. We cannot have MPs who cannot access the
Internet, who cannot even engage on social networks - Facebook and Twitter
- and other programmes that are available for us. You could then engage
your constituency offices there, create a vibrant debate with society there
as hon members ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): All of you ought to be really
orientated. Therefore, in July, when we come back, we have a training
session that will be operational for all of you to be compliant by the end
of this year. Programmes that will be included will be a beginner’s course
for those who have never, ever opened a computer – although you have
laptops and computers in your offices! I know some of you still have them
in boxes! Therefore, please ensure that you go for that beginner’s course.
Those who are average, please go for an advanced course so that you can
then be competent in other uses, and those who are advanced, there will be
a group for those who want to specialise in certain areas of the computer.
So, there will be these three groups. The classes will be group classes or
one-on-one sessions if you are shy about going to a group session.
[Laughter.] So they will be coming to your office at chosen hours and
times. So at the end all of us will be computer literate as hon members.
[Applause.]

Technology can no longer be avoided. I know that most of us are what we
call “BBTs” – born before technology. But the technology is now in your
home. Very soon the Minister of Communications will be introducing digital
television. There will be a lot of programmes and government information on
that particular television that will be in your house. So, you will be
compelled to know how to use that technology. Your cellular phones, that
Parliament has bought for all of you, have smart cards. They are smart
phones. Some of you only use them to receive calls and to phone, yet there
are so many uses for the phone. You can receive the Internet and so forth.

Please, let us ensure that we are part of the five million ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, please!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): ... South Africans who are active on
the Internet out of a population of 50 million. It is still a low number,
but MPs ought to be there. Our population consists of 70% young people, and
how you engage them is only through the Internet, because most of them are
active there.

Chairperson, let me take this opportunity to end by thanking the staff in
my office, and also in the Speaker’s Office, as well as the staff from the
Office of the Secretary to Parliament. They have been so helpful in terms
of giving support. When I criticised your lack of performance in certain
areas, I didn’t mean that all of you are bad. There are those who are very
competent and who go the extra mile in delivering the goods, and I have
worked with you in quite a number of areas. I just want to say thank you
very much and then support the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mr M S SHILOWA: Chairperson, we are all agreed that Parliament and, by
extension, the National Assembly, has to serve as the grand inquisition of
the nation. It is not enough, though, to proclaim this a people’s
Parliament as we often do. It is more important to look at how we ensure
that this, indeed, is not only perceived as such by the people of our
country, but that it comes across as such in the work that it does. How do
we ensure that topical issues of great moment serve before this Assembly to
enhance its relevance to the nation? If we don’t, very often people simply
assume that we meet here merely to shout at one another rather than to
engage in the current discourse.

Yet, it is in the media where political issues play out. It is the media
that seems to direct where political focus should fall. There is nothing
wrong with that being the case, provided we, as an Assembly, do not become
irrelevant in the process. Often when Ministers spring into action to
address a political problem, it is because it has caught the attention of
the media. Therefore we must, at all times, ask ourselves whether this
Assembly is indeed the grand inquisition of the nation, and where it is
not, to state what steps we should take to ensure that we move forward. The
ruling on the remarks by the hon George in this House leads us to finding
the House wanting in this regard.

As the principle of responsible government prevails in South Africa, the
executive, as it has been said by speakers before me, has to be fully
accountable to us as parliamentarians. We all agree that even though the
Constitution in various sections, including section 58(2), provides that we
play the whole role of oversight, we have not been able to play that role
more meaningfully, in part because of some of the responses that have been
coming from the Ministers. We also need to accept that shielding the
executive from accountability fools nobody. The way in which government
fails the people comes out into the open one way or another. How much
better it would be for the image of Parliament if the public perceived that
Parliament was succeeding in holding government accountable.

Since the advent of this Parliament, it has been mooted in several
quarters, including by yourself, hon Speaker, last year, that
interpellations should be brought back. This would certainly be a move in
the right direction. Unfortunately, I am told that former Speaker Ginwala
was once fond of observing that trying to implement something in Parliament
is like pushing an elephant. I hope that you, the Speaker, will be more
like a skilled mahout and coax the elephant to move on its own. We want to
see interpellations being introduced as mooted by you last year.

South Africans are more likely to trust our courts than Parliament because
Parliament never gives clear judgement on issues and is sometimes perceived
to be always hedging when there are big challenges to be faced. This we
seek to change because we must not make the courts the arbiter on policy-
formulation, but rather the arbiter in areas of implementation which we may
be unsure of.

There is also the question of secondary legislation, otherwise known as
regulation. In a constitutional democracy, it is imperative for all
legislation, including secondary legislation, to conform fully with the
Constitution. It is quite conceivable, in my view, that the plethora of
regulations which government has been implementing is a hangover from the
past. If they were to be brought before this House, we would find most of
them wanting, and/or they would not be able to stand up to the scrutiny of
our Constitution, let alone the Constitutional Court. This is a huge task,
but one which cannot, in good conscience, be left on the sideline. It is
something which I believe we must be able to focus on.

In addition to this, we need to be able to look at how we could ensure that
we define a better role for Parliament in secondary legislation. While it
may be very important that legislation in some areas provides for
regulations to be in place, in some other areas, that regulation goes
beyond merely regulating and becomes a second piece of legislation in
itself. I think that needs to be addressed.

The same goes for legislation. I agree with the hon Bapela that it is no
longer the main focus. Something that I think we must also try and work on,
however, is the way in which legislation is introduced. Sometimes it is
brought in in a rush, unrealistic timeframes are given, it is passed, and
then it is brought back for amendments to be made in Parliament, even
before that legislation has been put in place.

Mr H P CHAUKE: Chairperson, on a point of order: Can the speaker confirm
with Parliament that he will account for all the allocations given to his
party? [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order! Hon member, was that a
point of order? That was not a point of order.

Mr M S SHILOWA: I can confirm that Cope will account for all the resources
that we have received from Parliament, in time and in good time. Thank you
very much for the question. [Applause.]

I was saying that if we look at the time when Parliament began, the media
always used to be around here in the gallery. However, I think that as
debates in this House have begun to deteriorate, so too has media attention
on the content and the issues that we are discussing. Reporting on
Parliament is more about the conduct of Members of Parliament rather than
about the content and the debates that take place in this House. I think
this is something which all of us must work hard on to change.

If I may conclude ... [Interjections.]

Tshika, Nkulukumba Chauke. [Leave, hon Chauke.]

I would like to conclude by saying that we will support the budget.
However, we hope that we will be able to work better together to ensure
that we deal with the issues of oversight and accountability that have been
raised, and ensure that we are able to have real debates rather than have
debates of the deaf, where we come with speeches already prepared. Even if
a certain point has been covered, because you have come in to score a
point, you continue as if nothing has happened. [Interjections.] Thank you
very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, hon Speaker, hon Deputy President and colleagues,
firstly, the IFP joins the other speakers in thanking all persons who have
been involved in the leadership and management of Parliament over the past
year, and we wish them well for the years ahead.
Hon Chairperson, I want to start by saying that we really welcome the fact
that smaller parties are given at least three minutes to speak in the Votes
that we are dealing with now; we hope that this becomes a practice in this
House as well. This is because sometimes, as smaller parties, we get one
minute to speak. Before you even warm up and say hello, good morning and
how are you, your one minute has expired. I think in the interest of
democracy and Parliament being a place where the people know what political
parties have to say on whatever, we need more speaking time.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, members!

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, the Constitution and this Parliament of a free and
democratic South Africa have been in existence now for the past 16 years.
There have been 16 years of uncharted territory and an experiment in
building a unified nation in which all persons are free and equal. A nation
unified by its diversity and strengthened by its resolve to a better life
and future for all South Africans. The IFP believes that now is the
appropriate time for Parliament to reflect over the past 16 years - where
did we succeed; where did we fail; what could we improve on; and what could
we do differently?

To further reinforce an atmosphere of heightened engagement, which the hon
Speaker referred to earlier on, we suggest that a parliamentary indaba be
held, similar in structure to the Codesa talks whereby we can reflect on
the above questions mentioned. And here we have to involve the public as
well. It is very pleasing to note today a number of people in the gallery
despite the bad weather. However, I know on many occasions there is not a
single person in the gallery. Yet, some hon members come here and say “Mr
Speaker, colleagues and members in the gallery”, and I would look around
and not see anybody in the gallery. I think we need to ensure that more and
more people come to Parliament and listen to what is happening here in the
debates.

A few days ago last week - in fact, a week from Tuesday - I was part of a
debate which Idasa facilitated. One of the concerns of the civil society,
organisations and NGOs was their inability to get their messages across to
Parliament and to the executive. We were told at this debate that there
were about 65 000 school children that marched to Parliament, handed over a
memorandum and expected a response within seven days or so. They didn’t get
an acknowledgement even after seven days. This is a bad impression that is
being created out there when NGOs and the civil society can say these
things about us here in Parliament and the executive.

This Parliament must adopt the paradigm of forward-thinking if we are to
successfully steer our country into the 21st century. Carefully planned
actions, instead of hastily, ill-planned reactions, must be the order of
the day.

Parliamentary oversight of state organs must continue to be strengthened.
We support what the hon House Chairperson said because this is paramount in
ensuring effective service delivery by the various organs of state.

I want to reflect very briefly on the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and
Related Matters Act and the establishment of the parliamentary budget
office – I understand the hon Speaker did refer to this. But I think we
have waited far too long as Members of Parliament for this office to be
established, with professional personnel who could assist us as Members of
Parliament in ensuring that the legislation doesn’t become nice words
written on glossy paper. I trust that the Office of the Speaker will ensure
that we hasten the process of getting the parliamentary budget office in
place to assist us.

The other issue is whether we have enough parliamentary legal advisers.
When we attend to meetings in some of the committees, we find that legal
advisers have to run from committee to committee, and I don’t think this is
desirable. We need more legal advisers that come to our committee meetings.


In the last few seconds I have left, I want to agree with the House
Chairperson on his view of Scopa, Parliament and the relationship with the
executive. I think it is unfortunate that some members of the executive
feel that Scopa is some kind of a super committee up there that deals with
issues that it is not supposed to be dealing with.

However, this kind of thinking also permeates among some of our colleagues
who belong to portfolio committees. They feel that Scopa is some kind of a
super committee. Scopa is not there to interfere with the work of portfolio
committees. It has a particular role and responsibility to ensure that we
interrogate the financial statements of departments and reflect on the
report of the Auditor-General. We question departments on that and that
only. [Interjections.]

In conclusion, we as the IFP will support the Bill. Thank you, Chairperson.
[Time expired.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Chair, hon Speaker, in the previous year’s parliamentary
Budget Vote speech, I described the Chief Whips’ Forum as a soap opera,
because you could miss eight episodes and still be able to catch up with
the storyline. I am happy to state that this forum has, however, become
more efficient at dealing with issues and that, thankfully, the lead
characters are no longer continuously replaced by new actors from the
ruling party every few months.

This improvement has allowed us to build up a collegial spirit in the Chief
Whips’ Forum. As a team, we have been able to tackle some important issues
affecting this Parliament. The most important issue facing us all though,
is how we set about building up the credibility of Parliament and turning
it into an institution that is relevant in the lives of our people.

Unfortunately, past scandals like Travelgate have seriously damaged
Parliament’s credibility. The ID maintains that we now have to be beyond
reproach in all our affairs in order to repair this damage. The ID
therefore finds it disconcerting that we have now been forced to resort to
legal action to ensure that travel claims of members are subjected to
transparent scrutiny.

We also need to ask some serious questions about who has oversight over
Parliament. The Parliamentary Oversight Authority is not sufficiently
transparent, nor is it inclusive enough to provide proper oversight.

The Chief Whips’ Forum sometimes feels like international negotiations,
where action is only taken on those issues that are in the interests of
larger powers. Issues such as speaking time in Parliament, for instance,
are allowed to drag on because the status quo benefits the larger parties.
A parliamentary research report, however, found that we are the only
Parliament that allocates speaking time on a proportional basis, and we are
also the only Parliament that does not have speaking time principles
enshrined in its Rules. We need to urgently address this matter in the
interest of promoting a rigorous parliamentary debate that can advance
multiparty democracy.

Finally, I have been appalled at the lack of leadership that has been shown
by the larger parties in dealing with an issue of immense public interest,
namely party funding reform. For three years I have been trying in vain to
get Parliament to set up and ad hoc committee to debate legislation on this
issue. Parliament is the only institution that represents all national
political parties. Surely we should be showing leadership in setting up a
mechanism that can finally deal with this issue. Instead, the larger
parties, on both sides of the House, keep kicking this issue to touch, with
the effect that political party funding scandals continue to disgrace our
democracy. The ID demands that Parliament finally takes action on this
issue, and that political parties are held accountable to their rhetoric on
this issue.

Lastly, the ID would like to encourage Parliament and the Speaker to make
some space in this budget to hire a dedicated environmental officer who can
ensure that Parliament is proactive about setting an example for the rest
of the country on tackling what is a major challenge. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs E THABETHE: Chairperson, hon Deputy President, Speaker, Ministers and
Deputy Ministers present, and guests in the gallery, it has always been the
view of the ANC that to fulfil people’s aspirations and achieve human
developmental needs, inclusivity in participation is very important.
Throughout the 20th century, the ANC consciously fostered the unity of the
broadest range of forces.

The democratic breakthrough in 1994 ushered in an age in which Parliament
became an organ of the people’s power and people’s agenda. It is at this
site of power that the aspirations of the masses in their diversity lay.
The nonracial unity that we currently enjoy was forged in the crucible of
the working class struggle.

I must say through the Chairperson to you, Speaker, that I think it would
not be correct that we make it the custom for parties to have more time to
speak. Parties must go out and get votes because we are here as people’s
reps. [Applause.] We are representing people in this Parliament. And, I
believe, that the ANC got these votes, but we go out there ...

...  elangeni sishe sibe mnyama, sihambe singene indlu nendlu, singene
esontweni sithi: bantu votelani uKhongolose ngoba yilokhu azokwenza nani
nikanye. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[.... and bask in the sun until we turn black, entering each and every
household. We also enter the churches and say: people, vote for the ANC
because this is what it is going to do together with you.]

Hon Lance Greyling, you cannot get more time.
Hon Singh, you cannot get more time and have this made the custom. Go out
and get them so that you can be a representative of those people.
[Applause.]

I think we have to consider that, and, I’m sure, take the time so that you
have the courage to go out and get votes – so that then you can speak in
terms of the minutes, that they are proportional. We are a unique
Parliament. That is correct. Our Constitution is also unique. So, in that
space I don’t think it is a mistake. It will never be a mistake because it
finds its roots in the Freedom Charter and the ANC - we are representatives
when we give it. I mean, you must be happy for the ANC to give you time to
speak.

But you must not then play with that time and try to score cheap political
points, Lance Greyling. And we must be able then to make sure that as
Parliament, we are representing those communities. I must ask, Speaker:
could we get more allocations in terms of constituencies, because we have
to go out and service these constituencies as the people’s reps here in
Parliament. [Applause.] When it comes to constituencies, we don’t get a big
enough budget to deal with that. So I hope, through yourself, the Deputy
Speaker and the Secretary to Parliament, we can enjoy a better allocation
in terms of constituencies because it is those people that we have to go
back to and service and be able to tell what it is we are talking about.
I must say as well, in dealing with this issue, the democratic breakthrough
that we are all the beneficiaries of today is embraced in terms of the
democracy that the ANC-led government is pushing. In that regard, the
aspirations of South Africans in their diversity, as contained in the
Constitution, find their roots in the Freedom Charter. The Freedom Charter
contains the vision that steers the ANC-led government’s effort towards the
creation of a society based on democratic values, social justice and
fundamental human rights.

The Constitution also stresses the principles of accountability,
transparency and openness. We never saw these before 1994, I’m sorry to
say. Before, things were swept under the carpet. You would hardly hear
anything about what was happening from the government’s side, but because
of the ANC’s policies and principles and a vision that we must make sure
that we are transparent, people can also raise their views. We are much
better off now.

In the same vein, I must say that public participation in parliamentary
affairs is impacted upon by broader social and economic realities. I must
say, Speaker, large sections of our communities - the Chief Whip referred
to them in the rural areas - in peri-urban areas, townships and elsewhere,
form the majority of people that come from the underdeveloped areas. The
minority is well off and owns the means of livelihood to be able to fly
down to Cape Town and come to the hearings and make sure that their views
can be heard. They influence and shape what policy looks like. [Applause.]
We must make sure that we put in more effort to ensure that those people
that we represent can also have a chance; or we must look at a system that
will allow us to go about things better, as we did with the police and the
justice committees that were dealing with the Scorpions at the time. They
went out to different provinces and met with the people. This is what a
people’s Parliament should look like and do. They were able to go out and
get the people’s views out there. It was much the same thing as the way in
which we dealt with the Constitutional Assembly. We went out to
communities, to rural places all over, and then we were able to come back
and say, “Here is the product” after getting involved with those people.

Otherwise, our democracy will not be felt because those people will never
get a chance to participate in this Parliament. Most of them cannot afford
a flight and cannot afford accommodation at a five-star hotel or four-star
hotel. So, surely we as the ANC endorse a people-centred approach in that
it acknowledges the critical role of citizens because people are not
passive beneficiaries or charity seekers of the government. As a
developmental state, this is what we think a people’s Parliament will have
to do. And we must make sure that we can then deal with these challenges.

I think all of us agree here that we need more resources in terms of issues
raised by other parties here. I must say to my colleague the hon Shilowa, I
understand that regulations are part of an element that ensures that
legislation can be implemented. You can say that there is a plethora of
regulations.

At the time you were premier, you were doing the same thing with your MECs.
So, I find it very strange that today, when you are in the opposition, you
now say that these are not the right things. This is a mechanism that
allows the legislation to be better processed and to be more accessible to
many people. [Applause.] So, I’m sure with regard to that you would agree
with me that there is a lot that this ANC-led government has done to make
sure that we can amplify all of this. But the regulations play a key part
in terms of legislative implementation. So, in that respect, I believe that
we have to work together.

Parliament is the site of a battle of ideas and contestation of opposing
forces. It must deliver on its responsibilities towards the process of
fundamental social and economic transformation. This will bring to fruition
the aspirations of the masses.

With the impact of apartheid still visible socioeconomically in our
communities, Parliament should be the mouthpiece of the weak and the
vulnerable, especially women, the elderly and children. I must say that I
am proud to be a member of the ANC, because we are the only party without
legislation in place, but which has more than 30% women representing other
women and other forces here. [Applause.] And the youth ... [Interjections.]
No, no, no.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, hon members!

Mrs E THABETHE: You can howl, but howl at the relevant points and facts. It
is only the ANC at this point in time that ... [Interjections.] My time has
not expired.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Continue, hon member. Order, hon
members!

Mrs E THABETHE: So, we are the only party that has many women here,
credible women – not token women – who represent the people where they come
from. [Applause.] And we have a spectrum of youth that are able to give
vigilance and all it takes here in this Parliament. In that regard, I
think, for us we are the best ruling party ever - governing party ever -
that we are able to bring these about and make sure that we can then deal
with them.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chair, I rise on a point of order.
Is it appropriate - is it parliamentary - for the hon member to refer to
some members as token women members? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, I didn’t hear that,
but I will check the Hansard. I didn’t hear that the members are token
members. You may continue, hon member. Hon Elizabeth, continue please.
[Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, it is appropriate on occasions like this to ask
the hon member whether she did in fact say that. If she says she did, then
she must be asked to withdraw.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Mike Ellis, I said I would
check the Hansard, and then I will rule accordingly. So, don’t teach me
what to do. I have already taken that decision. [Applause.]

Adv T M MASUTHA: Hon Chair, in fact we can confirm that the member did not
say that.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Mike Masutha, you are out of
order. Hon Elizabeth, could you continue?

Mrs E THABETHE: Thank you, Chairperson. Parliament should be at the
forefront of societal education so as to build a conscious society that
understands that the Constitution is supreme. The society we are building
today arises from the ashes of a deeply divided past, characterised by
strife, conflict, untold human suffering and injustice, in which
participation in political, economic and social life was based on race. In
order to fulfil the aspirations and ideals of all South Africans,
Parliament must be at the forefront of rallying all to a common national
agenda, which is a job for everyone who is elected here because we have a
responsibility from the people who elected us to represent them here in
Parliament.

The democratic Parliament derives its character from fulfilling these tasks
– the ideals and aspirations of the masses. The tasks that Parliament is
facing and continues to be confronted with are similar to those that the
country has to resolve. We believe that through the ANC-led government,
with everything that we inherited in 1994, we are able to make sure that
the people really can govern, and that the people are part and parcel of
our parliamentary process. I hope that we will be able to increase that
and, as we move forward, that we are able then to make sure that we don’t
forget the role of our people, their participation, from time to time. I
must thank the people for being part of this and for making sure that we
are all of one mind.

Kaofela ha rona ha re le mona, re na le boikarabelo. Re ka ba le ho se
dumellane ho dintho tseo re di etsang, empa qetellong batho ba re
kgethileng ho tla mona, ba batla tswelopele le hore tlala e fele. Ha ho na
hore o wa mokgatlo ofe, kaofela re tshwanetse ho sebedisana mmoho le mmuso
wa ANC, hobane o na le tjhebelopele e tjhatsi. O na le tjhebelopele e
shebang hore na batho ba ka ithusa jwang ha mmuso le wona o ba thusa. Ke
tshepa hore Palamente ena ha e tswela pele e lokela ho bona mathata a
jwalo.

Motsamaisi wa Dipuisano, haholo ke kopa hore re leke ho kenyelletsa batho
mekgatlong ena le ho ba mema hore ba tle mona, empa re leke ho fetola tsela
eo re sebetsang ka yona ho isa Palamente bathong. Re se ke ra dulela ho bua
Sekgowa se seholo sa Harvard University ya Massachusetts, ha se sona se tla
lokisa hore batho ba rona e be karolo ya puso. Ha re yeng re bue le bona
mme ba tla utlwisisa, ba kgone ho tswela pele mmoho le rona. Ke a leboha.
[Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows)

[All of us here have a responsibility. We may differ on how we do things
but at the end, the people who elected us want development and they also
want hunger to be eradicated. It does not matter which party you belong to,
all of us must work together with the ANC government because it has a
vision on how people can help themselves in addition to government’s help.
I hope that as we go forward, this Parliament will look at such problems.

Speaker, I request that we should try to include people in these
organisations and also invite them to come here; but we must try to change
the manner in which we take Parliament to the people. We must stop speaking
complicated language from Harvard University of Massachusetts, because it
is not what will make people to be part of us. Let us go and talk to them.
They will understand and be able to accompany us on our way forward. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Chairperson, Mr Speaker and Members of Parliament, this
present Parliament is one year old. In this year, we have seen the
introduction of a whole new crop of members, as well as several new
government departments. The new executive has made some attempt towards a
more consultative relationship with all the parties in Parliament. This has
also been felt in this House where our concerns regarding speaking times
have been addressed somewhat. We are grateful for the improvement, however
marginal. I was personally very excited when I looked at the screen and saw
that I was given 12 minutes, but after a few minutes it was changed to
three minutes. [Laughter.]

However, it is our belief that this budget and the policy that it underpins
still fail to address many of the underlying concerns about this
institution.

The proportional formula that is applied to speaking times, funding and
other aspects of the functioning of Parliament do not foster an environment
where all voices get a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The functioning
of Parliament should be measured against its success at allowing all voices
to be heard. This can only be achieved in two ways: firstly, by giving all
political parties the time, resources and opportunities to represent the
views of their voters; and secondly, by ensuring genuine public
participation in the formulation of policy and law.

Our country faces huge challenges, not least of which being the worst
inequality on the planet. It is our constitutional and moral duty to ensure
that we explore all avenues and listen to as many voices as possible in our
pursuit of solutions.

In the early 1990s, we proved to the world our unique ability to find
solutions when we enter into a genuine dialogue amongst ourselves. This
Parliament should seek to emulate that spirit of nation-building. The UDM
supports this budget, and we hope that the time will be increased in the
future. I thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, hon Speaker, when any politician or Member of
Parliament gets onto this podium and starts off by saying “we are the only
party that does this and we are the only party that does that”, then alarms
should go off, and we should realise that.

At the time of this debate, 20% of the duration of the Fourth Parliament
has already expired. I know that the hon Chief Whip of the ANC - the ruling
party - feels very strongly that this is the Fourth Parliament, and things
will be done differently, and that it will not be business as usual.
However, it is all about perceptions. The public and even some sections of
the media draw no distinction between the First, Second, Third or Fourth
Parliament. To them Parliament is Parliament. They associate Parliament
with politicians and their general perception of politicians is
unfortunately rather negative. There is a massive challenge to all of us to
rehabilitate the image of politicians, as well as that of Parliament.

The hon Chief Whip of the ANC said today, and I quote:

   We must ensure that Parliament is respected by our respective
   constituencies, be that on the side of government or the opposition.

I agree with that; it is absolutely correct. However, if a point of order,
which is not actually a point of order, is put on the agenda – the one
which was raised by the hon Chauke just now - then it tends to give people
the perception that we are not to be taken seriously. Mr Chauke knew very
well that it was not a point of order he was raising, but that he was
trying to score a cheap political point.

How do we get the respect of the people out there? This won’t happen
automatically. So, how do we do it? The Fourth Parliament must be relevant.
Are we relevant and topical? I don’t think so. All emphasis is on oversight
at the moment, and I understand that. However, the Constitution clearly
says that the NA is elected to represent the people and the NCOP is
selected to represent provinces. Section 42(3) of the Constitution
stipulates that we should represent the people by providing a national
forum for public consideration of issues. I think it is in this terrain
that we miserably fail.

Die Parlement word nie gebruik as ’n platform waar die belangrike sake van
die dag, wat in die harte van die mense daar buite is, gedebateer, in
diepte bespreek, tot ’n punt gevoer, oor gestoei en antwoorde voor gesoek
word nie. Ons mis daardie geleenthede.

Die Parlement moet verstaan dat ons, ingevolge die Grondwet, op dieselfde
vlak as die regsprekende gesag en die uitvoerende gesag is. Ons is nie
ondergeskik aan die uitvoerende gesag nie. Ons is ook nie ondergeskik aan
die regsprekende gesag nie. Volgens die Grondwet is daardie drie bene van
die staatsgesag gelyk, en ons moet ons rol volledig daarin speel. Ons moet
dit elke dag doen. Die Parlement moet nie probeer om ten opsigte van
politieke standpunte wat deur partye voorgestaan word, noodwendig oor die
regerende party ... Die VF Plus sal die Begrotingspos steun. [Tyd
verstreke.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Parliament is not being used as a forum where the important business of
the day, which people out there are passionate about, is debated, discussed
in depth, brought to a head, engaged with and for which answers are sought.
We miss those opportunities.

Parliament must realise that we are, in terms of the Constitution, on a par
with the judicial and the executive authority. We are not subordinate to
the executive authority. We are also not subordinate to the judicial
authority. In terms of the Constitution these three tiers of government are
equal, and we must participate fully therein. We have to do this every day.
Parliament should not try to, with regard to the political views of some
parties, necessarily about the ruling party ... The FF Plus will support
the Budget Vote. [Time expired.]]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, hon Speaker, as you know, global financial pressures
have added to domestic financial demands in every area, and Members of
Parliament are acutely aware of the need to ensure that every cent spent
must deliver. The objectives of Parliament have to be measured against
demands for spending in other areas.

While the overall appropriation to Parliament shows an increase of
R71,2 million, it is in fact a decrease of 0,26% in real terms. This
decrease will necessitate stringent measures in some areas, but should not
impact too negatively on Parliament’s ability to strengthen its oversight
function, as an additional R448,4 million has been allocated over the
medium-term to accommodate additional capacity for the oversight function
of committees, including researchers, content and language specialists.
This is important because effective oversight will impact directly on
service delivery. Improved service delivery must receive our focused
attention.

Last year the ACDP was concerned that financial support to political
parties represented in Parliament and constituency offices around the
country showed a significant decrease. Given that constituency offices
constitute the closest level of interaction between members and the public
and provide the best platform from which members can get to grips with
issues confronting their constituents, this was a blow for the people’s
Parliament. Members of Parliament are hugely constrained when parties
receive budgets totally inadequate to pay market-related salaries for
researchers and other support staff. It is counterproductive, and it is not
in the public’s best interests. This year the Programme has seen an
increase, in real terms, of 2,13%, which is encouraging. This will help
ensure that the necessary tools and support services are provided to assist
members in their constituency duties.

The tension between time spent on work done at Parliament and time
allocated to members to work in constituencies too often results in
constituency time being sacrificed. Parliament must not be allowed to
hijack members who should be in their constituencies more.

The ACDP notes with approval that the 2010 Estimates of National
Expenditure indicate that Parliament intends to review its policies,
particularly those dealing with communication, entertainment and travel to
ensure efficiency in spending. Slight improvements have been noted
regarding speaking time for smaller parties, but the ACDP would like to see
Parliament take a closer look at comparative situations and the philosophy
of speaking time allocation in general.

One good thing, at least from my point of view, is that the ANC has not
been quite so boring of late as they attempt to fill up their exorbitant
amount of speaking time, and the small concessions for opposition parties
have produced more useful Budget debates.

The ACDP would like to thank the Speaker, all office bearers and staff of
Parliament for their commitment and hard work. We will support this budget.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs S V KALYAN: Chairperson, Core Objective 3 of Parliament’s policy
imperatives is to facilitate public participation and involvement, hence
the term “people’s Parliament”. Our Parliament’s idea of public
participation is to recreate Parliament in some province at huge cost and
use it as a platform to gain political mileage for the governing party. I’m
glad that sanity has finally prevailed and that this practice has been
abandoned in so far as the National Assembly is concerned.

Real public participation does not happen here in our Parliament, and I
will give you two examples to illustrate my point. When it comes to
international agreements, the executive binds all of South Africa without
our knowledge. Parliament is not involved at any stage, and there is no
strategy to monitor and exercise oversight over the implementation of
international agreements, nor its impact on citizens. Portfolio committees
are merely expected to rubber-stamp the executive’s undertaking. The
oversight and accountability model is supposed to address this, but we are
well into a full year of the Fourth Parliament, and this has yet to happen.
A second example is that South Africa has an ambassador to the United
Nations. Yet, has this Parliament ever discussed any of the decisions the
ambassador makes on behalf of South Africa, or have public hearings ever
been held?

Parliamentary Democracy Offices, PDOs, are supposedly meant to be organs of
Parliament to expand Parliament’s access and to be in touch with people on
the ground. The Chief Whips Forum requested a briefing from the Secretary’s
office on this issue. The officials failed to come the first time, citing
that a workshop was more important and, on the second request, that they
first had to consult with the presiding officers before coming to address
the Chief Whips Forum. The DA seriously questions whether PDOs are
necessary in the first place, whether it is carrying out its mandate and
whether its existence justifies the expense.

A review of Chapter 9 and associated institutions was completed by an ad
hoc committee chaired by former MP Kader Asmal. Huge resources were spent
on it, and it dealt with primarily participatory issues. Why has this
report not been dealt with in Parliament? Given the current dysfunctional
nature of the, CGE, Commission for Gender Equality, and the Youth
Commission, we should be looking seriously at the recommendations in the
report, instead of using it as a doorstop.

South Africa played a leading role in the establishment of the Pan-African
Parliament and in fact, one of our own MPs, hon Madasa, has recently been
appointed as the Clerk of the Pan-African Parliament. However, as a Member
of Parliament, I wish to register my frustration and disappointment of the
Pan-African Parliament representing South Africa at the lack of research
and other resources accorded to the South Africa delegation. Given that the
Pan-African Parliament is going through a transformation process, the
burden on the delegation has increased, but, regrettably, there are no
resources. Speaker, I hope you will address this matter as a matter of
urgency.

Parliament’s strategic plan was tabled late, which in itself is quite
unfortunate. It is my considered opinion that the strategic plan underpins
the budget. Therefore, how do we as a Parliament monitor the budget if it
does not go before any committee?

In conclusion, hon Thabethe, it is unfortunate that you refer to all the
women parliamentarians in this House as tokens. I can assure you that all
the women parliamentarians in the DA are here on merit. Your choice of
terminology is offensive. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Chairperson, hon Speaker, hon
Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members, the House Chairperson:
Internal Arrangements was appointed in accordance with the National
Assembly Rule 14, amended on 26 May 2009. This Rule provides that the
Speaker would allocate functions and responsibilities to the House
Chairperson and announce this in the ATC. These functions and
responsibilities are as follows: ensuring the wellbeing and interests of
members; overseeing and ensuring alignment of structures dealing with
members’ interests and facilities; receiving and providing reports on
issues of members’ interests; ensuring the enhancement of capacity of
members; ensuring the development of policy in respect of former members;
developing and proposing policy on benefits and facilities for former
members; and participating in liaison with the various parliamentary
committees, e.g. the National Assembly Programming Committee, Chief Whips’
Forum, National Assembly Forum, Joint Rules, National Assembly Rules and
the Joint Parliamentary Budget Forum.

As the House Chairperson on internal arrangements, I chair the Quarterly
Consultative Forum which provides the vehicle for processing what I have
just mentioned. The Quarterly Consultative Forum is a parliamentary forum
where political parties in Parliament must represent the interests of their
members without failure. However, we are experiencing some challenges
regarding effective representation.

During the conference of the Speakers’ Forum in March this year, Shameela
Seedat from Idasa referred to Parliament as “a theatre of dreams”. We know
that Lebo Mashile, in her poem, brought the matter uncomfortably closer to
us when she said, “you and I; We are the keepers of dreams”. However, the
vexed questions for us members remain: What are these dreams? To whom does
the dream belong? Who should fulfil this dream, and how?

To begin answering these questions in a reasonable manner, we need to
revisit the idea and the meaning of the covenant; the solemn agreement that
has conferred on all of us the honour of being called elected
representatives and the voice of the people. I believe we will do justice
to this social contract only if we express unwavering confidence in the
sovereignty of Parliament, the state or the Republic, which is the
embodiment of the collective will of the people.

I am often concerned when Members of Parliament do not make full use of
some of the parliamentary structures at their disposal, intended to equip
and empower them to excel in their service of the people. For instance, the
Quarterly Consultative Forum – which now meets monthly – focuses on
internal arrangements to cater for the interests and development of all
Members of Parliament. We believe that a healthy, mentally alert, well-
trained, sufficiently skilled and well-resourced Member of Parliament
becomes an effective living tool to realize the mission and vision of
Parliament. He or she is the agent of genuine transformation for the
advancement of good for all the governed, in particular the majority of
South Africans who are poor, homeless, unemployed, living with ill health,
marginalised and underdeveloped.
The Speaker referred to this institution as “a strong, powerful institution
of democracy”.

In ensuring the success of our forum, we have cultivated a good
relationship with service providers. These service providers are internal
and external. Internal service providers include Members of Parliament and
parliamentary services, and external service providers include the
Department of Public Works and the VIP Protection Services of the Police.

Under internal service providers we have the support of units with
different responsibilities. Various projects are in progress in
consultation with various functional departments. The internal service
providers play a pivotal role in ensuring that Parliament operates smoothly
and that Members of Parliament are empowered and skilled and that their
interests are generally enhanced.

Under the Institutional Support Services unit we have managed to set up a
team to work on the improvement of the catering services. I think there was
also a concern that the House’s microphones are not adequate. The original
request for microphones was processed and a feasibility study was done. It
was agreed that 120 microphones be installed. Sound and Vision has
submitted a proposal to the Secretary to Parliament for funding. For
assistance around this and other support, including parking in Parliament
and maintenance, I am going to ask members to contact Mr Lionel Klassen,
the manager of Institutional Division, at 0214033100.

Members’ Facilities Section provides a service to all members and
administers and monitors all claims submitted and paid to members. The
section is further responsible for the administration and support of the
travel system through which members procure their travel. There was an
increase in the budget of Members’ Facilities. The increase was, in part,
due to changes in the policy approved at the end of the third Parliament.
These changes included additional travel allocations, provision for
improved facilities for members over 70 years of age and members with
special needs. The budget also includes compensation for members,
facilities for members, as well as transfer payments to political parties.
The facilities further include travel and related costs, telephone
expenditure, relocation, training and facilities for former members and
Ministers.

Facilities are provided to members in terms of the policy. In consultation
with Members, the section continually reviews policy provisions and the
services provided, to ensure that the changing needs of members are met.
For further information in this regard, I am going to refer members to Ms
Linda Harper, who is the manager of Members’ Facilities, on 0214033421

Parliament has embraced ICT, information and communications technology,
solutions as tools of trade to enable Members of Parliament to fulfil their
duties efficiently and effectively. During the third Parliament, ICT
equipment given to members was either underutilised or not used at all due
to specific circumstances of individual members. A wider choice that is
specifically targeted at the requirements of each member would greatly
reduce this underutilisation.

As part of the Fourth Parliament project, a subproject was created to
identify, procure and implement ICT equipment for the fourth democratic
Parliament in line with members’ needs and requirements. To optimise
entitlements and utilisation, members were provided with the following:
One, a laptop of choice with a docking station and a mobile printer for use
both on and off site. On site, the member can use a docking station and its
accessories. Off site, the member can undock the laptop and use it anywhere
in the world. The major benefit is to simplify information management as
there is only one source of information both on and off site. This package
includes a mobile printer.

Two, a multifunction desktop printer was also provided for on-site
printing.

Three, a mobile device of choice, selected from the following collection of
mobile devices: an HTC S740, a Nokia 371, a Samsung Omnia 1900 and a Sony
Ericsson Xperia 1, was provided for members.

Eat you heart out, hon Bapela. I can talk about these things!

For further assistance, I am going to refer members to Mr Malose Dolo, who
is the manager of the project. His number is 0214038042.

The section of Members’ Training is responsible for providing support and
administration of training programmes for members. This falls directly
within the parliamentary responsibilities of the Deputy Speaker.

The Advisory Training Committee, made up of Members of Parliament and which
is responsible for advising the Presiding Officers on training matters, has
been established. It is currently reviewing programmes which were offered
in the previous parliamentary term with a view to recommend relevant and
new programmes.

In the interim, the following programmes are being implemented: a
certificate in Public Finance, offered by Unisa; and a B Comm honours
degree, offered by the University of the Western Cape. A new programme
sponsored by the Speakers Forum and facilitated by the Public
Administration Leadership and Management Academy ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon House Chairperson, your time
has expired.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): How much time was I allocated,
Madam Chair? [Interjections.] Was it really 12 minutes?

Ms N P KHUNOU: Modulasetilo, Maloko a a tlotlegang a Palamente, le baeng ba
rona ba ba tlotlegang ... [Chairperson, hon Members and distinguished
guests ...]

... the maxim, “working together, we can do more”, applies also to the
relationship between the legislature and the executive. The relationship
between the legislature and the executive should be a complementary and
mutually reinforcing working relationship that contributes in a dynamic way
to the realisation of the needs and aspirations of all South Africans - in
short, an activist Parliament in a developmental state.

Every constitution arises from and should be understood in a particular
historical context. When you transpose constitutional discourses from one
context to another, you must do so with care. Much can get lost in the
translation. Carelessly transplanting a healthy and beneficial plant from
one soil type to another can result either in the death of the plant or its
metamorphosis into an invasive weed that displaces and kills indigenous
plants. In the same way, doctrines such as that of the separation of powers
must be dug up with caution out of the soil of the struggles against
absolute monarchy, and must be carefully planted in the soil of a
constitutional garden nourished by the struggle against colonialism and
apartheid in which millions are awaiting to harvest the fruits of unity,
nonracialism, nonsexism, democracy and prosperity.

Our Constitution is regarded as one of the best in the world, not only
because it entrenches the Bill of Rights and enjoins the state and legal
subjects to respect and fulfil such rights, but it is also based on the
values of equality, human dignity and freedom.

Parliament has a duty to ensure through legislation that the spirit,
objectives and purport of the Constitution are promoted. It is through
Parliament’s legislative power and oversight that the divisions of the past
can be healed and a society based on democratic values, social justice and
fundamental human rights can be established.

Parliamentary vigilance is the pillar on which the fight against
unemployment should be anchored. It is indeed our duty to ensure, as the
ANC election manifesto indicates, that workers rights are human rights. In
this regard, we should tighten legislation to close all loopholes that
allow for the persistence of the infringement of socioeconomic and group
rights. The vulnerable people of our society depend on their elected
representatives for protection. In this regard we should ensure that we
stem the tide of continued labour exploitation and casualisation and that
the plight of farm workers and farm dwellers receives immediate attention.
We need to act against the continued whimsical and wanton evictions of farm
workers and farm dwellers.

As we continue to strike a balance between diversity and tolerance, freedom
and order and the will of the majority and the interests of the minority,
let us be steadfast and immovable in building a national democratic society
in which equality is respected and fulfilled by its entire people.

South Africa’s role in creating a better Africa and a better world hinges
basically on the strategic approach to achieve an international order with
greater security, peace, dialogue and greater equilibrium between the poor
and the rich countries. The ANC’s quest for peace also derives from the
internationalist tradition, with its origins in the Freedom Charter,
unequivocally stating that:

   South Africa shall strive to maintain world peace and the settlement of
   all international disputes by negotiation - not war.

This provides a perspective from which the ANC should intervene on all
matters of foreign affairs and international relations. Hence, the pursuit
of the country’s international agenda as a contribution to South Africa’s
own growth and development. These include consolidating the African Agenda,
strengthening the deepening relations with countries of the South,
transforming relations with the countries of the North, pursuing the
economic diplomacy and participating in the global system of governance.

This led, inter alia, to the recommendation that the Department of Foreign
Affairs be renamed by our President as the Department of International
Relations and Co-operation. It is, therefore, clear that South Africa’s
strategy is firmly anchored in the African Agenda, which serves as a pillar
upon which South Africa’s engagement with the international community
rests, and that there is co-operation with the developing countries of the
South in order to tilt the balance in favour of our developmental agenda.

The India-Brazil-South Africa partnership, a forum of like-minded states,
is a substantial progress in South-South co-operation, balancing politics
of solidarity and economic activities, including the support of Nepad
projects. It has developed common positions on global issues and built an
issue-based trilateral co-operation. These advances demonstrate that effect
is given to the ANC’s commitment to improve co-operation among countries of
the South in terms of economic relations, socio-political programmes and
efforts to ensure peace and equitable global relations.

Ga re a itlisa fa, re tlile ka mokgatlho wa rona. [We are not here on our
own, we are representing our party.]

Coupled with emphasis on economic diplomacy, was a resolve to improve the
international marketing of South Africa and Africa, which led to the
creation of a number of bodies, which directly and indirectly contribute to
a better understanding of the predominately positive character of South
Africa’s economic development.

In its manifesto for the 2009 elections, the ANC says:

   We are going to spare no energy in our efforts to find urgent democratic
   and lasting solutions to the situations in Zimbabwe, Swaziland, Sudan,
   the Democratic Republic of Congo, Western Sahara, Somalia and other
   countries. We are going to continue to support the global campaign to
   achieve the millennium development goals by 2015; we are going to conduct
   awareness campaigns among our people to prevent incidents of xenophobia;
   and we are going to work for the integration into our communities of all
   who are residents in our country, acknowledging the contribution that
   foreign nationals make to our country.

The Parliamentary Group on International Relations, as a substructure of
the Joint Rules Committee, is the vehicle through which strategic and
policy impetus to Parliament’s international participation can be provided.
It is also this body that will access and make recommendations on how
matters raised in international forums that Parliament is affiliated to and
participate in are discussed and relayed to the citizens of South Africa.
Focus groups will also be set. These focus groups will encompass the
following affiliated multilateral bodies, the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
the Southern African Development Community Parliamentary Forum, the Pan-
African Parliament, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the
African, Caribbean, Pacific-European Union and the Association for the
Educational and Cultural Advancement of African people. The size of these
groups will be influenced by the multilateral body they represent and
whether the delegates are appointed by the House for the duration of the
parliamentary term or on an ad hoc basis for each activity of the
multilateral body. Each focus group will meet at least four times a year in
accordance with the programme of the work of its multilateral body.

In conclusion, our Parliament in this regard aims not only to entrench
democracy within the country but also to act democratically and encourage
democratic practices throughout the continent and the world at large in the
quest to build a better Africa in a better world.

Ke batla gore go leloko la DA mo Kapa le seke la nna naledi e e phatsimang
kwa ntle fela mme le simolole fa gae. Fa o ya kwa Khayelitsha kgotsa kwa
metsesetoropong e batho bantsho ba nnang kwa go yona mo Kapa Bophirima, o
fitlhela gore dikereke tsotlhe tsa batho bantsho di ne tsa senngwa ka ntlha
ya gore go twe ga di a agiwa mo lefelong le di tshwanetseng go agiwa mo go
lona. Fela, fa o lebelela fa di sentsweng teng, go agilwe dithabene.
Motho o ipotsa gore: A naa la re batho bantsho ba tshwanetse gore ba nne ba
nwa nnotagi? O fitlhela go na le mafelo a dikoloi tse di senyegileng. Ga go
sepe se se siameng se se tla thusang setšhaba sa rona. Fa re le kwa ntle re
ganetsana jalo le jalo a re direng bonnete ba gore mo re nnang teng re
fetola botshelo ba batho ba rona. Batho ba ya kwa dikerekeng go bona
tshegetso ya maitsholo. Fa o senya dikereke o itse gore ga o senye matshelo
a batho fela mme mo godimo ga moo o a ba nyenyafatsa wa re batho bao ga ba
na tlhaloganyo. (Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[I would like to tell the DA member from Cape Town to stop being a star
that only shines externally, but it should start at home. When you go to
Khayelitsha and other black townships in the Western Cape, you will find
that all black communities’ church buildings have been destroyed because it
was believed that they were not built on the right land. However, when you
look at the places where they were demolished, you find that the same area
was later allocated for building taverns.

Does this imply that black people should live on drinking liquor throughout
their lives? You also find scrapyards nearby. There is nothing good that is
being done for our communities. Although we could be disagreeing on issues,
we should not forget to ensure that we strive to change the lives of our
people. People attend church services for moral support. When you destroy
churches, you must also note that you are not only destroying people’s
lives but you are also undermining them because you think that they can not
use their common sense.]

Churches are the only hope for our people. That is where we get our morals
from. So, if you go and demolish churches you are saying to the people out
there that you don’t consider them. This is because you have never
experienced this poverty but read about it over the newspapers. That is why
it is easy for you to demolish churches and leave the scrap yards and
taverns because you are belittling us into a drunken society. We are saying
that we are going to fight you by whatever means possible and make sure
that we change the lives of our people, and we are going to be equal. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mna L M MPHAHLELE: Mohlomphegi Modulasetulo, maloko le baeng ka moka, ke
bula polelo ya ka ka gore PAC e thekga kabo ya ditšhelete tša Palamente.
Empa go na le dintlha tše bohlokwa tšeo ke nyakago go di hlagiša. Re kwa
gore Palamente ye e swanetše gore e ame setšhaba dilong ka moka tšeo e di
dirago. Empa re nyamišwa ke tšhelete ye nnyane yeo e le go R85 milione yeo
ka yona re tlago ama setšhaba dipolelong tša rena. Re ka ama setšhaba bjang
dipolelong tša rena re na le mapheko a mantši ao setšhaba sa gaborena se
swanetšego go a tshela pele lentšu la sona le kwagala?

Lepheko la mathomo ke leleme. Dilo tše ntši tšeo di ya go setšhabeng di
ngwadilwe ka leleme leo setšhaba se sa le kwešišego. Le ge re re re bitša
pitšo goba re re setšhaba se kgeregele lefelong le le itšego gore se tle se
kwe sebiletšwa, o hwetša re bapatša tsebišo yeo ka leleme leo setšhaba se
sa le kwego. Bjale, re le ba PAC re re ge eba re nyaka go ama setšhaba ka
ditaba tša setšhaba, a re boleleng ka maleme ao setšhaba se a kwago le go a
kwešiša.

Ntlha ya bobedi ke ya go tiiša kopano le temokrasi. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[Mr  L  M  MPHAHLELE:  Honourable  Chairperson,  members  and  distinguished
guests,  I  would  like  to  comment  that  I  support  Parliament’s  budget
allocation. However, there  are  some  important  points  I  would  like  to
highlight. We are told that Parliament has to  involve  the  public  in  all
matters, so we are disappointed by the insufficient funds to  the  value  of
R85 million with which we are supposed to involve the  public.  How  can  we
involve the public in our debates while they still  have  to  overcome  many
challenges before their voices can be heard?

The first challenge is language. So many official correspondence is  written
in a language that is foreign to the public. Even when we  call  for  public
meetings, you find that the announcements are made in the language  that  is
foreign to the public. As the PAC, we would like to recommend  that  if  you
want to involve the public effectively in matters of the public, please  use
a language that is familiar to them.

The second point I would like to indicate is  that  of  strengthening  unity
and democracy.]

Xhamela, ndiyavuma ukuba masiqinise umanyano nolawulo lwentando yesininzi.
Kodwa ekuqiniseni umanyano nolawulo lwentando yesininzi, sikhumbule ukuba
umzabalazo awuqalwanga yiANC, ungaqalwanga yiPAC, umzabalazo kudala ukhona.
Masingalibali ukuba, phambi kokuba siphathe izikhali, kukho amaqhawe
awayekhona phambi kwethu, amadoda afana nooDomani, awathi aqala umzabalazo
wezikhali, kodwa namhlanje asazi ukuba oongobani. Ndifuna ukuthi abaThwa
namaKhoi nabo babesilwa belwela eli lizwe singawabali xa sikhumbula
amaqhawe ethu.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[I agree, Xhamela, that we have to strengthen unity and democracy, but in
doing that, we must remember that the struggle had long been there and it
was neither the ANC nor the PAC who started it. Let us not forget that
there were already heroes before we even started with armed struggle, men
like Damani, who formed the armed struggle and whom we do not recognise
nowadays. I want to say that the San and the Khoi-Khoi have also fought for
this country, and we must not forget them when we commemorate our heroes.]

Ke rata go boela tabeng ya temokrasi. Ye ga ke tsebe gore na ke temokrasi
goba ke “tolakrasi”. Ke bolela se ka lebaka la gore gantši mokgatlo o
swanetše gore o be le tšhelete gore o kgone go ikwalakwatša setšhabeng.
Tsela yeo ditšhelete di abjago ka yona Palamenteng ga e tiiše temokrasi.
Bahumi ba a humišwa gomme mekgatlo yeo e lego gore e a diila e tšwela pele
le bodiidi.

Ntlha ya boraro ke ya gore re hlabolle Maloko a Palamente ka dithuto ...
[Nako e fedile.] Ke a leboga. [Tšhwahlelo.] [Legofsi.] (Translation of
Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[I refer back to the issue of democracy. I am not too sure if this is
democracy. The reason I am saying this is because in various instances the
party has to have enough funds for their campaigns. The manner in which the
funds are allocated in Parliament is undemocratic. The rich parties get
richer at the expense of the poor ones which are getting poorer.

The third point I would like to address is the development of Members of
Parliament with regards to their education ... [Interjections.] Thank you.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]]

Mr N T GODI: Chairperson, Mr Speaker, comrades and hon members, may I state
from the start the APC’s support for the budget. Parliament’s key
responsibility is to make laws and oversee executive action. At the
beginning, which was in 1994, there was a necessary focus on lawmaking to
transform our country into a nonracial and nonsexist democracy.

Progressively, the shift, especially in this Fourth Parliament, has been to
focus on the very important aspect of oversight. Clearly the space and
energy is there to hold the executive accountable, but there is still room
for improvement, especially in terms of focus, depth and impact. Parliament
has a responsibility to empower or capacitate its committees, and committee
members have an obligation to do their work diligently.

Yes, the executive accounts to Parliament. But this does require a
restatement that indicates that this is both a political and constitutional
mandate and not a matter of personal preference. Poorly capacitated
committees render oversight a mere formality without a mutual enlightenment
that enhances the quality of service delivery. The executive has the
responsibility to ensure that the information brought to Parliament is
qualitative, accurate and timeous. That is, officials should not come
before committees ill-prepared and also mislead Members of Parliament, and
annual reports must not have inaccurate data and facts and they should be
submitted in time.

The APC is raising these issues because in the past financial year we have
seen officials coming unprepared and having to be sent back, officials
blatantly misleading members, and Parliament receiving annual reports
without cause very late or not receiving them at all. Oversight over the
executive is an indispensable necessity that must be done without fear,
favour or prejudice and committees must not be seen to be currying favours
with the executive at the expense of robust oversight.

Parliament’s support for committees has been tardy.  Sometimes  there  is  a
pedestrian approach to attending to  committee  challenges.  Committees  are
the engines of Parliament. Let us hope that beginning with the new  increase
in the allocation of committees, there  will  be  changes  for  the  better.
Certainly there are visible improvements, but much more still  needs  to  be
done.

As Parliament we represent our people. Their hopes and dreams for  a  better
life  are,  in  some  way,  dependent  on  our  work.  This  is  a  people’s
Parliament. Let the needs and concerns of our people be  at  the  centre  of
our work. The APC is steadfast in its commitment to work for a society  that
is democratic in form, nonracial in character and socialistic in content.  I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairman, I want to say to the hon Khunou that she must be
sure of her facts before she decides to speak on matters she knows very
little of. It is not at all clear why she chose to speak about the
demolition of churches in this debate, but I suppose if you have nothing
much to say, that is the kind of thing you do.

Many people have chosen to speak today about oversight and accountability,
and it is obviously a very important issue. But the hon Davidson pointed
out some of the serious problems facing us in terms of oversight and
accountability and the Programme attached to it. Certainly, this does need
addressing. He also pointed out that it is a cause for real concern that
the Joint Rules Committee seldom meets. But as far as this House is
concerned, the National Assembly, it is of even greater concern, because
the Joint Rules Committee of this House never sits.

It is to this body, Mr Speaker, that the DA has submitted various
proposals, some years ago already, to look at the whole issue of oversight
and accountability. Quite frankly, the proposals we have made also attempt
to address the ways that our parliamentary programme operates. Certainly we
believe that our parliamentary programme is in urgent need of a revamp.

You said in your opening remarks, Mr Speaker, that during the past year we
have built on the legacy of previous Parliaments. You are quite right, sir.
This Parliament is regrettably as boring as the last one was. The truth is,
our parliamentary programmes, parliamentary structures, what is expected of
MPs and generally our own participation as MPs do leave a great deal to be
desired.

The best example of this, quite clearly, is Question Time. This is the most
boring part of our programme, whereas in many respects it should be, and
certainly as in many other Parliaments, the most dynamic and engaging. But
it is the structure of Question Time that makes it boring, Mr Speaker. We
need to change it. We need to reintroduce interpellations, as the hon
Shilowa mentioned. We need to create the opportunity for MPs to ask more
follow-up questions so that proper dialogue with Ministers occurs. We need
to consider holding Question Time more frequently, maybe two or three times
a week for an hour each, with each cluster questioned every week. We need
to make Question Time far more interactive, far more alive. Question Time
should be an opportunity to really interrogate Ministers. It has become, in
fact, a protection mechanism for them because it is so static and
unimaginative.

On the issue of MPs, participation, let me say that we as members of this
House have a great deal to answer for ourselves. We have contributed - we
do contribute on a daily basis - to making our debates boring. There is
very little effort from MPs to really debate in this House. Very little
effort is, in fact, made by MPs to improve the overall standard of debates
in this House. Most MPs simply stand up and read their speeches, a
monologue, with no reference to what anyone has said before them and no
attempt to engage members in the debate at all. Head down and read, Mr
Speaker, is often the order of debate. In other words, sir, this is not a
debating Chamber, this is in fact a speechmaking Chamber; and often, quite
frankly, poor speeches as far as that goes as well. [Interjectons.]

Please, may I have an extra two minutes and I’ll slow down and show you how
to deliver a speech, sir. [Laughter.] People stand up and deliver their
speeches and make no attempt to even acknowledge, let alone challenge, what
others have said in a debate. We need to change this, Mr Speaker, and it is
always worth remembering what Rule 62 says:

  A member shall as far as possible refrain from reading his or her speech,
  but may refresh his or her memory by referring to notes.

I would urge this House; I would urge all parties to encourage their
members to abide by this particular Rule.

Mr Cronin, the next time you deliver a speech in this House, I am going to
watch you with a great deal of interest, sir - a huge amount of interest.

But, Mr Speaker, there is also a need to introduce different types of
debates into this House. Member’s debates, party debates, etc. Instead, the
only debates we have, other than Budget debates in this House, are debates
on national days, and we have these every year interminably year after
year. So, let’s change this structure, Mr Speaker. Let’s have far more
short, sharp debates - areas of concern to parties and to members. Quite
frankly, if you think about it, there is no reason why we shouldn’t do
this.

Parties propose motions every single day they are entitled to in this
House, but in actual fact, none of those motions are ever debated. Mr
Speaker, wouldn’t it be fascinating too if, for example, Ministers were
prepared to take questions during their speeches? This would really help to
make the debate very interactive. I can imagine the hon Stofile, for
example, standing up and answering to a question from Mr Lee, having a
direct dialogue across the floor. Wouldn’t that be fantastic? You’d be too
scared to take the hon Lee on, sir. [Laughter.] We know that. But we don’t
want to have silly questions like the ones the hon Chauke stands up and
asks. In fact, the trouble with Mr Chauke is that he doesn’t know the
difference between a question and a point of order, but of course that’s
another matter altogether. [Interjections.]

Mr T S FARISANI: Order! [Laughter.] A point of order. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: This is a former Speaker, but he doesn’t know anything
anyway. So, it’s okay.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Is that a point of order, sir?

Dr T S FARISANI: Chair, our Constitution calls on all of us to respect all
the cultures in South Africa, and so does the Freedom Charter. The hon
member, in speaking, is always pointing at people using this finger. In my
mother tongue this finger is called “musimbavhaloi”. [Laughter.]
You only use it when you are pointing at witches and wizards. [Laughter.]
So, the hon member should refrain from doing that. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: I will certainly remember that. I sincerely hope that I will
never have to point a finger at the hon Farisani, but who knows?
[Laughter.] Things happen that we don’t always expect.

We have to do something about this. We need more short, sharp debates. We
need to be involved in making Parliament infinitely more dynamic.

We also need to develop a new structure and procedure in our Parliament. We
need to revamp it. I’m asking the Speaker if he would please consider
making this his legacy for this Fourth Parliament. Let’s change our
programme, Mr Speaker. Let’s form a committee. Let’s get together and talk
about how we can make Parliament infinitely more interesting than it is. I
think it’s very important indeed.

On a good point to conclude, one of our greatest obstacles to the proper
flow of debates in this House is that too often the presiding officers do
not know the Rules of debate or how to apply them. There is at times
rigidity of application and at others no proper application at all, and
this needs to be addressed. I would therefore ask the hon Speaker to think
of instituting some form of training for presiding officers when they are
first appointed to rectify this. It really does this Parliament no good
with the situation as it is at the present time. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Sihlalo, malungu ahloniphekile,
Somlomo wePhalamende, kanye nabasivakashele ngiyanibingelela. [Chairperson,
hon members, the Speaker of Parliament and guests, I greet you.]

Allow me to first deal with some of the issues that were raised by the
members. Some members raised issues concerning the reintroduction of
interpellations, the allocation of speaking time, programming and
constituency funding. Hon members, we have subcommittees dealing with the
programme of Parliament in this Parliament. It is unfortunate that some of
these issues were raised by the Chief Whips of other parities, who also
participate in the Chief Whips’ Forum.

The Chief Whips’ Forum is the structure that decides on the programme of
Parliament and time allocation. They are supposed to make a proposal to the
presiding officers about the funding of constituencies and caucuses. The
very same members participate in other structures such as the Joint Rules
Committee and the programme committee. Members should not point fingers at
others but at themselves, because they are equally responsible.

Hon Kalyan raised the issue of international agreements that bind all South
African citizens without the involvement of Parliament during negotiations.
Section 231(1) of the Constitution says:

   The negotiation and signing of all international agreements is the
   responsibility of the national executive.

Section 231(2) says:

   The international agreement binds the Republic only after it has been
   approved by a resolution in both the National Assembly and the National
   Council of Provinces.

Therefore, as members of Parliament, we have to get briefings. I do believe
that these briefings are done at committee level. Ministers have to go and
brief the committees. At the end of the day, committees have to dictate the
kind of briefing they want; whether this should be from Ministers or
officials. When it comes to international agreements in particular, I
believe that committees must make a request to Ministers who participated
in negotiations to give them a briefing before agreements are ratified.
Therefore, as members of this House, let us not shift these
responsibilities.

An hon member raised the issue of lack of research and capacity for Pan-
African Parliament members. I can agree partly, when it comes to the issue
of support, that we still have challenges. For example, in the last
meeting, when I requested the programme of the Pan-African Parliament, the
members informed me that they didn’t know what they were going to do. I am
saying this as a person responsible when it comes to international
relations. This was on a Friday, and the meeting was supposed to take place
on a Monday. The question is: What kind of support are you going to be
given when you don’t even have the programme in front of you and don’t even
understand the issues that are going to be debated in that particular
forum?

I believe that members should take the responsibility to outline programmes
and activities they participate in. I also believe that when Parliament
took the decision that members should go and be its representative, it
expected these members to come back and give information on challenges they
were facing. Even in the report given to the Parliamentary Group on
International Relations meeting, there was no indication of anything raised
today by members as challenges. Those reports were also given back to
different focus groups, including the Pan-African Parliament. I believe
that those members will come up with recommendations on how they want to be
supported.
Ngonyaka ophelile siyiPhalamende sathi siyokwenza isiqiniseko sokuthi
isigungu esibhekelene nokuxhumana nokuba yingxenye ezingxoxweni zamazwe
ngamazwe siyokwakhiwa ngokusemthethweni. Ngalesosikhathi-ke izimemo
zamagama amalungu azohlala kuleso sigungu zabe seziphumile, sathi futhi
siyobuye sakhe izinhlaka ezingaphansi kwaso leso sigungu “subcommittees”,
sachaza futhi ukuthi lezi zinhlaka zosebenza kanjani. Ngiyafisa-ke ukwazisa
le Ndlu ukuthi ngabe sesihambe safikaphi ... (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[Last year, as Parliament, we resolved that we would ensure that the
Parliamentary Group on International Relations is officially established.
At that time the invitations had already been sent out to those members
whose names were put forward to take part in this forum. We further
resolved that we would set up structures known as “subcommittees” that
would fall under this forum, and we also explained how these structures
would work. I would like to inform this House how far we have gone ...]

... as part of accountability of that particular structure. We should all
be accountable.

Isigungu lesi ebengikhuluma ngaso sesakhiwe ngokusemthethweni kanye
nezinhlaka zaso. Izinhlaka zalesi sigungu ezakhiwe yilezi: Inter-
Parliamentary Union, SADC Parliamentary Forum, Pan African Parliament,
South Africa-European Union, African, Caribbean, Pacific, and European
Union.

Kunohlaka olulodwa esingakalakhi olubizwa ngokuthi i-Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association. Isizathu esenza ukuthi singalwakhi ukuthi
isigungu soSotswebhu esididiyele sathatha isinqumo sokuthi kumele kube
nomthethosisekelo ozolawula igatsha laseMzansi Afrika ngamanye amazwi i-
“South Africa Branch Constitution”.
Uma ngingase ngiwabikele amalungu ukuthi lolu hlaka selukhona njengamanje,
kusasa luzobe lwethulwa ngokusemthethweni koSotswebhu abadidiyelwe ukuthi
balubheke ngaphambi kokuthi luye esigungwini esifanelekile ukuze bakwazi
ukuthi benze izincomo. Bese liya kwi-Joint Rules, ukuze i-Joint Rules yenze
izincomo kule Ndlu, bese isiyaphasiswa ngokusemthethweni bese sakha igatsha
le-CPA.

Okunye esingadlana ngakho indlebe ukuthi ama-subcommittes ayasebenza,
ngikhuluma nje ngaphambi kokuthi le Ndlu ithathe ikhefu. I-SADC-PF Focus
Group ihlalile yabheka izincomo ezathathwa ngumkhandlu we-SADC Palementary
Forum ngonyaka ophelile e-Victoria Falls. Yabuye yabheka nohlelo lokugumba
usuku lwe-Africa Day, lokhu sikwenza njenge ngxenye yokuqinisekisa
ukuxhumana kwamaPhalamende  amazwe ngamazwe ikakhulukazi izwekazi lase-
Afrika.

Kusasa lokhu okusayo sicelile ehhovisi likaSotswebhu Weqembu Elibusayo
uKhongolose ukuthi asinikeze isikhathi sokuba sethule umbiko ngendima
esihanjiwe ngamalungiselelo e-Africa Day. Siyocela-ke ukuthi oSotswebhu
babikele izigungu zabo zodliwanondlebe “Caucus” ngokwezinhlangano zabo.
Futhi siyanxusa ukuthi amalungu aleNdlu abe yingxenye yalomgubho, mhlaka 25
kwephezulu.

Lokhu kuyisiqinisekiso sokuthi izinqumo ezathathwa kwinkomfa ka Khongolose
ziyenziwa, isinqumo engisicaphunayo esithi ... (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[The forum I was referring to has now been officially set up together with
its structures. The subcommittees of this forum are the following: Inter-
Parliamentary Union, SADC Parliamentary forum, Pan-African Parliament,
South Africa-European Union, African, Caribbean, Pacific, and European
Union.

There is a structure which we haven’t established yet called the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. The reason we have not yet
established this structure is because the Chief Whips’ Forum decided that
there must be a constitution to regulate the South African branch, in other
words, the South African Branch Constitution.

If I may report to the members that this structure is now in existence, and
will officially be tabled before the Chief Whips’ Forum tomorrow to be
interrogated, and the forum will then make recommendations before referring
it to the relevant committee. Then it will go to the Joint Rules Committee
so that they can make further recommendations to this House, after which it
will be officially adopted and then we will have a CPA branch.

Another issue we did not discuss is the fact that subcommittees are already
working, as I speak, and did so before this House took a break. The SADC-PF
Group got together and looked at the recommendations taken by this council
last year at Victoria Falls. They also looked at the programme for the
celebration of Africa Day. We do this as a way of ensuring communication
between parliaments of the world, but especially those on the continent of
Africa.

We have asked the Office of the Chief Whip of the ruling party, the ANC, to
allocate time tomorrow for a report-back on how far we are with regard to
the preparations for the Africa Day celebration. We would like to plead
with the chief whips of the various parties to announce this to their
caucus committees according to their parties. We would also like to
encourage members of this House to be part of these celebrations, on the
25th of this month.

This is a confirmation that the resolutions taken at the ANC conference are
being implemented, the decision I’m quoting, which says that: ...]

... We need to work on improving the relationship between South African
communities and foreign nationals and conduct awareness campaigns amongst
our communities to prevent incidents resulting from xenophobia.

Lawo-ke bekungamagqabantshintshi nje ebengithi angiwabeke. Enyangeni
kaNdasa ziyisishagalombili kwaba nenhlanganiso yokugubha usuku lomama. Lolu
hlelo lwabe luholwa uSekela Somlomo kanye nesigungu sabesifazane
esididiyele “Multi-Party Women’s Caucus”. Kwaba nezincomo ezathathwa lapho
engethemba ukuthi nazo ziyobekwa kule Ndlu ukuze zixoxwe. Enyangeni
kaNtulikazi kuzoba nenkomfa ye-CPA esifundazweni saseMpumalanga.

Bekungaba kuhle ukuthi uhlelo lwePhalamende lukwazi ukuvumela amalungu
aleNdlu ukuba abe nethuba lokuba amabhekeleli, ikakhulukazi emaphuzwini
okuzobe kunengxoxompikiswano ngawo. Lokho-ke siyocela ukuthi inkundla
yoSotswebhu Abakhulu ikakhulukazi ibuke ukuthi izinsuku ze-CPA
izozinikezela kanjani ukuze amalungu aleNdlu akwazi ukuba yingxenye yaleyo
nhlanganiso. Sibuye sabamba iqhaza ngokuba yingxenye kuma-Obsever Missions
abeholwa yi-SADC-PF kulamazwe alandelayo, iBotswana iNamibia, iMozambique,
kanye neMauritius. Ngiyafisa ukubonga amalungu abemele le Ndlu ngokusebenza
ngokuzikhandla nangokuzinikela. Ngiyafisa futhi ukubonga ... (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Those are the issues I wanted to highlight. On the 8th of March we had a
meeting to celebrate Mothers Day. This programme was led by the Deputy
Speaker and the Multi Party Women’s Caucus. I hope the recommendations that
were taken there will be put before the House for debate. In July there
will be a CPA conference in Mpumalanga.

It would be appropriate if the Parliamentary programme allows members of
this House to have the opportunity to go and observe, especially, the
issues that will be debated. We will therefore request the Chief Whips
Forum to look at how it will set aside the days of the CPA so that members
of this House will be able to be part of that conference. We also
participated in observer missions which were led by SADC-PF on the
following countries: Botswana, Namibia, Mozambique and Mauritius. I also
wish to thank those members who represented this House for their diligence
and dedication. I also wish to thank ...]

... the Minister of International Relations and Co-operation for
implementing the resolution taken in Polokwane that says:

   South African embassies should play the role of providing delegations
   with information and advice on protocol without undermining the
   separation of powers as stipulated in the Constitution of the Republic of
   South Africa.

Kodwa-ke ngiyafuna ukusho ukuthi kona kusashoda, siyocela ikomidi
loBudlelwano Namazwe Omhlaba kanye Nokubambisana eliholwa uMnumzane uNxesi
ukuthi lenze umsebenzi walo wokuvakashela amaNxusa ukubhekelela ukuthi
ngabe wonke asebenza ngendlela efanayo yini ngokumyalelo womphathiswa
ophethe lo Mnyango.

Ngiyafisa-ke Somlomo ukuthi ngiqhubeke ngoba nesikhathi siyahamba, ukuthi
siyile Phalamende kufanele siqinisekile ukuthi umphakathi uyafundiseka
ngeqhaza elibanjwe yiPhalamende. Sasithe kungakuhle ukuthi amakomidi
abambele imihlangano yawo ngaphandle kweziNdlu zePhalamende, futhi
kunomkhakha obhekene ngqo nalomsebenzi ongaphansi kukaNobhala-Jikelele
wePhalamende esiwubiza ngokuthi i-Public education Unit, kukhona ngisho ama-
Parliamentary Democracy Offices ekubeni umhlonishwa u-Kalyan uthe
awasebenzi.

Ngifisa ukusho ukuthi ake sizibheke thina njengamalungu aleNdlu ukuthi
ngabe siyazisebenzisa yini izakhiwo ezibekwe yileli Phalamende ukuthi
sizisebenzise ngendlela efanelekile, ngoba ama-democracy offices analo
lonke ulwazi lokuthi kwenzakalani ePhalamende. Umsebenzi wethu ngamahho
visi esizinda sabalandeli bethu ukuthi sakhe izinhlelo bese kuthi labo
basebenzi abakulawo ma-Parliamentary Democracy Offices beze bazosifundisela
umphakathi okumele siwubhekelele ukuze bakwazi ukuthi nabo baqhubekisele
phambili uhlelo lwabo.

Kodwa uma thina njengePhalamende singalibambi leloqhaza lokuthi sihole
azohlala angasebenzi, ngakho-ke bengifisa ukuthi ngesikhathi se-
constituency ake siwasebenziseni futhi-ke ngiyazi ukuthi izinhlangano
zepolitiki ziyanikezwa izimali zama-constituency, yebo sizosho ukuthi
incane kodwa siyayisebenzisa yini noma cha.

Mhlawubhe lezo zinto yizinto okufanele sizibhekelele, ukuze sikwazi
ukuphumelela kudingeka ukuthi sibe nokwesekwa okwanele ikakhulukazi
kuBudlelwano Namazwe Omhlaba. Ngiyafisa-ke ukuthi kunobhala wePhalamende
ukuthi kulezi zikhalo ezikhona kanye nokhwakha kabusha “restructuring”
akwenze ngokuphazima kweso, ngoba uma kungenzeki angeke sikwazi
ukuqhubekela phambili siyileNdlu.

Siyabonga-ke ukuthi uSomlomo neSekela lakhe, oSihlalo beNdlu kanye
namalungu aleNdlu ayaseseka singoSihlalo beNdlu sikwazi ukusebenzisana
ndawonye. Okokugcina sizocela ukuthi kube nokuqeqeshwa kwamalunga aleNdlu
mhlawumbe abe ngamashumi amathathu noma amane mayelana ne-Observer Mission
ukuze sikwazi ukubambe iqhaza ngendlela ezokwamukeleka ngaphansi
kwemibandela ekhona kwi-SADC.

Ngiyakholwa futhi ukuthi iPhalamende linazo izindawo zokufundisa, lokho-ke
siyocela ukuthi kwenzeke masinyane ngoba ngoSeptemba iTanzania izobe iya
okhethweni kanti ngonyaka ozayo ngoNdasa iZimbabwe izobe iya okhethweni.
Ngakho-ke singoSihlalo beNdlu siyasesekela lesi sabiwomali noma ngabe
sincane kangakanani. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe] (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[But I would like to say that there are some things that are still lacking.
Our plea to the Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Co-
operation, led by Mr Nxesi, is to do its duty, which is to visit embassies
to ensure that they function according to the instructions of the minister
in charge of this department.

Speaker, I wish to continue, but my time is limited. We, as Parliament,
must ensure that the community is educated about the role of Parliament. We
had taken a resolution that the committees should hold their meetings
outside of Parliament. However, there are fields that are directly related
to the work done by the Secretary to Parliament. The unit which deals with
this is the Public Education unit, but there are also parliamentary
democracy offices which the hon Kalyan referred to as nonfunctional.

I wish that we can do introspection as members of Parliament to determine
whether we are using the structures put in place by this Parliament as
intended, because all democracy offices have information about the
processes of Parliament. Our duties at these constituency offices are to
put programmes in place so that the employees of those parliamentary
deemocracy offices can educate the community, so that the communities can
take their programmes forward.

But if we as Parliament don’t play that role, which is to lead, these
offices will remain nonfunctional. We should therefore make use of these
offices during the constituency period and I know that political
organisations are given a budget for constituency work. Yes, we do admit
that the budget is small but are we using it?

Maybe we should budget for those things so that we have enough support,
especially in terms of international relations. I want to say to the
Secretary to Parliament that these recommendations and restructuring must
be implemented as soon as possible, because if this is not done we will not
go forward as this House.

We would like to thank you, Speaker and your Deputy, the House Chairpersons
and members of this House for supporting us as House Chairpersons so that
we can work together. Lastly, we would like to request training for
approximately thirty to forty members of this House in respect of observer
missions so that we can effectively take part, in a manner that is
acceptable, in terms of SADC-protocol.

I believe that Parliament has the facilities to educate. We would like this
request to be attended to urgently because in September Tanzania will hold
their elections and next year, in March, Zimbabwe will be holding theirs.
Therefore, as House Chairpersons we support this budget even if it is very
limited. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Adv T M MASUTHA: Mutshamaxitulu, ndzi yima ematshan’wini ya ANC ku ta
seketela ku avanyisiwa ka mali leyi fambelanaka na mafambiselo ya Palamende
eka siku ra namuntlha. Loko ndzi nga si ya emahlweni, ndzi lava ku
pfunetanyana ndzi hlamusela Tat Muchaviseki Shilowa hi Xitsonga leswi Tat
Chauke a va ringeta ku mi kombisa swona.

Loko Muf Meshoe a ri kona a ta mi hlamusela leswaku na le Bibeleni swi
tsariwile:

   U nga voni xilavi etihlweni ra makwenu kambe ku ri na ntsandza emahlweni
   ka wena lowu ku tsandzisaka ku vona kahle leswaku ntiyiso wu le kwihi.
Leswi a va ringeta ku swi hlamusela hi leswaku murhangeri wa n’wina wa Cope
la nga hundza, Tat Lekota, u hlamuserile rixaka leswaku ku na mali leyi nga
twisisekiki leswaku yi tirhisiwe njhani eka nhlangeletano wa n’wina eka
lembe leri nga hundza. Hikwalaho a va lava ku twisisa leswaku leswi mi swi
vula njhani mi nga si hlamusela leswi mi tshamaka mi hi byela hi swona
leswaku mfumo a wu na vutihlamuleri; a wu tirhisi mali ya rixaka hi ndlela
leyi faneleke.

Leswi swi endliwa hi mhaka ya leswaku hina, hi ri Swirho swa Palamende
leyi, hi fanele hi sungula hi tilangutisa ku vona leswaku swilo leswi hi
nge van’wana va swi landzelela, xana hina ha swi landzelela ke? Leswi hi
leswi Tat Chauke a va ringeta ku mi hlamusela swona. Ndza tshemba leswaku
mi kote ku swi twisisa hi Xitsonga. (Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs
follows.)

[Adv T M MASUTHA: Chairperson, I rise on behalf of the ANC to support the
budget allocation which is in line with Parliament’s administration to
date. Before I proceed, I would like to assist hon Mr Shilowa a little
regarding what Mr Chauke was trying to say in Xitsonga.

If Rev Meshoe were here, he would tell you that it is also written in the
Bible that:

   Why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother’s eye while there
   is a plank in your eye which blinds you to see where the truth lies.

What he was trying to say is that your former Cope leader, Mr Lekota, has
told the nation that there is money, but it is not clear what it was used
for during the congress you held last year. Therefore he wanted to get
clarity as to how you have the guts to persistently say that the government
is irresponsible; it is not using state money accordingly.

As Members of Parliament, we ought to do self-introspection first to
determine the things we expect of others; are we following them ourselves?
This is what Mr Chauke was trying to find out from you. I believe that you
were able to understand it in Xitsonga.]

But let me proceed to deal with some of the issues that have been raised in
this debate this afternoon. Sticking with hon Shilowa, I would like to
concede the point that he correctly highlighted that delegated legislation,
as the Constitution stipulates, requires to be scrutinised by this
Parliament, given the fact that this Parliament has original law-making
authority and therefore equally has the responsibility to ensure that when
it delegates that authority to others, it ensures that those who then
subsequently exercise that authority exercise it in line with the
Constitution and the principles that it articulates. There I agree with the
hon member.

However, where I disagree with him is with his proposal that there be a
shift of the rules of engagement, especially when his own members are in
default of those rules. The Deputy Speaker ruled a member of your party out
of order, and that member of your party sought to contest the authority of
the Deputy Speaker. There cannot possibly be any rule change that would
promote the kind of anarchic practice where members would be allowed to
have an altercation with a presiding officer. Otherwise proceedings of the
House and the entire House itself would become completely dysfunctional and
debilitated. That was the issue. [Applause.] And I think we must face the
truth and not hide behind trivia.

As we debate this budget allocation of Parliament, it is incumbent on us to
pause and reflect on our mandate and answer the question: Why are we here?
As the ANC, we move from the premise that political power is not attained
for its own sake, but to pursue given political and sociopolitical
objectives. We emerged through a democratic process based, first and
foremost, on the principle of universal suffrage, where the people
expressed their confidence in us and pinned their hopes on the promises
that we made to them, which we dare not fail to fulfil.

Our specific mandate as Parliament and the manner in which we are enjoined
to discharge it, have been well articulated in various parts of the
Constitution, and I need not specify those provisions. We make laws with
the involvement of our people through the public participation system that
includes the holding of public hearings to solicit their input. We provide
a platform for consideration of issues affecting our society through public
debate. We hold the executive accountable in the implementation of national
legislation and policy to ensure access to services by our people.

We exercise this oversight role by, amongst other things, inviting the
executive and government departments to the various committees to account
for the programmes they implement and their utilisation of public resources
allocated to them by this Parliament, and by inviting the executive
regularly to respond to questions relating to the discharge of their
functions and responsibilities under the Constitution. All these matters
have been thoroughly canvassed in the debate this afternoon.

Through the constituency system, jointly with other public representatives
from the provincial and local spheres of government, we make ourselves
directly available to the public to respond to, and intervene in, any
issues relating to their access to the services I have alluded to provided
by government, and information relating to the availability of those
services.

South Africa is a constitutional democracy of a special kind. Over and
above adhering to the principle of separation of powers between the three
arms of state or government - namely the legislative, executive and
judicial – we have gone further to entrench a value system based on human
rights by including a bill of rights in the Constitution. We went even
further to create various constitutional institutions to entrench
safeguards and support this system of democracy. These institutions or
instruments include, but are not limited to, the often talked about Chapter
9 institutions, such as the Human Rights Commission, the Public Protector
and the Auditor-General. In particular, I wish to highlight the role of the
Auditor-General, not so much because I am honoured to chair the standing
committee that oversees that body, but because of its special role as the
supreme audit authority in the country in terms of our Constitution and in
line with international best practice.

The role of the Auditor-General in ensuring good and clean governance
cannot be overemphasised. The latest audit outcomes reflected in the
Auditor-General’s reports are a cause for concern. Even though some
improvement has occurred in some respect, eg with regard to the improvement
in accounting systems and increased co-operation and demonstration of
leadership amongst executive functionaries at all three spheres of
government, according to the Auditor-General’s own words, “much still needs
to be done to improve our system of accountability” in government.

Section 181 of the Constitution, in addition to establishing this Chapter 9
institution, defines the relationship that other organs of state must
maintain with this Chapter 9 institution. Subsections 2 to 5 specifically
state, and I quote:

   (2)      These institutions are independent, and subject only to the
        Constitution and the law, and they must be impartial and must
        exercise their powers and perform their functions without fear,
        favour or prejudice.

   (3)      Other organs of state, through legislative and other measures,
        must assist and protect these institutions to ensure the
        independence, impartiality, dignity and effectiveness of these
        institutions.

   (4)      No person or organ of state may interfere with the functioning
        of these institutions.

   (5)      These institutions are accountable to the National Assembly, and
        must report on their activities and the performance of their
        functions to the Assembly at least once a year.

Now the work of these institutions and the reports that they are required
by the Constitution to submit to this House constitute a valuable resource
for us as members and as parliamentary committees to perform our oversight
function. These institutions were created in part to assist Parliament in
discharging its oversight mandate, hence it is up to Parliament to ensure
that their findings and recommendations are carefully considered, adopted
and enforced by it.

The challenge, however, is the capacity of Parliament and its committees,
as well as individual members, to discharge these constitutional
responsibilities with the meagre resources allocated to it. For us to do
effective oversight, we require such resources as content specialists and
researchers with expert knowledge of the fields that we work in, and with a
clear mandate to go beyond information that has been provided by government
departments in obtaining and presenting before these respective committees
full information on issues of service delivery and other matters that
affect the public. We require sufficient allocation of resources to do
committee work such as holding public hearings and passing legislation. I
thank you very much. The ANC supports this budget. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Chairperson, let me begin by thanking all the hon members who
have spoken and made contributions. These are certainly most welcome and
have all been noted. We have taken copious notes. I also want to thank my
colleagues who have already answered to some of the questions. In fact they
answered both questions that had been raised and questions that had not yet
been asked. We are happy that there is this ongoing dialogue and discussion
around issues of what it is that we want to achieve for this Parliament and
how to go about achieving it.

Hon Davidson raised the issue of unanswered questions. I did, in my speech
this year and last year, express concern that there are these questions
that need to be answered, and I undertook that I was going to raise the
matter with the Leader of Government Business, which I have done. As I’ve
said, it’s ongoing and I continue to engage the Deputy President, who is
the Leader of Government Business. In fact, there has been an improvement
with regard to the issue of unanswered questions. The Deputy President has
assured me that we will continue addressing this issue.

Hon Davidson also raised the issue of 500 plus questions, some of which
date back to before 2009. I am sure the hon member is aware that questions
of a previous year lapse at the end of the annual session of Parliament,
and the Rules of this Parliament do not allow for questions to be carried
over. [Interjections.] Can I get protection?
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, hon members!

The SPEAKER: Our Rules do not allow for questions to be carried over.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Davidson, order, please!

The SPEAKER: May I suggest that maybe members look at how to amend this
Rule, but for now it is the Rule.

I would also like to speak on the other issue raised by the hon Davidson on
the inability of structures of Parliament to take decisions and to also
remind the member that he serves on all these structures, including the
Chief Whips’ Forum. So, the point is that we, wherever we are, need to make
sure that all the structures function and function well.

Furthermore, I said in my speech this afternoon that we want to make this a
vibrant Parliament that is able to take decisions and move forward. If
there are any issues, I’m certainly hoping that we would be able to sit
down and say what it is that we need to change for the better. We want this
Parliament to be a better Parliament and to work effectively and
efficiently. We all have a collective responsibility in this regard.

Having said that, again we should look at ways in which we can ensure more
effective co-ordination and communication among the different structures.
And we want, again, to look at the governance model, which we need to
discuss in some detail. It might perhaps answer some of the questions and
concerns that have been raised to date.

Chairperson Bapela is correct when he says that the money is not enough.
It’s a classical case of the wants, the needs and the resources. It’s
always difficult to balance those. The needs are greater than the resources
available, which is why we also emphasise the issue of efficiency and
effective use of the limited resources we have. We are receiving 2% of the
national Budget. We certainly would want to get more money, but for now we
don’t have more resources.

It’s also a case, which is a bit of a problem, as I mentioned earlier, that
we have money that we cannot spend, yet we want more money. We need to find
a solution to this problem. We only spent 69% of the budget, yet we want
more when we cannot spend it. There certainly is a problem. There are
bottlenecks that we need to address. Before we say we want more money,
let’s address the problem so that we can use the money effectively and
efficiently. Adding more money does not solve the problem. Let’s find the
problem and identify it correctly, then we can find the solution to it.

The hon Shilowa raised an issue which the hon Masutha has addressed at
length, which is how do we define a better role for Parliament in secondary
legislation, ie legislations which are drafted by the executive and whose
constitutionality should be tested. It was agreed at the Joint Rules
Committee of 22 April 2010 that a draft resolution to establish interim
mechanisms for scrutiny of delegated legislation be adopted by the Joint
Rules Committee and placed before the House for consideration. That was the
decision, and it needs to come to the House.

Hon Greyling raised the issue of political party funding. The request from
the hon member Greyling that the Joint Rules Committee discuss a proposal
for the establishment of an ad hoc committee to consider drafting
legislation to regulate private party funding could not be placed on the
agenda. As I had explained in the Joint Rules Committee meeting of 22 April
2010, the establishment of ad hoc committees is a decision taken directly
by the House, or, in the case of joint ad hoc committee, by both Houses.

The Joint Rules Committee considers the establishment of permanent joint
committees. And as we all know, the normal procedure for introducing
legislation by a member is through the use of Rule 234, and the proposal is
considered by the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and
Special Petitions. The other procedures would be through the committee of
Parliament. As Speaker, I do not have the power - although people believe I
do - to instruct the National Assembly to introduce legislation,
notwithstanding my opinion or interest in the matter.

I certainly agree with the hon Kaylan about the need for increased public
participation - I also mentioned this in my speech - and the role of
Parliament in international relations,

In terms of Chapter 9 institutions and the so-called “Kader Asmal report”,
this is a recommendation that is before the Parliamentary Oversight
Authority and the Joint Rules Committee.
With regard to the Pan-African Parliament, I agree with the comments made
by Chairperson Oliphant, that in fact we are concerned about the Pan-
African Parliament, which is not quite functioning as it should - which is
why we have seconded, as Parliament, one of our own members. We are going
to lose him in Parliament, but we think he will add value to the work of
the Pan-African Parliament which we host, and that is Adv Madasa. We have
also agreed that we will continue to give all support — political, moral
and technical - to the Pan-African Parliament to make sure that it does
function and function as an important body representing Parliaments of the
continent. So, we do agree that something has to be done, but we also want
to say that something is being done.

With regard to speaking time for smaller parties, I think hon members will
remember that when I came in as Speaker, I did invite leaders of parties
and had discussions with them. I expressed my preference that there should
be more time given to parties and that the minimum time would at least be
three minutes. However, that is the decision of political parties. I have
expressed my preference, but the decision is actually not mine, it is
yours.

Around the issue of constituency allowances, again this is actually a
decision of political parties. They are the ones who are in charge of the
constituency allowances.

In terms of the issue of the budget office, which was raised by a number of
members, let me inform members that the presiding officers met with
political task team responsible for the implementation of Money Bills
Amendment Procedures and Related Matters Act on 20 April 2010. The purpose
of the meeting was to receive a progress report from the task team and to
discuss around the implementation of the Money Bills Amendment Procedures
and Related Matters Act with the view of reaching a common understanding.
The process of establishing a budget office may seem to be slower than
necessary. However, members will remember that this is an important and
complex legislation that requires careful consideration and implementation.
I have suggested to the task team that it would be advisable that we
consult with other parliaments that have established budget offices to
ensure that we benchmark with the best model out there. As I said, it is
important to learn from others to avoid reinventing the wheel.

I also want to confess here that I was wrong on some issues. For example, I
was all along under the impression that the Canadian model of the budget
office is one of the best in the world, until I met the Minister of
International Trade of Canada on March 16 2010 when he paid a courtesy call
to Parliament. When I raised this issue he looked at me with great, great
surprise and concern. He informed me that the Canadian budget office does
not serve the objective for which it was established, and as such it has
not assisted parliament in any way whatsoever. He did suggest that we not
look at the Canadian model. We might look at other models, but we are not
going to look at the Canadian model.

I agree that we need to improve our public participation and involvement in
Parliament; there can certainly be no doubt about that. Parliament will
review the work of members in constituencies as well with the view of
finding measures on how best it can improve and enhance a representative
democracy.

A lot of these comments are valuable because we will be looking at them and
making sure that we are able to factor them as we go forward in terms of
improving how Parliament works.

I agree entirely with the hon Dudley that global financial pressure led to
domestic pressure, and that there is a real decrease in the budget
allocation. I think that is spot on.

There is another issue on party funding being inadequate, but that there is
a real increase despite the inadequacy of 2,1% in the current budget. I
think that is to be commended.

Chairperson Skosana, I just want to indicate that the Quarterly
Consultative Forum meets monthly and discusses all the interests of Members
of Parliament. I also sympathise with the hon Chairperson Skosana that his
10 minutes appeared to be fewer than the 10 minutes that he normally allows
himself when he speaks. I want to suggest that perhaps the 10 minutes was
not enough because he did use the time to give out the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of staff; that does take up quite a bit of time.
[Laughter.]

I agree with what you said, hon Ellis. With your experience you say that
all the Parliaments have been boring. I wasn’t here, but I take your word
for it that it has been very boring. So, let’s make sure that it’s not
boring. Let’s do something about it.

I want to thank you again for your participation and comments, and I also
support the Budget Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, you are invited by
the presiding officers to the cocktail party. The buses will leave at 18:00
outside of the NCOP building, and transport will also be arranged from the
venue to parliamentary villages. Hon members, I’m informed that the
cocktail party will be held at the Southern Sun Hotel, which is the old
Cape Sun Hotel. It is located in Strand Street.

Debate concluded.

        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
     CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - VOTE NO 23: JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL
                                 DEVELOPMENT

Order disposed of without debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to (Democratic Alliance abstaining).

Report accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS - VOTE NO 6:
  PUBLIC WORKS, AND STRATEGIC PLAN FOR 2010-11 TO 2012-13 OF DEPARTMENT OF
                        PUBLIC WORKS AND ITS ENTITIES

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TOURISM - VOTE NO 34:
                                   TOURISM

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND
            TRAINING - VOTE NO 16: HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING
 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES - VOTE
    NO 31: MINERAL RESOURCES, AND STRATEGIC PLAN OF DEPARTMENT OF MINERAL
                                  RESOURCES

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
   AND CO-OPERATION - VOTE NO 5: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE
      AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS - VOTE NO 3: CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
                             TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HUMAN SETTLEMENTS - VOTE
     NO 30: HUMAN SETTLEMENTS, AND STRATEGIC PLAN OF DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN
                    SETTLEMENTS AND ITS HOUSING ENTITIES

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT - VOTE
                          NO 18: SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE - VOTE NO 12:
                           STATISTICS SOUTH AFRICA

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WOMEN, CHILDREN AND
    PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES - VOTE NO 7: WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH
                                DISABILITIES

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY -
     VOTE NO 33: SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, AND CORPORATE STRATEGY 2010-13

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT -
                      VOTE NO 27: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND
       ADMINISTRATION - VOTE NO 11: PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH - VOTE NO 15:
  HEALTH, AND STRATEGIC PLAN OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH FOR 2010-11 TO 2012-13

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS - VOTE NO
    26: COMMUNICATIONS, AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATIONS AND ITS ENTITIES

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS - VOTE NO
    8: GOVERNMENT COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SYSTEM, AND ITS ENTITIES

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL
                     AFFAIRS - VOTE NO 37: WATER AFFAIRS

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL
                 AFFAIRS - VOTE NO 29: ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES - VOTE
     NO 10: PUBLIC ENTERPRISES, AND STRATEGIC PLAN 2010-11 TO 2012-13 OF
              DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES AND ITS ENTITIES

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT - STRATEGIC
         PLAN AND BUDGET OF DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT AND ITS ENTITIES

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND
         FISHERIES - VOTE NO 25: AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON LABOUR - VOTE NO 17:
     LABOUR, AND STRATEGIC PLAN OF DEPARTMENT OF LABOUR AND ITS ENTITIES

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS - VOTE NO 4:
   HOME AFFAIRS, AND STRATEGIC PLAN OF DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS AND ITS
                                  ENTITIES

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INDUSTRY - VOTE
                          NO 35: TRADE AND INDUSTRY

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SPORT AND RECREATION -
    VOTE NO 19: SPORT AND RECREATION SOUTH AFRICA, AND STRATEGIC PLAN OF
               DEPARTMENT OF SPORT AND RECREATION FOR 2010-14

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND
         LAND REFORM - VOTE NO 32: RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON CORRECTIONAL SERVICES -
                      VOTE NO 20: CORRECTIONAL SERVICES

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND MILITARY
            VETERANS - VOTE NO 21: DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ENERGY - VOTE NO 28:
                                   ENERGY
   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE - VOTE NO 24:
                                   POLICE

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE - VOTE NO 22:
                     INDEPENDENT COMPLAINTS DIRECTORATE

Order disposed of without debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Works on Vote No 6: Public Works,
and Strategic Plan for 2010/11 to 2012/13 of Department of Public Works and
its Entities accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Tourism on Vote No 34: Tourism accordingly
adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training on Vote No
16: Higher Education and Training accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources on Vote No 31: Mineral
Resources, and Strategic Plan of Department of Mineral Resources
accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Co-operation
on Vote No 5: International Relations and Co-operation accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs on Vote No 3: Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements on Vote No 30: Human
Settlements, and Strategic Plan of Department of Human Settlements and its
Housing Entities accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Social Development on Vote No 18: Social
Development accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Standing Committee on Finance on Vote No 12: Statistics
South Africa accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth, Children and People with
Disabilities on Vote No 7: Women, Children and People with Disabilities
accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology on Vote No 33:
Science and Technology, and Corporate Strategy 2010-2013 accordingly
adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Economic Development on Vote No 27:
Economic Development accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on the Public Service and Administration on
Vote No 11: Public Service and Administration accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Health on Vote No 15: Health, and
Strategic Plan of Department of Health for 2010/11-2012/ 13 accordingly
adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Communications on Vote No 26:
Communications, and Department of Communications and its Entities
accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Communications on Vote No 8: Government
Communication and Information System, and its Entities accordingly adopted.


Report of Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs on Vote No
37: Water Affairs accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs on Vote No
29: Environmental Affairs accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on Vote No 10: Public
Enterprises, and Strategic Plan 2010/11 – 2012/13 of Department of Public
Enterprises and its Entities accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Transport on Strategic Plan and Budget of
Department of Transport and its Entities accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries on
Vote No 25: Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Labour on Vote No 17: Labour, and
Strategic Plan of Department of Labour and its Entities accordingly
adopted.
Report of Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on Vote No 4: Home Affairs,
and Strategic Plan of Department of Home Affairs and its Entities
accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on Vote No 35: Trade
and Industry accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation on Vote No 19: Sport
and Recreation South Africa, and Strategic Plan of Department of Sport and
Recreation for 2010-2014 accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform on Vote
No 32: Rural Development and Land Reform accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Correctional Services on Vote No 20:
Correctional Services accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Defence and Military Veterans on Vote No
21: Defence and Military Veterans accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Energy on Vote No 28: Energy accordingly
adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Police on Vote No 24: Police accordingly
adopted.
Report of Portfolio Committee on Police on Vote No 22: Independent
Complaints Directorate accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS - OVERSIGHT
                 VISIT TO EASTERN CAPE ON 1-3 FEBRUARY 2010

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND
   TRAINING - OVERSIGHT VISIT TO CAPE PENINSULA UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY,
                           CPUT, CAPE TOWN CAMPUS

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
  AND CO-OPERATION - ANNUAL REPORT OF DEPARTMENT OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
                        AND CO-OPERATION FOR 2008-09

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT -
     OVERSIGHT VISIT TO DIFFERENT ENTRY POINTS FOCUSING ON CUSTOMS FRAUD
  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT -
                  OVERSIGHT VISIT TO COMPANIES IN DISTRESS

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES -
      OVERSIGHT VISIT TO STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES ON 16-19 NOVEMBER 2009

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INDUSTRY -
                   REVIEW OF NATIONAL GAMBLING LEGISLATION

Order disposed of without debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: I move:

   That the Reports be adopted.


Motion agreed to.


Report of Portfolio Committee on Public Works on Oversight Visit to Eastern
Cape (1–3 February 2010) accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training on Oversight
Visit to Cape Peninsula University of Technology (Cput), Cape Town Campus
accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Co-operation
on Annual Report of Department of International Relations and Co-operation
for 2008/9 accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Economic Development on Oversight Visit to
different entry points focusing on customs fraud accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Economic Development on Oversight Visit to
companies in distress accordingly adopted.

Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on Oversight visit
to State-owned Enterprises (16 – 19 November 2009) accordingly adopted.

Report of Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry on Review of National
Gambling Legislation accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 17:30.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             FRIDAY, 7 MAY 2010
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Referral of Bill to National House of Traditional Leaders


    The Secretary to Parliament has, in accordance with section 18(1) of
    the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No.
    41 of 2003), referred the Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill [B 9 –
    2010] (National Assembly – sec 76) to the National House of Traditional
    Leaders, which must, within 30 days from the date of the referral (7
    June 2010), make any comments it wishes to make.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Assembly

     a) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly  owing  to  the
        resignation of Mr M A Mangena with effect from 1 May 2010, has been
        filled with effect from 1 May 2010 by the  nomination  of  Mr  K  J
        Dikobo.
     b) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly  owing  to  the
        resignation of Mr B W Dhlamini with effect from  4  May  2010,  has
        been filled with effect from 4 May 2010 by the nomination of Mr K P
        Sithole.

                             MONDAY, 10 MAY 2010

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly
1.    Report of  the  Standing  Committee  on  Finance  on  Budget  Vote  9:
   National Treasury, dated 21 April 2010

The Standing Committee on Finance, having considered Budget Vote 9  and  the
Strategic Plan (Update) 2010/13 of National Treasury, reports as follows:

1.    Introduction

On 14 April 2010, the Minister of Finance, the Deputy Minister  of  Finance,
the Director-General of National  Treasury  and  senior  treasury  officials
briefed the committee on Budget Vote 9: National Treasury  and  its  updated
strategic plan 2010/13. The Committee also  received  a  briefing  from  the
Commissioner and senior officials of  the  South  African  Revenue  Services
(SARS) on its 2010/11 – 2012/13 strategic  plan.  The  report  will  present
information on National Treasury and SARS respectively.

2.    Presentation by National Treasury

The  Director-General  noted  that  National  Treasury  will   work   within
government’s priorities in delivering on its mandate.

2.1   Aim and strategic objectives
In relation to  the  aim  and  strategic  objectives,  the  Director-General
reported that National Treasury is  founded  in  terms  of  Chapter  13  (on
Finance) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa.  According  to
section 216 (1) of the Constitution national legislation  must  establish  a
national treasury and prescribe measures to  ensure  both  transparency  and
expenditure control in each sphere of government.

Additionally, Chapter 2 of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA)  clearly
defines the functions and powers of the department as follows:

    • Promote national government’s fiscal policy framework  and  coordinate
      macro-economic policy;
    • Prepare a sound and sustainable national budget and equitable division
      of resources;
    • Equitably  and  efficiently  raise  fiscal  revenue,  while  enhancing
      efficiency and competitiveness of the South African economy;
    • Sustainably manage and make effective use  of  government’s  financial
      assets and liabilities; and
    • Promote transparency to improve financial accountability  and  enforce
      effective financial management.

Various pieces of legislation define the role of  National  Treasury,  these
include  the  Municipal  Finance  Management  Act   and   financial   sector
legislation e.g. Banks Act.

2.2   Economic outlook – positives

The Director-General indicated that the economy is expected to grow  by  2.3
per cent this year  rising  to  3.2  per  cent  in  2011.  Better  inflation
outcomes in line with the target  range  are  expected.  Global  demand  and
trade volumes are picking up and more stable employment and sectoral  growth
outcomes are also expected. The current account deficit  has  moderated  and
is expected to be at 4.9 per cent of Gross Domestic Product  (GDP)  in  2010
compared to 7.1 per cent in 2008.

Sterling efforts of the South African Revenue Services  (SARS)  resulted  in
an outstanding target overshoot of R8 billion –  bringing  down  the  budget
deficit to 6.8 per cent of GDP. Public infrastructure  investment  over  the
Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) of R845 billion will be  sustained.
An agreement in government has been reached regarding job creation  and  the
need to transform the economy.
2.3   Economic outlook- risks

In  relation  to  the  risks  for  economic  outlook,  the  Director-General
indicated that public sector wage pressures appear to be  strong  while  oil
prices remain high.  There  are  still  issues  relating  to  infrastructure
investment  challenges  while  unused  production  capacity  will   moderate
investment in the coming year. Net job creation likely  to  remain  sluggish
even as the economy recovers. There is potential for  slow  global  economic
recovery which implies a sizable budget deficit over the MTEF.

Debt servicing costs rise from 2.4 per cent in 2009/10 to 3.2  per  cent  in
2012/13 and therefore eroding fiscal resources.

2.4   Key strategic focus areas

Against the above background, the Director-General presented  the  following
key strategic focus areas:

    • National Treasury will work with  other  departments  to  achieve  job
      creation, economic growth and poverty reduction;


    • The department will provide appropriate support to the economy as  the
      global economy recovers while reducing government borrowing  over  the
      MTEF. This will take place within the  context  of  the  monetary  and
      fiscal policy stance which supports aggregate  demand,  while  foreign
      demand recovers. A fiscal exit  strategy  is  in  place  to  prudently
      reduce the impact of high borrowing on future growth prospects;


    •  National  Treasury  will  derive  value  for  money  in  all   public
      expenditure and  enhance control measures in awarding tenders;

    • National Treasury will provide sustainable  long-term  public  finance
      support to critical public needs, such as electricity  supply,  public
      transport, community development and regional development; and

    • The department will ensure that the new budget process with Parliament
      works effectively.

2.5   Key microeconomic reforms to support growth

In  pursuing  the  issues  of  growth,  employment  creation   and   poverty
reduction, the Director-General presented the  following  key  microeconomic
reforms:

      • Supporting labour-intensive industries through industrial policy;

      • Investing in and improving maintenance of network  industries  such
        as energy, transport, etc;

      • Raising productivity and  competitiveness  by  reducing  regulatory
        hurdles and red tape;
      • Increasing access  for  private  investment  and  participation  in
        critical input markets; and

      •  Raising  savings  and   investing   through   responsible   fiscal
        management.

2.6   Key strategic priorities

The key strategic priorities over the next three years have  been  clustered
as follows:

    • Economics and Financial Markets groups;
    • Fiscal and budget group; and
    • Financial management group.

2.7   Departmental programmes

2.7.1 Programme 1: Administration

The purpose of this programme is to:

    • Ensure a modern, efficient and integrated ICT infrastructure;
    •  Develop,  implement  and  maintain  an  integrated,  progressive  and
      innovative HR strategy;

    • Ensure integrated knowledge management systems and infrastructure ;

    • Ensure sound financial management and  governance  according  to  best
      practice;

    • Provide a secure and an enabling working environment; and

    • Implement supply chain management (SCM) strategy as part of  the  roll
      out of the integrated financial management  systems  (IFMS).  National
      Treasury is one of the lead sites for the roll-out of the  procurement
      management module.

2.7.2 Programme 2: Public finance and budget management

The  pubic  finance  and  budget  management  programme  comprise  of  three
divisions (Budget Office, Public Finance  and  Intergovernmental  Relations)
and can be classified as follows:


      • The Budget Office  coordinates  the  national  budget  process  and
        ensures prudent resource allocation.
         – Improve value for money in spending across government.
         – Improve structuring of departmental votes (project draws  to  an
           end during the 2010/11 financial year).
         – Enhance the quality  of  performance  information  contained  in
           budget documents.


      • Public Finance is the primary link with  all  national  departments
        and  other  government  entities.  The  division  targets  sectoral
        studies as part of the comprehensive expenditure review and improve
        alignment  between  policy  frameworks  and  public  spending.   In
        addition, the division moves forward  with  the  reform  of  social
        security and health insurance systems.

      • Intergovernmental Relations is the primary link with provinces  and
        municipalities.  The  division  ensure  effective  and   sufficient
        technical support in infrastructure delivery programmes to all nine
        provinces in health, education and  public  works  departments.  It
        increases   the   infrastructure   planning   support    to    more
        municipalities (from 15 in 2010 to  27  in  2012/13)  and  improves
        financial management support to provinces and  municipalities.  The
        division also transfers responsibility to build capacity in  budget
        formulation and analysis to the  Public  Administration  Leadership
        and Management Academy (PALAMA) in April 2012.

      • Technical and Management Support is a sub-programme that  comprises
        external support or capacity  building  initiatives  of  the  three
        programme 2 divisions:  i.e.,  Technical  Assistance  Unit,  Public
        Private Partnership Unit,  2010  World  Cup  Unit,   Infrastructure
        Delivery Improvement Programme and  the  Neighbourhood  Development
        Partnership Grant.

2.7.3 Programme 3: Asset and liability management

The purpose of this programme is to:
    • Manage and minimise rising debt servicing costs;
    • Finance government's borrowing requirement  (R191.7  billion  in  2010
      rising to R195.6 billion in 2012/13);
    • Retain and attract new investors in government debt;
    • Ensure accurate forecasts of government’s cash needs to meet liquidity
      requirements at all times (R2.5 trillion of cash flows 2010/11);
    • Improve the semi-annual sovereign credit rating review assessments of
      South Africa’s economic and financial prospects;
    • Contribute to alignment of Development Finance Institutions (DFIs)  to
      their mandates and to government’s developmental agenda; and
    • Review State Owned  Enterprises  (SOEs)  to  improve  performance  and
      efficient use of government resources.

2.7.4 Programme 4: Financial management and systems

The purpose of this programme is to:

      • Maintain and support current financial management systems;
      • Roll-out the  Integrated  Financial  Management  Systems  (IFMS)  –
        implement the asset, procurement and HR management modules in  lead
        sites over the next three years;
      • Migrate departments to completed IFMS  modules  and  retire  legacy
        systems that have been migrated;
      • Create a user support capacity at SITA (in SITA’s role as a PSI);
      •  Introduce  strategic  sourcing  principles  to  all   spheres   of
        government;
      • Align preferential procurement with aims of the BBBEE Act;
      • Supply chain compliance monitoring and combating SCM related fraud;
        and
      • Intensify efforts to root-out corruption and fraud in the award  of
        tenders.

2.7.5 Programme 5: Financial accounting and reporting

The purpose of this programme is to:

      • Put into operation  and  enhance  the  specialised  audit  services
        office to develop  fraud  detection  guidelines  for  supply  chain
        processes;
      • Introduce a Chartered Accountants Academy with 65 trainees by 2013;
      • Create an annual financial statements reporting pack  for  national
        and provincial departments;
      • Publish  consolidated  annual  financial  statements  for  national
        departments by 31 October 2010;
      • Conduct internal audit reviews in 26  municipalities  by  31  March
        2011; and
      • Improve financial management system in government including through
        projects in the Financial Management Improvement Programme.

2.7.6 Programme 6: Economic policy and international financial relations

The  economic  policy  and  international  financial   relations   programme
comprise of three divisions  (Economic  policy,  Tax  and  financial  sector
policy and International and regional economic policy).

The purpose of this programme is to:

      • Review the effectiveness of the financial sector regulatory system;
      • Finalise a response to the Banking Enquiry recommendations;
      • Provide policy papers on death  taxes,  carbon  pricing,  gambling,
        inward listings;
      • Implement a roadmap for integration  and  review  of  SACU  revenue
        formula;
      • Enhance accessibility to financial services;
      • Reform the system of retirement funding ;
      • Improve economic  policy  advice  and  forecasting  in  new  global
        environment;
      • Finalise discussion paper on wage subsidies; and
      • Conduct review  of  economic  growth  advice  provided  in  various
        studies.

2.7.7 Programme 7: Provincial and local government transfers

This programme will continue to facilitate the transfer of  grants  to  both
provinces and municipalities.

2.7.8 Programme 8: Civil &  military  pensions,  contributions  to  funds  &
other benefits
This programme is responsible for the payment and  administration  of  civil
and military pensions, namely:

    • Civil Pensions: Special Pensions, Political Office  Bearers  Pensions,
      Ex Presidents  Pensions,  Injury  on  Duty,   Post-Retirement  Medical
      Benefits and parliamentary awards, and Retired  Judges Pensions; and
    • Military Pensions and other benefits: payment of military benefits and
      payment to service providers for military medical expenses.

The separation of the administration from the fund  was  completed  and  the
government component responsible for  administering  both  programme  8  and
civil pensions (GEPF) was established on 1 April 2010.

2.8   Operational budget


Table 1: National Treasury Operational Budget
|                                 |Budget    |Prelimina|Budget    |
|                                 |2009/10   |ry       |2010/11   |
|                                 |          |outcome  |          |
|                                 |R’000     |2009/10  |R’000     |
|                                 |          |R’000    |          |
|1. Administration*               |246 809   |242 790  |243 734   |
|2. Public Finance and Budget     |265 150   |262 917  |341 765   |
|Management                       |          |         |          |
|3. Asset & Liability Management  |60 974    |53 174   |67 106    |
|4. Financial Management and      |459 479   |405 633  |498 707   |
|Systems                          |          |         |          |
|5. Financial Accounting and      |138 882   |137 110  |228 381   |
|Reporting                        |          |         |          |
|6. Economic Policy and           |95 862    |94 488   |124 721   |
|International Financial Relations|          |         |          |
|7. Provincial and local          |          |         |          |
|government transfers             |14 410 631|14327 373|12834 500 |
|8. Civil and military pensions,  |          |         |          |
|contributions to funds and other |4 955 302 |4 955 140|2 590 949 |
|benefits                         |          |         |          |
|9. Fiscal Transfers              |42 212 481|42 190   |33 290    |
|                                 |          |108      |053*      |
|TOTAL BUDGET                     |62 845 570|62 668   |50 219 916|
|                                 |          |733      |(Due to a |
|                                 |          |         |reduction |
|                                 |          |         |of Eskom  |
|                                 |          |         |to  R20   |
|                                 |          |         |billion)  |
|*Administration as % of total    |19.48%    |20.30%   |16.20%    |

Table 1 above displays the operational  budget  of  National  Treasury.  The
budget allocation for National Treasury for 2010/11 will be  R  50  219  916
billion. The decline in this figure is as a result of  the  payment  of  R20
billion to Eskom.

2.9   Issues noted by the Committee
Following the interaction with the Strategic Plan of National Treasury,  the
committee noted the following issues:

    • The National Treasury wanted to review the performance of State  Owned
      Enterprises and enquired what actions that will be taken  in  relation
      to the targets.


    • The committee enquired about the fraud detection guidelines and wanted
      to know when the guidelines will be in place.

    • The payments to consultants increase substantially from 2010 onwards.

    •  Looking  at  the  strategic  plan  of  the  Department  of   Economic
      Development, the committee noted that there is a substantial amount of
      overlap between that department  and  National  Treasury  specifically
      with regard to setting of policies.

    • In terms to the tendering process of government, the  Committee  noted
      that that  National  Treasury  made  reference  to  the  supply  chain
      management policy and efforts  put  in  place  to  achieve  this.  The
      Committee is concerned whether enough is being done to ensure that the
      financial management of public funds is monitored effectively.
    •  In  relation  the  Government  Employees  Pension  Fund  (GEPF),  the
      Committee noted the changes of the administration of this entity,  and
      asked whether the GEPF is becoming something else other than a pension
      fund.

    • The Committee noted that there was no mention about the  operation  of
      the suspense account. The committee believed that there  should  be  a
      standard mechanism that could be used by all spheres of government for
      the operation of suspense accounts.

    • In relation to savings, the Committee noted that  there  should  be  a
      programme in place where  departments  could  be  encouraged  to  save
      without undermining services delivery.

    • Under the financial management group, an indication  of  amending  the
      Public Finance Management Act and the Municipal Finance Management Act
      was given. The Committee wanted to know when this will happen.

    • The Committee enquired when  National  Treasury  will  take  steps  to
      secure sound  and  sustainable  fiscal  and  financial  management  in
      municipalities.

3.    Presentation by the South African Revenue Services

The Commissioner of SARS reported that the strategic  plan  is  a  blueprint
for what SARS are going to do differently, creatively and  inventively  over
the medium  term  in  support  of  government’s  priorities.  The  strategic
choices SARS  has  made  are  already  bearing  fruits.  During  tax  season
2009/10, a record number of over 4 million tax  returns  were  submitted  on
time – a 25 per cent increase on 2008. Of these more than 80 per  cent  were
processed within 24 hours and, where relevant, refunds  were  paid  directly
into taxpayers’ bank accounts within 48 hours.

At the end of the financial year on 31 March 2010, SARS was able to  deliver
R8.1 billion more revenue than  anticipated.  While  clearly  stronger  than
anticipated economic recovery played a  significant  part  in  this  revenue
boom,  special  compliance  initiatives  from  SARS   accounted   for   over
R23billion in additional revenue over the course of the year.

3.1   Key focus areas
The Commissioner presented the following key focus areas:

3.1.1 Firmer enforcement

In relation to firmer enforcement by SARS, the Commissioner  indicated  that
this includes the re-engineering  of  audit  and  exception  case  handling,
expanding the use of third party data and risk tools,  and  continuing  with
the implementation of administrative penalties. This is also in response  to
the growing international nature of tax evasion  in  seeking  tax  arbitrage
opportunities  and  exporting  complex  and  highly  technical  tax  evasion
products by  immoral  financial  advisory  services.  Curbing  these  crimes
requires both  closer  co-operation  between  tax  authorities  as  well  as
investing in specialist  audit  and  financial  management  skills  able  to
identify and investigate evasion which is frequently  cloaked  in  seemingly
legitimate structured finance deals.

3.1.2 Importance of building capacity

The Commissioner informed the Committee that SARS  must  continue  to  build
and invest in a skilled, professional, performance  driven  and  value-based
institution which is able to deliver on its mandate in a sustainable way.

This requires measures to enhance the efficiency of SARS, expand the  skills
of people and ensure the governance and leadership  structures  to  maintain
the integrity, values and vision which underpin the organisation.

3.1.3 Government co-operation

The Commissioner highlighted that SARS is an integral  part  of  government.
SARS fully supports and contributes  to  co-operative  government  including
initiatives such as the development  of  the  Border  Management  Agency  to
ensure more effective and efficient border security and  trade  facilitation
for South Africa.

SARS is working together with other government departments and  agencies  to
assist with key  technology,  contract  and  project  implementation  skills
obtained as part of its on-going modernisation.

In this regard, SARS is currently working hand-in-hand with  the  Department
of  Home  Affairs,  the  South  African  Police   Services,   the   National
Intelligence Agency, the  Department  of  International  Relations  and  Co-
Operation and other key border stakeholders on improving security at  points
of entry for the 2010 FIFA World Cup.

3.1.4 Streamlining trade processes

In relation to streamlining trade processes, the Commissioner  informed  the
committee that in support of government’s priority to create jobs,  measures
to boost trade while simultaneously protecting local industries from  unfair
competition  from  illicit,  counterfeit  and  duty-free   goods   are   key
priorities.

A key component of this strategic approach is  the  concept  of  a  “trusted
trader” model in which key stakeholders who meet  strict  criteria  of  self
regulation will enjoy the benefits of more rapid movement of goods.

3.2   Strategic outcomes
The Commissioner presented seven strategic priorities that have been  linked
to specific outcomes for the next three years as follows:

3.2.1 Revenue realisation through compliance

The first is driving revenue  realisation  to  deliver  now  and  to  ensure
sustainability. This comes  from  enhanced  compliance  from  taxpayers  and
traders achieved through a range of outcomes including:

    • A better and more detailed understanding of compliance  levels  across
      different taxpayer and trader segments to allow more targeted service,
      education and enforcement initiatives;
    • Streamlining audit and customs inspections to deal with complex  cases
      and serious non-compliance;
    • e-engineering debt collection processes to reduce debt;
    • Expanding the implementation of administrative penalties; and
    • xpanding the use of third  party  data,  taxpayer  history  and  other
      statistical information to enhance risk identification.

3.2.2 Productivity, service and efficiency

The main thrust  of  this  strategic  priority  is  to  drive  productivity,
service quality and cost efficiency. This outlines outcomes to  improve  the
quality  of  service  delivery  and  entrench  a  culture  and  practice  of
efficient, transparent, honest and caring public service. SARS will  achieve
this over the medium term by:

    • Implementing an Enterprise Capability Management  System  that  tracks
      and drives productivity across SARS;
    • Revising the Service Charter  and  channel  strategy  to  better  meet
      taxpayer and trader needs; and
    • Improving the ease and speed of registration and other interactions.
3.2.3 Customs modernisation

In relation to customs  modernisation,  the  Commissioner  highlighted  that
SARS priority is to deliver on their  customs  mandate  in  a  way  that  is
aligned with government’s  priorities  to  both  grow  the  economy  through
facilitating trade and protecting local businesses. SARS outcomes  over  the
medium term to achieve this include:

    • Improving the speed of the movement of goods through our borders;
    • Implementing an accreditation programme to qualifying traders; and
    • Enhancing the detection of illicit goods through the use of risk tools
      and   expanding  non-intrusive  inspection  capability  as   well   as
      heightened visibility at points of entry

3.2.4 Streamlining operations

The Commissioner highlighted that the streamlining  operations  priority  is
to clarify the SARS operating model, streamline  governance  and  strengthen
leadership. SARS three-year outcomes include:

    • Implementing an evolved operating model with  an  integrated  capacity
      plan to ensure an empowered, agile and responsive workforce;
    • Implementing a streamlined governance framework; and
    •  Implementing  a  leadership  model  with  appropriate  resources  and
      capabilities to ensure sustainable leadership.

3.2.5 Segmentation of clients

The main thrust of this priority is the continued segmentation  of  taxpayer
and  trader  groups  to  allow  for  differentiated  products,  service  and
compliance initiatives to better and more closely meet the particular  needs
of these segments. Over the next three years SARS will:

    • Develop holistic segmentation designs for all 10 taxpayer  and  trader
      segments based on a thorough understanding of the behaviour and  needs
      of each segment; and
    • Implement operating models for five of  these  segments  namely  large
      businesses,  medium-sized  businesses,  the   informal   sector,   tax
      practitioners and traders

3.2.6 Empowering of employees

The central emphasis of this priority is the focus on  the  SARS  people  to
create a high-performance culture and  environment  that  are  values-driven
and which fosters professional and personal growth  at  all  levels  of  the
organisation. Specific outcomes include the following:

    • The establishment of  a  systematic  response  to  train  and  retrain
      individuals in line with capacity and capability  requirements  within
      SARS;
    • Implementation of an employee value proposition to position SARS as an
      employer of choice to attract and retain skills; and
    • Enhancement of performance management  processes  and  empowerment  of
      managers to bring the best out of their people.

3.2.7 Deepening relationships

The  main  thrust  of  this  strategic  priority  is  to   deepen   external
relationships with key stakeholders  to  advance  co-operation,  partnership
and integration in pursuit of  compliance,  trade  facilitation  and  border
control.

This includes advancing relationships  with  domestic  stakeholders  in  the
public and private sector as well as other revenue and  customs  authorities
internationally through bilateral and multilateral forums.  One  such  forum
that is recently launched is the African  Tax  Administration  Forum  (ATAF)
pioneered by and currently chaired by South Africa.

The ATAF, which has already attracted more than 30 African tax  authorities,
is a springboard for a united quest towards greater self-reliance,  economic
growth and social development.

4.    Issues noted by the Committee

Following the interaction with the Strategic Plan  of  SARS,  the  Committee
noted the following:
    • SARS does not communicate  the  issue  of  enforcing  compliance  very
      effectively. The Committee believed that there  are  some  individuals
      and institutions that are not tax compliant and asked whether SARS has
      a communication strategy to inform the citizens about the dangers  and
      actions taken of non-compliance.
    • The Committee enquired if there was  a  litigation  process  in  place
      where people could contest against decisions taken by SARS.
    • In relation to skills development, the Committee  enquired  about  the
      mechanisms that are in place to retain skills.
    • With regards to the  streamlining  operations,  various  SARS  offices
      around the country  have  been  considered  to  be  consolidated.  The
      Committee enquired if there was a process in place  where  people  can
      fully  understand  and  be  consulted  on  the   implications   of   a
      consolidation process.
    •  The  Committee  noted  that  in  the  previous  parliamentary   term,
      discussions took place in relation to tax deduction  for  people  with
      disabilities and referred to a list that was being discussed  at  that
      time. The Committee wanted to know what  progress  has  been  made  to
      finalise the list.
    • In relation to enforcement, the Committee  enquired  what  steps  SARS
      will take to bring the informal economy into the tax net.
    • Regarding the Customs Border Unit (CBU), the Committee asked how  many
      cases this unit dealt with and what the outcomes of these cases were.
    • In relation to the review of the policy on  the  disposal  of  illicit
      goods, the Committee enquired how far this process was.
    • The Committee noted that SARS will provide capacity for  the  CBU  and
      asked how this process will unfold.
    • In relation to the Interim Economic  Partnership  Agreement  that  was
      signed between certain members of the Southern African  Customs  Union
      (SACU) and  the  European  Union,  the  Committee  enquired  what  the
      implications were for these countries. The Committee also enquired how
      far the process of reviewing the SACU revenue formula was.


5.    Recommendations

Based on the deliberations with National Treasury and  SARS,  the  Committee
recommends that:

      5.1   National Treasury should put  a  strategy  in  place  that  will
           provide a stronger focus on the manner in  which  municipalities
           manage public finances;


      5.2   SARS should provide the Committee  with  its  strategy  for  the
           consolidation   of   SARS   offices   with   regard   to   where
           consolidations will take place, which communities  are  affected
           by  these  consolidations,  and  how   SARS   will   effectively
           communicate with communities before consolidations  take  place;
           and


      5.3   SARS should put a programme in place to  identify  the  mismatch
           between declared income and actual income of individuals in  the
           economy who do not pay taxes effectively.


6.    Conclusion

Emanating from the briefing and discussions the Committee resolved  that  it
will undertake further engagements with  National  Treasury  on  the  fiscal
exit strategy; the procurement/tendering reform processes; the  relationship
between  the  asset  units  in  National  Treasury  and   other   government
departments; the retirement reform processes, and  the  Government  Employee
Pension Fund current processes. The Committee will also further engage  SARS
on the review of the SACU revenue sharing formula  processes;  the  strategy
for the consolidation of SARS offices; the review of the disposal policy  on
illicit goods; and the state of readiness in preparations for the 2010  FIFA
World Cup at the ports of entry.
Members of the Standing Committee on Finance, having considered Budget  Vote
9: National Treasury pledges  their  support  of  Budget  Vote  9:  National
Treasury.

Report to be considered.

                            TUESDAY, 11 MAY 2010

National Assembly

The Speaker
1.    Membership of Committees

   (1)      The following changes to Committee membership have been made by
       the ACDP:

       Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation


       Appointed:      Dudley, Ms C
       Discharged:     Meshoe, Rev K R J

2.    Request for filling of vacancies in ICASA

   (1)      A letter, dated 29 April 2010, has been received from the
       Minister of Communications, requesting the National Assembly to fill
       three vacancies in the Independent Communications Authority of South
       Africa (Icasa) in terms of section 5 of the Independent
       Communications Authority of South Africa Act, 2000 (Act No 13 of
       2000).


       Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications for
       consideration and report.
3.    Submission of Report of Public Protector

   (1)      A letter, dated 4 May 2010, has been received from the President
       of the Republic, submitting to the National Assembly a report of the
       Public Protector on an investigation conducted in terms of section
       3(1) of the Executive Members’ Ethics Act, 1998 (No 82 of 1998), the
       President’s comments thereon and action taken in regard to the
       report’s recommendations.

4.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled


   (1)      The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
       Finance:

       (a)  Government Notice No 231 published in Government Gazette No
           33051, dated 26 March 2010: Administration and operations:
           Determination in terms of section 7A(4) of the Public Service
           Act (Proclamation No 103 of 1994) of provisions that confer
           powers and impose duties on the head of the Government Pensions
           Administration Agency (GPAA) and apply to the reporting,
           administrative, organisational, oversight and other management
           objects, processes and procedures of the GPAA.

   (2)      The following paper is referred to the  Portfolio  Committee  on
       Science and Technology:

       (a)  Southern African Development Community (SADC) Protocol on
           Science, Technology and Innovation, tabled in terms of section
           231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

   (3)      The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
       Finance:

       (a)  Government Notice No 114 published in Government Gazette No
           32951, dated 19 February 2010: Exemption granted to the Cape
           Winelands District Municipality from compliance with section
           28(6) of the Local Government:  Municipal Finance Management
           Act, 2003 (Act No 56 of 2003), in terms of section 177(1)(b) of
           that Act.

       (b)  Government Notice No 168 published in Government Gazette No
           32993, dated 1 March 2010: Determination of commencement date of
           sections 39, 40, 41(a), 42, 43, 54 and 55 in terms of section 57
           of the Insurance Laws Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 27 of 2008).


       (c)  Government Notice No 169 published in Government Gazette No
           32994, dated 1 March 2010:  Withdrawal of regulations issued in
           terms of section 16(1) of the Value-Added Tax Act, 1991 (Act No
           89 of 1991) to calculate the tax payable in terms of a small
           retailer’s VAT package.

       (d)  Government Notice No R.211 published in Government Gazette No
           33036, dated 19 March 2010:  Regulations issued in terms of
           section 8(2E) of the Value-Added Tax Act, 1991 (Act No 89 of
           1991), prescribing the period within which the tax payable in
           terms of section 8(2) of that Act shall be paid.


       (e)  Government Notice No 230 published in Government Gazette No
           33047, dated 23 March 2010:  Stopping and reallocation of
           conditional allocations in terms of sections 28 and 29 of the
           Division of Revenue Act, 2009 (Act No 12 of 2009).


       (f)  Government Notice No 257 published in Government Gazette No
           33037, dated 23 March 2010:  Publication in terms of section 40C
           of the Pension Funds Act, 1956 (Act No 24 of 1956) of the
           proposed amendment of regulation 28 of the regulations made
           under section 36 of that Act, for public comment.


       (g)  Government Notice No R.218 published in Government Gazette No
           33042, dated 26 March 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
           2/324) in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


       (h)  Government Notice No R.219 published in Government Gazette No
           33042, dated 26 March 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No
           2/325) in terms of section 56 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


       (i)  Government Notice No R.256 published in Government Gazette No
           33070, dated 31 March 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 Part 5A
           (No 1/5/147) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
           Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


       (j)  Government Notice No R.257 published in Government Gazette No
           33070, dated 31 March 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 Part 5B
           (No 1/5/148) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise
           Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


       (k)  Government Notice No R.258 published in Government Gazette No
           33070, dated 31 March 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 6 (No 6/16)
           in terms of section 75(15) of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964
           (Act No 91 of 1964).


       (l)  Government Notice No R.266 published in Government Gazette No
           33083, dated 1 April 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
           1/1/1402) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


       (m)  Government Notice No R.267 published in Government Gazette No
           33083, dated 1 April 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 10 (No
           10/13) in terms of section 49 of the Customs and Excise Act,
           1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


       (n)  Government Notice No 240 published in Government Gazette No
           33059, dated 1 April 2010: Listing of public entities: Amendment
           to Schedule 3, Part A, of the Public Finance Management Act,
           1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), to include the Safety and Security
           Sector Education and Training as a national public entity.


       (o)  Government Notice No 241 published in Government Gazette No
           33059, dated 1 April 2010: Listing and delisting of public
           entities: Amendment to Schedule 3, Part C, of the Public Finance
           Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), to remove the Free
           State Youth Commission and Western Cape Provincial Youth
           Commission as public entities.


       (p)  Government Notice No 242 published in Government Gazette No
           33059, dated 1 April 2010: Technical change to public entity:
           Amendment of Schedule 3, Part B, of the Public Finance
           Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999), to change the South
           African Rail Commuter Corporation to the Passenger Rail Agency
           of South Africa.


       (q)  Government Notice No 281 published in Government Gazette No
           33100, dated 13 April 2010: Publication, in accordance with
           sections 8(3) and 14(1)(a)-(d) of the Division of Revenue Act,
           2010 (Act No 1 of 2010), of the allocations per municipality for
           each local government grant in terms of Schedule 3, 4, 6, 7 and
           8, the allocations to provinces in terms of Schedule 8 and the
           provincial and local government frameworks for each allocation
           in terms of Schedule 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8.

   (4)      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
       Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and report:


       (a)  Medium-Term Strategic Framework of the Department of Justice
           and Constitutional Development for 2010-14.


   (5)      The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public
       Accounts for  consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
       and Industry:

        a) Report of the Auditor-General on an investigation into the
           procurement of the enterprise content management system at the
           Companies and Intellectual Property Registration Office (Cipro)
           in South Africa [RP40-2010].

   (6)      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
       Arts and Culture for consideration and report:

        a) Medium-Term Strategic Framework of the Department of Arts and
           Culture for 2010-14.


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Women, Children, Youth and
People with Disabilities on Budget Vote 1: National Youth Development
Agency, dated 21 April 2010

The Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth, Children and People with
Disabilities received a briefing from the National Youth Development Agency
on the budget allocation for 2010/11 and the related operational plan.  The
Committee engaged extensively with the Agency on the 21 April 2010 where
several concerns were raised pertaining to the absence of a strategic plan
which was not presented and the financial and programmatic issues
pertaining to the entities it subsumed namely the National Youth Commission
and the Umsobomvu Youth Fund. All of the aforementioned have a direct
bearing on the ability of the Agency to fulfil its mandate effectively and
for oversight to be conducted hereto. The Committee will meet with the
Agency to consider the strategic plans and budget and will report to
Parliament hereafter.

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on  Communications  on  the  process
followed  on  recommending  a  person  to  be  appointed  to  serve  on  the
Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA) Council,  dated
11 May 2010.

The  Portfolio  Committee   on   Communications,   having   considered   the
nominations of candidates submitted for appointment to serve  on  the  ICASA
Council in terms of the ICASA Act, 13 of 2000 (as  amended  by  Broadcasting
Amendment Act, No 64 of 2002) reports as follows:

A request from the Minister of Communications to  fill  vacancies  at  ICASA
was referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications on 25  March  2010
and 11 May 2010 (see ATC 25 March 2010  and  11  May  2010).  The  Committee
advertised calling for nominations to fill the vacancies.

The Committee received 91 CVs  and  unanimously  shortlisted  the  following
candidates for the first round of interviews  that  took  place  on  04  May
2010:

1.    Dr Alison Nora Gillwald
2.    Dr Norman Tinyiko Baloyi
3.    Ms Lahlang Shirley Somo
4.    Mr Tshepo Molai
5.    Ms Linda Dalbock
6.    Dr Stephen Sipho Mncube

The Committee further unanimously shortlisted the candidates  listed  below.
The interviews are scheduled to take place on 12 and 13 May 2010:

1.    Adv Luthando Simphiwe Mkumatela
2.    Ms Kathryn Leigh Berman
3.    Mr William Hamilton Currie
4.    Mr Peter John Zimri
5.    Ms Mankakane Violet Magagane
6.    Mrs Kedibone Annah Serero-Chiloane
7.    Mr Joseph Morakile Lebooa
8.    Ms Josephine Kwena Mabotja
9.    Mr Gabriel Thono Magomola
10.   Ms Ntombizodwa (Miki) Ndhlovu
11.   Prof Jacobus CW Van Rooyen
12.   Ms Brenda Bernice Ntombela
13.   Mr John Matisonn
14.   Mr Chose Andrew Kenilworth Choeu

Mr Chose Andrew Kenilworth Choeu and Dr Alison Nora Gillwald withdrew  their
applications.


