---
title: 'National Assembly - 26 August 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-08-26
---

                          THURSDAY, 26 AUGUST 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr S ABRAM: Mr Speaker, I have a notice of a motion.

Agb Speaker, ek gee kennis dat ek tydens die volgende sitting van die Huis
die volgende mosie namens die ANC sal voorstel: [Hon Speaker, I give notice
that on the next sitting day of the House I shall move the following motion
on behalf of the ANC:]

   That the House debates reducing correctional centre inmate overcrowding,
   while not compromising the interests of justice.

I thank you. [Applause.]
Ms S P RWEXANA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the customary practice of ukuthwala [a form of
   arranged marriage whereby a girl or young woman is taken to a man who
   will become her husband without her consent], as this is a very serious
   problem requiring urgent attention in South Africa today.

Mr M J ELLIS: Speaker, can we clarify that before the hon leader speaks.
Did you say motions without notice or ordinary motions?

The SPEAKER: We are still on Notices of Motion.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

      That the House debates the implications for the rule of law of the
      decision taken last week at the Southern African Development
      Community, SADC, summit not to renew the terms of the judges presiding
      over the SADC Tribunal, thereby effectively disbanding this highly
      respected legal body of last resort or appeal for nationals within the
      SADC community.

I thank you.
        TRAGIC DEATH OF TEN-YEAR-OLD BOY AT RUGBY MATCH IN UITENHAGE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —


   (1)      notes with sadness the tragic events that happened at  a  rugby
        match in Uitenhage, Eastern Cape, which resulted in the death of  a
        ten-year-old boy, Bevan Joseph, and serious injuries to  more  than
        30 spectators when a stadium wall collapsed on them;


   (2)      further  notes  that  the  tragedy  happened  as  a  result  of
        spectators fleeing barbaric scenes of bottle-throwing and  stabbing
        that occurred  after the final whistle  had  blown  in  the  annual
        rugby match between two local clubs, Gardens and Progress;


   (3)      calls on the police to intensify their  investigation  into  the
        events and to deal decisively with the  hooligans  responsible  for
        the cowardly act;


   (4)      resolves that acts of violence and hooliganism have no place at
        our sporting events and in society; and


    (5)     conveys its heartfelt condolences to Bevan Joseph’s  family  and
        friends.

Agreed to.

          CREATION OF HOLOCAUST AND GENOCIDE CENTRE IN JOHANNESBURG

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —




   (1)      notes that Johannesburg is to create a  Holocaust  and  Genocide
        Centre offering exhibitions,  lectures,  educational  material  and
        other resources to educate people on both the  Holocaust  in  which
        millions of Jews were killed and the Rwanda genocide;

   (2)      further notes that this centre, that is being built  in  Forest
        Town, Johannesburg, will also have a strong focus on xenophobia;

   (3)      recognises that there is a great deal that can be learnt by all
        South Africans from these horrific world events;




    (4)     thanks the various charitable donators and the city council  for
        the funding they are providing for this project; and



    (5)     wishes the initiators and staff of the centre all the best with
        the establishment of this important project.

Agreed to.

      JOHN WILLIAM SMIT, THE MOST CAPPED TEST RUGBY CAPTAIN OF ALL TIME

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M S SHILOWA: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —

          1) notes that —


         a) John William Smit is the most capped rugby test captain of  all
            time;


         b) Smit is the second most capped Springbok of all time  and  that
            he has reached the milestone of wearing 100 Test caps  for  the
            Springboks; and


         c) Smit was the captain of the World  Cup  squad  that  saw  South
            Africa lift the Web Ellis trophy for only the second time;

     2) acknowledges the role Smit has played in not only building the game
        of rugby in South Africa, but also his contribution towards nation-
        building in this, his tenth year of rugby at the very top;


        3) congratulates him on the milestones that he has achieved; and


     4) thanks him for his tireless devotion and for the inspiring role  he
        plays in the lives of the youth of South Africa.

Agreed to.

         VICTOR MATFIELD TO PLAY HIS 100TH TEST IN SPRINGBOK JERSEY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —


     1) notes that on Saturday, 28 August 2010, Victor Matfield  will  play
        in his 100th test cap in a Springbok jersey during the Vodacom Tri-
        Nations on his home ground, Loftus Versfeld;

     2) further notes that this achievement will place  Matfield  alongside
        only two other Boks who have reached this milestone;

     3) further recognises that Matfield, who has been a legendary  captain
        for the Blue Bulls, has played a big part  in  the  recent  run  of
        championship wins by that team; and

     4) wishes Victor  Matfield  all  the  best  with  this  important  and
        significant game.


Agreed to.

                 RHINO KILLINGS BY POACHERS IN SOUTH AFRICA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —
   (1)      notes that more than 160 rhinos have thus  far  been  killed  by
        poachers in South Africa this year;


   (2)      further notes that the current widespread annihilation of rhino
        by poachers after the rhino horn is a serious threat  to  the  South
        African rhino population;


    (3)     expresses great concern about the  slaughter  of  South  African
        rhino by poachers which has reached an unprecedented level;


    (4)     calls upon members of the public to report any information  that
        would  assist  with  breaking  the  rhino-poaching  syndicates  and
        prosecuting the perpetrators.

Agreed to.

      DEATH OF JEREMY TAYLOR IN PLANE CRASH ON HIS WAY TO CLIMB EVEREST

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —

   (1)      notes with great sadness the death of a South  African,  Jeremy
        Taylor, together with 13 others, in a plane crash while on his  way
        to climb Mount Everest in Nepal, at the age of 31, on  Tuesday,  24
        August 2010;


    (2)     further notes that Jeremy died at  the  time  he  was  about  to
        fulfill his life-long dream to climb Mount Everest; and

    (3)     conveys its heartfelt condolences to  his  family,  friends  and
        colleagues.

Agreed to.

          COCAINE SEIZED BY POLICE AT COEGA HARBOUR, PORT ELIZABETH

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —


     1) notes that on Wednesday, 25 August 2010, the South  African  Police
        Service seized cocaine with a street value of about R1,4 billion at
        the Coega harbour at Port Elizabeth;


     2) further notes that this is one of the biggest drug  busts  made  in
        South Africa;


     3) recognises the outstanding efforts  and  work  done  by  the  South
        African Police Service in this instance;

     4) congratulates the South African Police Service on a job well  done;
        and


     5) wishes them all the best in their continued  efforts  to  curb  the
        distribution of narcotics in South Africa.

Agreed to.


    PASSING AWAY OF FORMER DEPUTY MINISTER OF SAFETY AND SECURITY, MR JOE
                                  MATTHEWS


                             (Draft Resolution)

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Speaker, Xhamela, Ministers, colleagues, I move
the draft resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper as follows:

   That the House —

     1) notes with great sadness the news of  the  passing  of  the  former
        Deputy Minister of Safety and Security, Mr Joe  Matthews,  81,  who
        died of natural causes in Milpark Hospital in  Johannesburg  on  21
        August 2010;

   (2)      further notes that Matthews was born on 17 June 1929 in  Durban
        and that he was the son of African National Congress  leader,  Z  K
        Matthews;

   (3)      acknowledges that after matriculating in Johannesburg in  1947,
        Matthews went on to obtain a BA degree from Fort Hare University  in
        1952, an LLB from the University of London in  1956  and  a  Masters
        Degree in History from the same institution 12 years later;

    (4)     recognises that his career in politics and the legal  profession
        spanned six decades after he  joined  the  ANC  Youth  League  as  a
        teenager in 1944 and that he and  his  father  were  among  the  156
        accused, along with Mandela, Walter  Sisulu  and  other  senior  ANC
        leaders in the 1956 Treason Trial  which  ended  in  1961  with  the
        acquittal of all involved;

   (5)      further recognises that he joined the Inkatha Freedom Party  in
        1992 and served as Deputy Minister of Safety and Security from  1994
        up to his  retirement a decade later in the  cabinets of both former
        president Nelson Mandela and his successor, Thabo Mbeki;

   (6)      remembers Joe Matthews as a great South African, a hero of  the
        struggle for freedom and a  man  whose  sharp  intellect  and  keen
        understanding of South Africa's history, challenges   and potential
        made him an invaluable resource to our country; and

   (7)      conveys its heartfelt condolences to the  family,  friends  and
        comrades of the late Joe Matthews, to the African National Congress
        and the Inkatha Freedom Party.

When a man passes away at a great age, the sense of injustice which often
accompanies death is less acute than in the case of a younger person. Man
is allotted three score and ten years as a lifespan. The ones who are
blessed, like Joseph Gaobakwe Matthews and I, to live past this measure,
are believed to have had and led a full life. People will say surely there
is nothing more an octogenarian can still long to do. Surely regrets are
far behind him and some will say he has had his innings.

But today, as I offer my message of condolence on the passing of one of
South Africa’s greatest sons, I do feel regret. I regret that I have been
robbed of an opportunity to share another good conversation with my beloved
friend, Joe. I regret that his sharp mind, a veritable library of
knowledge, will no longer challenge mine as we explored ideas, theories,
philosophies and dreams. I regret that his warmth and gentle humour will no
longer brighten my days. I regret that South Africa had merely a lifetime
of Joe Matthews because more certainly would have enriched us. Even to the
end of his days, Joe’s mind remained brilliant. There was nothing senile
about him.

I know that the popular thing these days is the belief that old men can’t
lead. Last week we were enlightened by the Leader of the Youth that even in
the ANC, not only in the IFP, their old men must be shown the door.
[Laughter.]

Colleagues, I know that I am not alone in longing for more time with Joe
Matthews; his daughter, the hon Naledi Pandor, has suffered a terrible
loss. Our thoughts and prayers are with her and her family as they walk
through the valley of the shadow of death. I am grateful to the hon
Minister for her kindness in keeping me informed of her father’s brief
illness and for contacting me, even from the hospital, when he passed into
eternity. Joe was blessed to have such a daughter who would consider his
friends in the midst of her own suffering.

There are many who will mourn the loss of Joe Matthews, but the deepest
pain is reserved for his children and family. May God be their comfort and
strength.

This afternoon I had the privilege of speaking at a memorial service in
which we paid tribute to the memory of our former colleague. I noted then
that his life, like that of any prominent leader, will be written into the
history books in terms of accomplishments and regrets, mountain peaks and
valleys.

History tends to record the pivotal moments of a human being’s life, while
friends and loved ones record through their memories the trivialities and
daily witness of character that give a fuller and truer sense of a man.
Even as I spoke this afternoon, I was aware that history is not a perfect
record, because it is written by human beings - people. Every person has an
agenda, a viewpoint, a belief and a motive. The record of Joe Matthews’
life will not always be perfect and it will be up to us who knew him to
challenge distortions and set the record straight.

The decisions that Joe Matthews made were closely watched and analysed, in
part because he was a brilliant historian and lawyer, who wrote
prolifically; and in part because he was the son of Professor Z K Matthews
who had already earned the respect and admiration of black South Africans
and the international community. He was also under scrutiny because he was
a gifted political strategist who engaged in the struggle of our country.

When Joe Matthews entered the University of Fort Hare in 1948, he
immediately joined those who established the Fort Hare branch of the Youth
League, to which both of us belonged. Joe and I met at Fort Hare and we
quickly became good friends. As students, we shared a passion for law,
history and music; and we cut our political teeth together in the ANC Youth
League. We also shared a passion for South Africa’s liberation. We engaged
in deep discussions with one another, late into the night. We often spoke
about freedom and also about our teachers, our classes and our great loves.

Our long friendship, which eventually spanned 62 years, offered us an
insight into each other’s character. I will not hesitate to say that Joe
was an exceptional man, honest, warm and delightful to listen to. I think
it was because Joe knew me so well that he was able to support me when I
rejected the armed struggle, which the ANC in exile brought to South
Africa.

Joe recounted in his interview about the book: The Long Walk to Freedom,
how His Excellency, Nelson Mandela, came to him with the idea of an armed
struggle and they discussed its potential as a tool of liberation. He
recounted how the idea was posed to other leaders and was accepted. Joe
knew that I could never have agreed to bloodshed and loss of life, even as
a means to gain political enfranchisement. To my mind, it was too high a
price to pay, considering that we would eventually reach the same goal
through passive resistance and negotiations.

As a Christian and a patriot, I could not lead, at the time when I was in
charge of KwaZulu-Natal only, to take up arms, because our country would
have been reduced to ashes with no spoils of war for anyone to inherit.
Joe, although he was a member of Umkhonto Wesizwe, supported my stand and
never withdrew his encouragement or his friendship.

In the same way Joe understood and supported my rejection of nominal
independence for KwaZulu-Natal during apartheid. Had I been honey-trapped
into seeing KwaZulu-Natal become a Bantustan, millions of black South
African would have been deprived of citizenship once liberation was
achieved. It was a decision that looked to the long-term future of our
people. I thank God for vindicating that decision many years later, as
former President F W de Klerk admitted before the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission that it was this decision that finally made the grand scheme of
apartheid untenable.

Because of this history, I must confess that it angered me to read in last
week’s Sunday Times that a member of the ANC’s National Executive
Committee, NEC, the hon Dr Pallo Jordan, told the newspaper that Joe
Matthews’ legacy had been stunted by two of his decisions: to support
Bantustans and to join the IFP. Dr Jordan said this as if these things
besmirched the memory of Joseph Gaobakwe Matthews. To me, it was a
distasteful utterance, to say the least, and a cheap political pot shot.

I was angered on behalf of my late friend and also saddened for his
daughter, our hon Minister, to have an insult levelled against her father,
coming from within her own party. It is not the first time she has suffered
because of foolish words, hastily spoken within her own party. I cannot
help but think of the ANC Youth League President’s attack on her beautiful
accent, acquired because of her father’s exile during the liberation
struggle. How insulting, when her own father founded the ANC Youth League!

I know that grief can so easily take the disguise of anger. My frustration
at seeing history falsely recorded is amplified by the pain I feel at Joe
Matthews’ passing. I cannot stomach the idea that the immense contribution
that my friend made to the liberation struggle, the field of law, our
democratic negotiations, to safety and security and to remembering our
country’s past the way it actually happened, may now be diminished just
because he gave his allegiance to the IFP and his friendship to Mangosuthu
Buthelezi.

I became used to unjust vilification myself, but it pains me to see my
friends suffer by association with me. Let us not allow the truth, my dear
brothers and sisters, to be painted over. Joe Matthews began in the ANC
Youth League, briefly joined the SA Communist Party in the fifties, and
fell out with the ANC in the seventies. He joined the IFP in 1992, and
served in the Government of National Unity for the first ten years of
democracy. After he retired, the ANC-led government sought out his wisdom
and advice. Joe’s brilliant intellect was always in demand.

When he returned from exile in 1991, Joe returned to a country on the brink
of change. In my view, it would have been a loss for South Africa to forgo
his contribution as we negotiated a democratic dispensation. I had no
qualms whatsoever in sending him to Kempton Park as a key part of the IFP’s
team. When we reached the point where international mediation was required,
the IFP sent Dr Frank Mdlalose and Mr Joe Matthews for discussions with Mr
Thabo Mbeki, Mr Jacob Zuma and Mr Penuel Maduna. Agreement was then reached
on the terms of reference for mediation.

When the interim Constitution established a Government of National Unity, I
again had no qualms in putting Joe Matthews forward for the position of
Deputy Minister of Safety and Security, which His Excellency, Mr Mandela,
gave to him. It was in this position that some of us in the House had the
privilege of interacting with the hon Joseph Gaobakwe Matthews. It is right
that we remember him in this House today and honour the contribution that
he made to Parliament and the government of South Africa.

His memory will remain alive in the hearts and minds of those who loved
him; which is most of us, across all parties. May history remember him as
he was - a brilliant historian, gifted leader, patriot, and a hero of South
Africa’s struggle. Amandla!
HON MEMBERS: Awethu! [To the people!] [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: We would like to thank the hon Shenge. Hon members, before I
proceed with the list of speakers, I wish to recognise and acknowledge the
presence of members of the Matthews family in the Chamber. May you please
stand up so that they can all see you?
[Applause.] You are warmly welcomed.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, it is particularly significant for me to be able
to follow the hon Buthelezi on this sad occasion as we pay tribute to the
late Mr Joe Matthews. The hon Buthelezi has certainly paid a remarkably
warm tribute to both a friend and colleague and it is therefore a great
privilege for me to follow him on this podium.

I had the pleasure and honour of knowing Joe Matthews during his years in
Parliament. I wish I had known him before that because, from all accounts
and according to his CV, which I had the great pleasure of reading in some
detail, he was a remarkably interesting and very accomplished person. His
whole life history indicates a man who from his young days cared deeply
about the rights of people. Likewise, his political history shows a man
deeply committed to fighting for those rights, often at great personal risk
and compromising his own freedom in the fight for the freedom of others.

His long period of exile from 1960 to 1991 must have been very difficult
and frustrating for him. He achieved a great deal during those years,
serving the ANC from afar in many different capacities, as well as using
the opportunity to improve his academic qualifications and writing quite
extensively on a number of subjects and in particular on South Africa. It
is obvious that, as soon as he was able to, he jumped at the opportunity to
return to his home country, the country of his birth and the one that he
had fought for, for so long.

There can be no doubt that, despite his personal successes overseas in the
UK, Botswana, Canada and the Netherlands, South Africa was his passion, and
returning to his country for him was a moment of huge significance. What is
equally significant was that he retained strong relationships with so many
people in this country, both in the ANC and the IFP while he was in exile.

His return to South Africa saw him immediately involved with his old
colleagues, especially his friend of many years, the hon Buthelezi, the
President of the IFP. Consequently for many of us it was not surprising
therefore that, despite his intense loyalty to the ANC for decades, he then
became a member of the IFP in 1992 where he played a very prominent role in
the run-up to the first democratic elections in 1994 and thereafter.

From a personal point of view, during his time in Parliament, Joe Matthews
was always a gentleman. His tenure as Deputy Minister of Safety and
Security in the Government of National Unity was very successful. He was
forthright in his interventions, but understood the importance of his work
and certainly did not tolerate shoddy work, either from Members of
Parliament or officials. What has really made him as a human being was the
fact that he was a compassionate person, but at all times very firm.

Mr Matthews did not look for popularity. He was his own person and he was
dedicated to his work. At times, as I remember him, he was fairly taciturn.
But certainly, that never overshadowed a steely determination that both his
political enemies and friends fully understood and respected. At the same
time, as the hon Buthelezi has mentioned, his sense of humour was
excellent, sometimes dry, sometimes dour, but it was excellent. As I have
said, he was a very warm and caring human being.

I do believe that he will be long remembered in the South African political
history as a man of great integrity. It is for these reasons that on behalf
of the DA, I offer our sincere condolences to his family, especially on
this occasion, his daughter, the hon Naledi Pandor, and all his political
friends and allies, both within the IFP and the ANC, who, no doubt, will
miss him greatly. I thank you. [Applause].

Mr M G P LEKOTA: Mr Speaker, dear colleagues, today we bid farewell to one
of South Africa’s greatest sons and freedom fighters. Although Joe Mathews
came from a family of stature in South Africa’s history, he became a
revolutionary in his own name and right. His record of performance speaks
for itself. From early in his life as a student and member of the youth of
the premier liberation organisation of our country, he made his mark
amongst his peers across the length and breadth of South Africa.

The records of written and oral history abound of his exploits. Many of our
generation, certainly my generation, learned of his work amongst cadres of
the movement in jail on Robben Island, and from those who had returned from
exile. We were always very proud to hear of his exploits, of how he
narrated the plight of our people on platforms and under the cruel rule of
apartheid.

When he had joined us in Cabinet or rather in the democratic government,
his inputs in Cabinet and in other committees were scholarly and inspiring.
But it was away from these formal meetings and in casual analytical
discussions that the greatness of the man came out. I came to realise then,
in a very small measure perhaps, how much South Africa had lost during the
years of rejection of the full contributions of the darker skinned sections
of her population.

The late Joe also played a positive role in assisting Raproshma between the
liberating movements and other parties in the country, at a time when our
country was torn with tensions, in particular along the East coast of the
country. He made a number of diplomatic interventions among leaders of our
different parties and worked assiduously to undermine tension.

Today our country has one less of the best of her sons. While we celebrate
the greatness of his life, we cannot regret his departure. Our sympathies
from Cope go to the IFP and to all of those parties, the ANC, Members of
this House and others who have had the opportunity of sharing time and work
with him. We particularly extend our very deep sympathy to his family and
friends. May his soul rest in peace. [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Mr Speaker, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members, the UDM offers its sincere condolences to the family, friends and
colleagues of the late hon Mr Joe Matthews. He is one of the class of 1994,
which was a first crop of the democratically elected members of this
Parliament to depart us. It is also worth noting that he too, like many
other significant political players of this country, studied at the
University of Fort Hare.

The late hon Matthews was an active participant in politics for many
decades and participated in some way or another in the many tenacious
events that shook our country in the latter half of the twentieth century.
He therefore leaves a legacy of considerable proportions. Our thoughts and
prayers are with his family. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Speaker, ek dink as almal in die Raad na die lewe
van mnr Joe Matthews luister, sal hulle saamstem dat hy die voorreg gehad
het om ’n vol lewe te lei. Ons het wel polities van hom verskil, maar hy
was altyd ’n voorbeeld vir daardie politieke partye en daardie politieke
bewegings waarvan hy lid was. En ek dink altyd as ’n mens op die ouderdom
kom wat hy bereik het en jy kan terugkyk op jou lewe, dan kan jy ook sê dit
was ’n voorreg.

Ek het die voorreg gehad om saam met hom te werk toe hy die Adjunkminister
van Veiligheid en Sekuriteit was. Hy was altyd beleefd, hy was altyd
hulpvaardig, en wat my veral ook opgeval het, is die goeie en perfekte
Afrikaans wat hy gepraat het. In daardie opsig het hy ook ’n voorbeeld
gestel.

Die VF Plus wil aan sy gesin, sy familie en sy vriende ons innige meegevoel
meedeel. Dit is altyd ’n groot verlies en dit is ook altyd hartseer om ’n
geliefde te verloor, daarom spreek ons ons innige meegevoel en simpatie uit
teenoor hulle almal. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROERNEWALD: Hon Speaker, I think that when everyone in the House
listens to the life that Mr Joe Matthews led, they would all agree that he
had been privileged to have led such a full life. We may have differed from
him politically, but he set an example to those political parties and those
political movements of which he was a member. And it has always been my
belief that if a person has reached the age that he has, and you are able
to reflect on your life, then you would also have to admit that it has been
a privilege.

I had the privilege to work with him when he was the Deputy Minister of
Safety and Security. He was always polite, he was always ready to help, and
what also struck me, in particular, was the excellent and perfect Afrikaans
that he spoke. In that regard he also set a good example.

The FF Plus would like to extent our heartfelt condolences to his family,
his relatives and his friends. It is always a great loss and it is also
very painful to lose a loved one and, therefore, we would like to convey
our heartfelt condolences and sympathy to all of them. Thank you.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I want to express our
sincere condolences to the family, friends, IFP and ANC members for the
loss of this great son of the soil, Joe Mathews, who passed away this past
week. During my short interaction with him, as a then Deputy Minister of
Safety and Security, I found him to be a warm, yet firm leader and an
intellectual that loved his work and his country dearly. He was a man who
paid dearly in his contribution to the liberation and freedom of this
country.

The ACDP will honour him, his leadership, his contribution and his great
mind for many years to come. To the family, I wish to confirm what all the
members have said and say that our prayers are with you. May his soul rest
in peace. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M N MATLADI: Speaker, the UCDP would like to pass its heartfelt
condolences to the family and friends of Joseph Matthews. The nation has
lost a frontline stalwart and a veteran of the struggle. He will always be
remembered for his unfaltering zeal and commitment to be part of the
delegation in the pre-1994 elections. We shall also miss him for his
services as Deputy Minister of Safety and Security. Go well, son or
grandson of African stalwarts.

Go mmarona mme Naledi Pandor ra re tshedisega, re le UCDP re na le wena. Re
a leboga. [To our mother, Naledi Pandor, we convey our condolences; the
UCDP is with you.]

Mong L M MPHAHLELE: Motsamaisi wa dipuisano, re le ba mokga wa Pan
Africanist Congress of Azania, thapameng ya letsatsi lena mmoho le ba
lelapa la Ntate Joe Mathews re bina kodiyamalla hobane re lahlehetswe ke
mohale hara bahale, sekwankwetla hara dikwankwetla. Ntate Mathews e ne e le
mohlalefi ya neng a le sehlohlolong se hodimodimo nalaneng ya naha ya rona.
Ka dithuto ebile senatla sa monna wa Moafrika. Lefu la hae le re amme
bohle. Bokgabane ba hae bo re tswalletse melemo e mengata. Ho ntwa ya
tokoloho le topollo Ntate Mathews e ne e le makatolle a kgoro dikatilwe.
Lejwe la moremaphofu. Motheo wa moralla. Mohlabani ya sebete sa tau.
Tabatabelo ya rona ke hore, e ka re kgweding ena ya bomme, bomme ba Afrika
ba ka re tswalla bahale ba kang enwa ntate Mathews.

Ho mokgatlo wa IFP re re tshedisehang hle, ba mphato. Le thobe bohloko bo
le ammeng, ka tsebo ya hore lefu ke ngwetsi ya malapa ohle. Helehelele!
baheso Maafrika, enwa motho ha se sebata fela, ke sebatahadi sa nnete ya
koma. Se le dinaleng tsa baikgapedi setjhaba, sa e bona pholoho ka enwa
thaka mphato ya Maafrika. Ho bua ho feta mona ka ntate Mathews e ka ba ho
qhaqha mabitla. Ya kgaola ya ya! [Applause.] (Translation of Sesotho speech
follows.)

[Mr L M MPHAHLELE: Speaker, we, as the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania,
together with the family of Joe Matthews, are mourning this afternoon
because we have lost a warrior amongst warriors, a hero amongst heroes. Hon
Matthews was a wise man who was well placed in the history of our nation.
He was an achiever in his studies, a great African man. His death has
affected all of us. His greatness has made it possible for us to have many
opportunities. In the fight for freedom, hon Matthews was the one who
opened closely guarded doors. He was as solid as a rock. He was the eye of
the storm. He was a fighter who was as brave as a lion. Our wish during
this Women’s Month is for African women to give birth to heroes that are
like hon Matthews.

We pass our condolences to our colleagues in the IFP. Nurse your pain
knowing that death can happen to anyone. Indeed, fellow Africans, this
person was not just a hero, he was a great hero indeed. When the nation was
in danger, it was freed by this great African. To talk more about hon
Matthews than I already have will be like a desecration. Thank you!]
[Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Speaker, the MF would also like to endorse the sentiments
expressed by all previous speakers. However, we would like to extend our
heartfelt condolences and messages of strength to the friends, families and
relatives of the late Mr Joe Matthews.

True leaders are those who add value to society and must lead by example
for the youth to emulate and Joe indeed has been one remarkable, impeccable
leader. It is noted with great respect that, at a very young age, Joe was
very witty and was already a mature politician.

Undoubtedly, Joe, with the greatest spirit of humility, made some
incredible contributions to the South African government and politics – an
impeccable leader, a freedom fighter, a man of courage and charisma.

There are many sorrows in life and one of the greatest sorrows that no one
would like to experience, is the sorrow of death. For all those who are
mourning the death of Joe Matthews and are experiencing emotional pain and
sorrow, the MF would like to pray that God Almighty give them the strength,
courage and fortitude to deal with the irreplaceable loss.

May peace be granted unto Joe and may his soul rest in peace, through the
grace of God Almighty. Thank you.

Mr K J DIKOBO: Mr Speaker, hon members, and the family of the late Comrade
Joe Matthews, yet another stalwart of our struggle for freedom has left us.

The passing away of uncle Joe Matthews adds to the procession of veterans
of our long and arduous liberation struggle who are leaving us one after
the other.

In his 81 years on earth, uncle Joe devoted his energies and talents to
serving our country. He did it with dedication and distinction. He was an
accomplished intellectual who employed his vast knowledge, capacity and
insight to contribute towards the building and advancement of a better
country for all of us.

He was a walking encyclopaedia of knowledge in law, political theory,
history and other areas, and yet humble and completely approachable. Uncle
Joe shared his vast wealth of knowledge with ease and pleasure. We will
remember his service to the country as Deputy Minister of Safety and
Security, a task he fulfilled with dignity and dedication.

We in Azapo salute this great son of our soil and express our condolences
to his family, to his political organisation, the IFP, and to his friend,
Shenge. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Hon Speaker, hon members of this
august House, on behalf of the ANC I want to join the previous speakers in
saluting the contributions of the late Joe Matthews, Gaobakwe, as he was
better known in Alice before he went elsewhere. That little town of Alice,
one of the most beautiful in the Eastern Cape, has two landmarks. One is a
house in Gaga Street, and that is where Joe grew up. To this day it is
called the Matthews House because the municipality decided to retain it as
the property of the Matthews’. The other landmark is a small church in
Ntselamanzi, a Presbyterian Church called John Knox Bokwe, named after the
grandfather of the late Joe Matthews.

These were not by accident retained under those labels, but were rather a
product of the contribution that those families have made towards the
liberation and the formation of the mindset of nationalism, African
nationalism, in South Africa. Bhuti Joe was born of a very great pedigree
of African nationalists and academics. John Knox Bokwe preceded the ANC in
the 19th century already, in discussing very important issues of
Africanism, African nationalism and nonracialism. This debate was recorded
already in 1857 when he was still a student at Lovedale Mission.

John Knox Bokwe had two very important siblings, umama ka bhuti Joe,
makhulu Freda, as well Dr Bokwe, the younger of the Bokwe academics.
Therefore, it cannot surprise us that at a very young age, this brilliant
South African, gentleman, academic, intellectual, man of great integrity,
and indeed this patriot and nationalist, had to steep himself deep into the
well of political thought and political activism.

Although he was born in Durban and went to school at Adams College, at a
very early age his parents came to Alice, where he went to school at
Lovedale Mission and the University of Fort Hare. He met great people
there. Robert Sobukwe was the president of his student representative
council when he was at Fort Hare. Of course, he met Chief Buthelezi, and he
met other people — brilliant minds of our liberation movement – who were
participants in the Youth League of the ANC.

Brother Joe was also a founding member of the Youth League together with
the likes of utata Sisulu, utata Madiba and a whole range of others. But
then he met with O R Tambo, and he also met with other very brilliant
analysts and political thought framers of our country. It is during this
time that he, like many other young minds, got quickly absorbed in the
leadership structures of the revolutionary movement. You will know that
Brother Joe succeeded Madiba in 1952. When the latter had to step down from
the leadership of the African National Congress Youth League he became the
next chairperson in 1952-53, in order to allow Madiba to go and lead the
defiance campaign.

He also served in the various levels of the ANC senior party. He was living
in New Brighton at one stage; he ended up in the executive committee of the
then New Brighton branch under the chairpersonship of Oom Ray, the late
Raymond Mhlaba. He was involved in politics together with the robust
revolutionaries and stalwarts of our organisations, including the likes of
Raymond Mhlaba, Vuyisile Mini, Nangoza Jebe and all those people. I was
telling one comrade here that if you think our conferences are robust, you
should have attended the meetings of the ANC at T C White or Emakhaleni in
Port Elizabeth and see what robustness and being physical meant in the
debates and activities of the ANC.

Boet Joe was also a veteran of the revolutionary movement. He joined the SA
Communist Party at a young age and grew to become a member of its central
committee. He was very active in the drafting of the Freedom Charter in
1955, active in the promulgation of the programmes of the defiance campaign
and, of course, he was also very active in drafting some key documents of
our revolution, one of which is a seminal strategy and tactics in Morogoro
in 1969. That document continues to be the anchor of our political thought
and direction.

South Africa has lost a very revered activist. South Africa has lost a very
gentle person, gentle giant if you like, because Brother Joe was very
gentle, and he spoke like an angel, but when the occasion arrived, he could
be robust and very combative in his debating stance. When he came back to
South Africa in 1991, he attended a conference in Pietermaritzburg. Because
he was not a delegate, he could not remain in the conference. He was
assigned the status of an observer, together with Allan Boesak, by the way.
That decision was taken at the same time for both of them.

He joined the IFP, because he thought that if nobody was looking in his
direction, he could still be a very important member of the African
transformation machinery. It didn’t matter what label he carried on his
back, such was the man. Indeed, in 1994 he came to this Parliament, and he
sat there where hon Shilowa is sitting. That was his seat. He used to sit
there and debate with us in this House.

Hon Speaker, we always whispered amongst our ranks in the ANC about how
this man has remained an ANC activist par excellence. He could not cut his
umbilical cord from the ANC. In word and in thought, he continued to give
that kind of guidance in communities and in community development
initiatives.

Comrade Joe Matthews will be buried, I do not know by which organisation,
because Joe Matthews, you see ... [Laughter.] People who do not know these
things say “by his family”. It does not work like that in the revolution,
but I believe it will be a “toenadering” [rapprochement] of the IFP and
ANC, the parties that he was a member of until his death. We salute his
contribution. Of course, until his death, Comrade Joe Matthews — and this
is not a claim — was not a member of the SACP. He left the SACP in 1973. I
believe that this is the time when we will begin to come together and bury
a freedom fighter who is a product of our organisations, who was a beacon
in the direction which our people should follow.

Joe Matthews is not a loss to any political party; he is a loss to South
Africa in general. He is a loss to Africa as a continent, because that is
where his contribution was always felt throughout his lifetime. We dip our
banners down for his family and with his family, with his friends and
broader family, the Bokwes, the Maqubelas and all of them. It is a very big
family, by the way, the extended Matthews family. May his soul rest in
peace. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The SPEAKER: We thank the hon Reverend Stofile. We can confirm, hon
Mfundisi, that Uncle Joe will be buried by the people of South Africa, his
family and the international community. Hon members, that concludes the
speakers list on this matter. I take it there are no objections to the
resolution being adopted.

The Presiding Officers associate themselves with the motion. The
condolences of the House will be conveyed to the Matthews family, the IFP
and ANC. A book of condolences has been opened just outside the Chamber and
members are urged to sign it as they go out. Thank you.

Motion agreed to.

                         TNS RESEARCH SURVEY RESULTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M L FRANSMAN (ANC): Hon Speaker, the ANC welcomes the results of the
latest opinion poll by the TNS research survey, pointing to an increase in
President Zuma’s approval rating. [Interjections.] The independent survey
conducted in seven metropolitan areas has shown his approval rating in
Gauteng jumping from 47% to 57% - hon Dexter - in Soweto, from 50% to 70%;
in East London, from 47% to 71%; Bloemfontein, from 48% to 65%; and Cape
Town, from 23% to 24%.

Since taking over the reigns as President of the Republic, President Zuma
has ensured government’s implementation of ANC policy, particularly the key
priorities set out in the ANC’s election manifesto. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members, please. Continue, Member.

Mr M L FRANSMAN (ANC): President Zuma’s tenure has thus far been marked by
the determination and commitment of the ANC-led government to push back the
frontiers of poverty in urban as well as in rural areas. Among other
interventions, government has been ensuring a safety cushion for the poor
by bringing social grant increases forward.

Despite taking over leadership during a very serious economic recession
internationally, President Zuma has given leadership which has resulted in
sound management of the economy internally - all parties have spoken to
that in the past - and better use of national resources with the economy
destined for growth. Mindful of the fact that much still needs to be done,
we have set ourselves key priority targets to reach by the end of the
second decade of freedom. Together, we can do more. Thank you. [Applause.]

              WESTERN CAPE PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M WENGER (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the MEC of Finance in the DA-run
Western Cape government announced yesterday that, for the first time in
recent history, the provincial government has received a clean sweep of 25
unqualified audits. [Applause.] This is a substantial improvement on the
results obtained during the last year of the ANC’s administration in the
province.

The Auditor-General has thus announced that the Western Cape is a clean
government. It is the only province in South Africa that can boast of such
an achievement. [Applause.] The province’s clean finance unit, called “The
red flag team”, has enforced the highest possible standards of financial
management, and will continue to do so in the future. The team will ensure
that there are even further improvements next year.

Having a corruption-free government is the start of sustainable
development, improved investor confidence, economic growth and job
creation. The DA is absolutely committed to rooting out any corruption and
has thus made a very good start after only one year in control of the
province. Being compliant with financial legislation alone does not
guarantee service delivery - we know that. The Western Cape government
plans to be both excellent in compliance and delivery.

This DA-run government is accountable to the voters for the money that is
spent. Why does the ANC find it so difficult to do the same in the
provinces it governs? [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                          FIGHT AGAINST CORRUPTION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms C M P KOTSI (Cope): Deputy Speaker, a vicious cycle has been set in
motion in South Africa where large-scale looting of state resources is
having intolerable consequences for ordinary citizens. The poor and
marginalised are the most affected by the serial corruption that has taken
root. There is a dire and urgent need to clean up the corruption, and Cope
welcomes that.

Yesterday the Hawks uncovered fraud worth R200 million in KwaZulu-Natal.
People allegedly involved in the scam include former KwaZulu-Natal Treasury
head and current CEO of Ithala Bank, Sipho Shabalala. The former KwaZulu-
Natal Health Department chief financial officer, Sipho Buthelezi, is
likewise implicated. The Uruguay businessman Gaston Savoy, who supplied
services at grossly exaggerated prices, has had his assets temporarily
seized. These include the City Royal Hotel in Pietermaritzburg, Steamburg
Hotel in Constantia and Shamwari Lodge in the Eastern Cape.

Any corruption that is exposed and its perpetrators made to face the full
might of the law is a victory. Cope welcomes the new-found fervour in
government to fight corruption. Our support for government action will
increase if the present action is not serving as a decoy.

The looting of the state, wherever it occurs and whoever it is that is
involved, must be eradicated with single-minded purpose. The government has
made a promising start, now it must show in action that it has a stomach to
expose those who are highly connected, as well as those who are occupying
high positions in government. [Time expired.]

                    CANCER AWARENESS CAMPAIGNS IN GAUTENG

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs T E KENYE (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, cancer is viewed as a leading
cause of death worldwide. Therefore, the ANC encourages women to go for
regular medical checkups in order to receive appropriate treatment before
cancer cells begin to spread. As a result, between April and June 2010 more
than 20 000 women presented themselves for cervical cancer screening at
Gauteng’s public health facilities.

Moreover, the Gauteng Department of Health and Social Development have
committed itself to increase the number of women screened for cervical
cancer in a bid to reduce morbidity and mortality from cancer. They are
determined to improve the quality of life for cancer sufferers throughout
the month of August.

This department will be educating women on how to look after their health
through radio campaigns and health promotions in communities, clinics and
hospitals. Furthermore, this department, together with its partners, will,
on 29 August 2010, host an event at the Johannesburg Zoo where education
and screening will take place. The event will take place under the theme
“Angels Working for Cancer”, and the funds raised during the day will be
used to improve services at the oncology department of Charlotte Maxeke
Johannesburg Academic Hospital.

The ANC calls on all provinces to emulate this initiative made by Gauteng
by making testing services available at public clinics as well as
encouraging women and men to test for any type of cancer at all public
clinics, so that if any abnormalities are found people can be referred to
the relevant hospital for treatment. I thank you.
[Applause.]

          INSUFFICIENT WATER AND SEWERAGE INFRASTRUCTURE IN GAUTENG

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr K P SITHOLE (IFP): Hon Deputy Speaker, the current housing
infrastructure in Gauteng has sufficient capacity to provide water and
sewerage to three million people. Currently we have 10 million residents
living in the Gauteng area.

The infrastructure is clearly incapable of supporting and sustaining such a
large resident base, and must be upgraded and expanded as a matter of
urgency if we are to avoid the social and health implications that normally
surround such areas of infrastructure.

The IFP therefore urges the Minister of Human Settlements and his
department to regard this matter as critical and to attend to its
resolution as a matter of the highest priority. I thank you.

                      CALL TO END PUBLIC SERVICE STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S Z NTAPANE (UDM): Deputy Speaker, the UDM laments the escalating Public
Service strike. We call on government and the unions urgently to return to
the negotiating table. It is simply unacceptable that both parties are
refusing to speak to each other and instead hurl insults and accusations
through the media.

The ANC, the SACP and Cosatu as alliance was given a mandate in the 2009
elections to govern the country. They must collectively solve the current
crisis. The infighting and factionalism within the tripartite alliance
should not be allowed to disrupt the functioning of the government and
society.

The lack of a coherent communication strategy from government is deeply
troubling. It seems as if every second the Minister and his spokesperson
are saying different things to the media.

In the meantime we appeal to both sides to refrain from violent and
aggressive tactics. In all of this, the real victims seem to be forgotten
by the unions and the government. Once you have settled your differences,
how will you restore the crime victims, health sufferers, and matric
students whose lives are being destroyed because of the political posturing
by the leaders? Thank you.

                     THUSONG SERVICE CENTRE IN MBANGWANE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S E KHOLWANE (ANC): Thank you, Deputy Speaker. The launch of the Thusong
Service Centre in Mbangwane is a dream come true for the community of
Mbangwane. The people of Mbangwane never thought that they would ever have
Internet access and other government-related services in their own
backyard.

Mbangwane, for those who do not know, is situated under Nkomazi
Municipality in Mpumalanga, which is 130 km away from Nelspruit, the
capital city of Mpumalanga.

The launch of this centre means that Mbangwane community will no longer
have to travel to Malelane, the nearest town, which is about 100 km away,
to get their identity documents, birth and death certificates, submit
applications for pensions, and other related grants.

The community of Mbangwane and other surrounding areas are now in a
position to use this facility provided by this Thusong Service Centre. As
usual, this is part of the determination and initiative of the ANC
government, which is determined to bring services closer to the people in a
manner which is quicker and smarter. Thank you. [Applause.]

                        DROUGHT CRISIS IN THE COUNTRY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof C T MSIMANG (IFP): Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members. The
current drought being experienced in some parts of our country is now
reaching crisis proportions. Most areas have little or no water. The rivers
have dried up and cattle grazing areas are perishing, which in turn is
putting thousands of livestock at risk.
The Minister and her department must look at ways of increasing the
capacity, both of our water catchment areas as well as identifying
alternative means of water supply. I thank you. [Applause.]

                RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENTS IN MUYEXE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H F MATLANYANE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the changes taking place in the
small and dusty village of Muyexee in Limpopo through the Comprehensive
Rural Development Programme has come as a result of President Jacob Zuma’s
commitment to the rural development strategy.

When the programme was launched in August last year, the President said at
least one person from each household in the small impoverished village will
be employed for a period of two years. Residents who previously had to
depend on social grants for a living are now able to land jobs in the
infrastructure development project such as the building of the multipurpose
community centre and the construction of community houses.

While still an impoverished village, the residents now boast newly-built
houses, a library and a computer centre for its youth. The community now
has 283 decent houses, built specifically for the poor, who did not have
adequate accommodation or had dilapidated houses.
And while access to water has always been a challenge for the villagers,
boreholes have been drilled to provide water for the community that
previously had to buy water for R1 per 25ℓ from those with boreholes in
their households.

Furthermore, 39 villagers are being trained in basic computer skills, while
others are being trained in bookkeeping and financial management, brick-
making and project management.

Eleven Muyexe youths with matric have been given learnerships for 12 months
... Thank you. [Time expired.]

                BAD GOVERNANCE MASQUERADING AS POLICY-MAKING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr W G JAMES (DA): Deputy Speaker, government talks too much and does too
little. And talking is expensive.

Minister Blade Nzimande tells me that his department spent R1,7 million on
the Higher Education Transformation Summit held in April 2010. I asked him
why the Centre for Educational Policy Development, a body he chaired before
becoming the Minister, having only resigned from it on 12 May 2009,
received the contract for the summit without the issuing of a tender. He
said that as it was donor money there was no need. I have learnt that it
was not donor money, but unused funds left there by the old Department of
Education. So the question is, who is telling the truth and who is lying?

The CEPD is an ANC-aligned education think tank. John Pampalis, Minister
Nzimande’s advisor, was a trustee of that body once, as was Mary Metcalfe,
his director-general, and Minister Angie Motshekga was a trustee too. It
is, hon members, a revolving door of individuals, ideas and money and gives
another meaning to recycling bad governance in a cosy club that masquerades
as policy-making.

                         THE PUBLIC SECTOR WAGE BILL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N J J KOORNHOF (Cope): Deputy Speaker, the Reserve Bank figures recently
published suggest that the public sector wage bill has been increasing by
6,5% above inflation every year for the past eight years.

According to the Business Day, economists suggest that this is
unsustainable and may crowd out other long-term investments. Despite the
economic downturn, the total wage bill has increased from R140 billion in
2003 to R322 billion in 2010; increasing in 2008-09 with more than 18%.

Whilst other governments have cut their public sector wage bill to survive
the economic crisis, this government has no option but to take a hard line
to resist an out of control increase in the wage bill. How difficult to
understand, but this is the more patriotic and sensible approach.

If we as South Africans can stand together and deliver a wonderful World
Cup to show off our patriotism to the world, it is also time for the trade
unions to show more responsibility towards our economy and to concentrate
on service delivery and respect other citizen’s rights. Cosatu should take
its power struggle with the government elsewhere.

With fears that we might see a double dip in economic growth worldwide, we
must realise that we are all in this boat together. Exuberant chief
executive officers’ salaries in the private sector are a disgrace and must
be cut, and unnecessary and fruitless expenditure by Ministers and the
state does not assist in this. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

               SABC TRANSMISSIONS TO THE PEOPLE OF EKURHULENI

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M N MAGAZI (ANC): Deputy Speaker and hon members, the ANC would like to
congratulate the Minister of Communications for his efforts to bring about
SABC transmissions to the people of Ekurhuleni who were finally able to
watch SABC television. This happened after Minister Nyanda switched on a
low-power transmitter in that area. The community of Ekurhuleni wrote to
the SABC only in 2009 requesting a full transmission.

Icasa approved the request earlier in 2010. Sentech finalised the
installation of the transmitter at the end of May and the transmitter was
switched on in time for the community to be able to enjoy the World Cup on
television. This resulted in more other transmitters being switched on in
Steynsdorp, Josefsdal and Mhlaba where more than 20 000 people gained
access to radio and television broadcast.

The ANC welcomes these initiatives and hopes that this process can be
speedily spread to all parts of the country, so that all communities can
access TV and radio signals, especially in rural areas. I thank you.
[Applause.]

            ASSAULT ON PATIENT BY MALE NURSE AT MOKOPANE HOSPITAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D VAN DER WALT (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA is appalled by the
allegations that a male nurse at the Mokopane Hospital in Limpopo last week
attacked a male patient with a broomstick.

The nurse refused to provide the patient with a urine pan when asked for
it. The patient, who had been tied to the bed, was in an embarrassing and
unavoidable situation, as he had no choice but to wet his bed. The nurse
then got angry and used a broomstick to punish the patient by hitting him
over the head.

After hearing about this incident, I visited the hospital and took these
horrible photos of the patient’s injuries. I saw the wounds on his head,
his swollen face and bloody eyes, his swollen arms and hands, and the
bruises across his chest. The patient was in a far worse state than when he
arrived at the hospital seeking medical treatment. Is this the right to
health care as enshrined in our Constitution? I hope not.

The fitness of the staff member to perform his duties must be investigated.
He must be disciplined and dismissed. Paying an admission of guilt fine of
R500 on a charge of assault is not enough. How many other patients have
been treated in a similar manner by this nurse?

I have now also been informed that the chief executive officer of the
hospital has tried to persuade the family of the patient not to bring a
case against this hospital. This allegation also needs investigating by the
Limpopo department of health.

When patients are admitted into hospital, they are in the care of the
Department of Health. We call on the department to act decisively on this
incident to restore confidence by the public in the Mokopane Hospital.

                     LAUNCH OF HYDROGEN-POWERED BICYCLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N D NGCENGWANE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led government welcomes
the launch of the new hydrogen-powered bicycle, called “A hi Fambeni”, by
Science and Technology Minister Naledi Pandor at the Resource-driven
Technology Centre for South Africa Conference on 12 August 2010. The
hydrogen bicycle was designed by Pierre Terblanche, an internationally
renowned bike designer, and built by students of the Tshwane University of
Technology.

The bicycle, translated as “Let’s go”, is made of cutting-edge light and
strong materials. The design is meant to accommodate the transport needs of
people living in rural villages. A hi Fambeni offers a practical way to
promote public awareness of hydrogen and fuel cell technology as a clean
energy alternative. Electric bikes are a huge part of the future of the
green transport economy.

In 2007, the department launched Shova Kalula, a programme that means
“pedal easy”, which is a partnership between the private sector and civil
society. This programme plans to give a million bicycles to schoolchildren
by 2015 and to construct a dedicated bicycle pathway. There will be some
energy between Shova Kalula and A hi Fambeni, the hydrogen-fuelled e-
bicycle prototype. According to the Minister of Science and Technology, the
department plans to start a bike, a trike, and then a car. The ANC welcomes
this initiative which will, upon completion, add value to the lives of our
people with regard to offering them an alternative mode of transport. I
thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That concludes members’ statements. Are there any
ministerial responses?

Mr M J ELLIS: Say something!

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY — NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: I have
nothing to say.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then that concludes ministerial responses.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, this is the second time this week that
there has been, including today, no ministerial responses at all. The other
day there were two. Can we presume that this means that the Ministers are
totally happy with everything that every opposition party says in this
Parliament? It is very significant if that is the case, particularly when
people like the hon Trevor Manuel is sitting here. He normally has so much
to say for himself, that if he is agreeing with us, this is very good news
for the opposition, indeed.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY — NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: I just want
to ask: Who beat the hon Ellis with a broomstick? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you going to respond to that?

Mr M J ELLIS: Absolutely! [Laughter.] I just want to say that if he raises
matters like that again in this House, Madam Deputy Speaker, I may be
tempted to beat him with this crutch. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY — NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Are these
threats parliamentary, Deputy Speaker? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, they are not far from the question, though. Hon
Cronin.

            ASSAULT ON PATIENT BY MALE NURSE AT MOKOPANE HOSPITAL
                          FIGHT AGAINST CORRUPTION
              WESTERN CAPE PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT ADMINISTRATION

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Not to disappoint the hon Ellis, it is
true that most of what was said from the opposition benches, we agree with
completely. Misconduct on hospital floors is something that we condemn very
seriously, whether it is in the context of a strike or whether it is in the
general course of events. So, we associate ourselves with the concerns that
were expressed there.

It is very pleasing to hear a member of Cope praising the Hawks, because
remember how members from the other side of the House were telling us how
the dissolution and restructuring of the criminal justice system was going
to lead to all kinds of terrible things. I think that with you, we share
the pleasure and commend the Hawks for the actions that they have taken in
arresting people who are corrupt, and this campaign against all forms of
corruption, regardless of who might be corrupt, should certainly continue.

Then also, we commend the DA in the Western Cape for achieving a good
audit, a good audit outcome. [Applause.] That is good, and we all need to
seek to achieve clean audits. However, as the member correctly said, clean
governance is not a guarantee of transformation and of addressing the
critical dimensions. There is a great deal of smugness about the Western
Cape and about the Western Cape government, but let us never forget that in
terms of many of the social indicators in South Africa, the Western Cape is
amongst the most unequal provinces. So, there is clean governance, yes, and
we salute that and commend it but, at the same time, let us ensure that
there can’t be smugness, as there often is on that side in terms of real
transformation that brings real change to the great majority of extremely
poor people living in this province. [Applause.]

                 SABC TRANSMISSIONS TO PEOPLE OF EKURHULENI
                     THUSONG SERVICE CENTRE IN MBANGWANE

                            (Minister’s Response)

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: We would like to thank hon Magazi
for noting the work that is done by the Department of Communications and
also say that it is part of the programme of the department to make sure
that all communities in South Africa have access to radio and
communications and, therefore, we are going to make sure that the process
of all low-power transmitters are implemented in all areas which are grey
areas where people do not receive both television and radio.

The second part is also to thank hon Kholwane on the issues that he raised
around Internet and access to ICT services by communities. It is also part
of our programme in the Department of Communications to make sure that we
roll out broadband to all communities because the President has said that
we have to make sure that all communities can access ICT services,
especially in rural areas. Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker.
                       DEEDS REGISTRIES AMENDMENT BILL
                       SECTIONAL TITLES AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Deputy Speaker, the
Deeds Registries Act, No 47 of 1937, and the Sectional Titles Act, No 95 of
1986, deal primarily with registration issues relating to the registration
of the transfer of land, and the opening and transfer of properties in
sectional titles schemes.

The Sectional Titles Act of 1986 contains provisions for the registration
and surveying of sectional titles units as well as manager-related
provisions for the governance of sectional titles schemes.

The Sectional Titles Amendment Bill aims to improve registration
procedures, which will be for the benefit of sectional titles developers
and bodies corporate.

The Deeds Registries Amendment Bill of 2010 seeks to amend the Deeds
Registries Act by deleting certain obsolete references to a registrar of
mining titles or a mining commissioner in sections 3(1)(u) of the Act;
providing for the extension of duties of the Registrar, as provided for by
the insertion of sections 2(1)(d) and 3(1)(z); facilitating operations of
the Deeds Registries Regulations Board; providing for the appointment of
alternate members to the board as provided for by the insertion of section
3(A); providing for the disclosure of full names and marital status of
persons in all deeds and documents to be executed or lodged for
registration or record in a deeds registry as provided for by the amendment
of section 17(2); providing for the issuing of a certificate of registered
title in respect of a fraction of an undivided share in land as provided
for by the insertion of section 34(1)(a); and finally, amending certain
definitions in section 102 to fall in line with constitutional imperatives.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs A STEYN: Deputy Speaker, the briefing by the department on the Deeds
Registries Amendment Bill sets out the aims of the proposed amendments.
Most of these provisions were made to remove areas of confusion that
currently exist and to update the definitions.

An important proposal is to legally oblige registrars to comply with the
directives from the Chief Registrar of Deeds. Due to the fact that South
African law does not explicitly guarantee title to land, it is critical
that the deeds registration system effectively guarantees this title. The
current system is failing property owners as major syndicates are
exploiting the gap in the Act.

At present, all 10 deeds registry offices have their own practices that are
causing problems and discrepancies. Three weeks ago, the deeds offices in
Pretoria were put in the spotlight for the fraudulent transfer of 33
properties owned by the Johannesburg Property Company. This amendment will
ensure that the State Attorney will be responsible for conveyance and the
transfer of state and municipal land.

The second important amendment is clause 5, which amends section 34 of the
Bill. It makes provision for the owner of a piece of land to apply for a
certificate of registered title for his or her undivided share of the land,
where the land was subject to joint ownership.

The amendment would provide for the issuing of a certificate of registered
title of any fraction of his or her undivided share. The implication of
this could have widespread benefits for people in joint ownership of
property, as this will allow all co-owners to have a title registered in
their own name.

The Sectional Titles Amendment Act is the legislation that governs
apartments, townhouses, office blocks and other building blocks, where
multiple owners hold a type of property ownership known as sectional
titles.

Important amendments are found in clause 1(d), which provides for a body
corporate to approach the court in instances where it had been unable to
obtain a unanimous resolution.

Clause 3(a) determines confusion arising from a sectional title register
opened on more than one piece of land and clause 6, which did not cater for
the issuing of a certificate of a registered title, in a sectional titles
scheme, in respect of a fraction of an undivided share in a unit. What all
these mean is that the body corporate will know exactly what their rights
are and that all grey areas will be deleted.

The DA supports both Bills. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr T BOTHA: Hon Deputy Speaker, the amendment to the Sectional Titles Act
is long overdue, considering that the original Bill was formulated 25 years
ago.

The most significant amendments relate to the redefining of the boundaries
between certain sections; allowing bonds to be registered in respect of
separate pieces of land shown on the sectional plan; allowing for one or
more certificates of real rights of extension to the property to be issued;
allowing for one or more certificates of real rights of exclusive use areas
to be issued at the opening of a sectional title register; and providing
for the issuing of a certificate of a registered sectional title in respect
of a fraction of an undivided share in a section.

This is a very encouraging development, as it will allow for an individual,
under the prescribed conditions, to have the right to a title deed for a
room in an apartment or house. In Northern Ireland, Scotland and Canada, co-
ownership has been used fairly successfully for quite a while. The
advantage of owning rather than renting is an obvious benefit.

The implications of this amendment are vast. It will allow new house
designs with common areas and exclusive rights areas, enabling individuals
to have a foothold on the property market. It will make it possible for
banks to lend incrementally to individuals who otherwise would have been
excluded from the property market.

Individuals, who default at present, lose their entire property. In this
new way, individuals can borrow a little, pay that off and then upscale,
using the proceeds as a deposit. In times of stress, they can sell off
parts of their property to meet their financial obligations.

Property ownership will now be opened up to more people than ever before.
This will make a major contribution to alleviating the plight of the
homeless and historically disadvantaged. I thank you.

Prof C T MSIMANG: Hon Deputy Speaker, the Sectional Titles Amendment Bill
correctly seeks to align the Act with current trends in the sectional
titles market. Norms and procedures change over time and this Bill seeks to
address and incorporate those changes, thus providing adequate legal
redress for owners of sectional titles in their dealings with both local
authorities and among themselves.

Key objectives are the legitimising of current practice of levying for
special contributions; the removal of confusion around the opening of the
sectional titles register for more than one piece of land; the provision
for cancellation of exclusive use areas and to provide for the issuing of
certificates of real rights of extension and certificates of real rights of
exclusive use areas at the opening of the sectional titles register.

The Deeds Registries Act, as it stands, has many obsolete and obfuscated
provisions. One has only to wander into the deeds office to see queues of
conveyance attorneys, waiting somewhat impatiently, to see a deeds office
examiner about an unclear provision in the Deeds Registries Act.

The Deeds Registries Amendment Bill will go a long way in addressing such
issues, and like the Sectional Titles Amendment Bill, will have the desired
and intended effect of bringing its source legislation into the 21st
century. A pragmatic and inherently practical approach is required when
dealing with legislation of this nature and the IFP is confident that these
two pieces of legislation do just that. The IFP supports both Bills. I
thank you.

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Deputy Speaker and hon members, the Bills before us relate
to property rights. It is a topic that is complex at the best of times. The
original Act dates back to 1986 and, since then, the constitutional and
legislative framework has radically changed. Consequently, there have been
major developments regarding the legal possibilities of sectional titles
for those who own such property, those who manage it as well as their agent
representatives.

Sectional titles have always been fraught with complexity due to the
inherent nature of property rights within sectional titles being partially
shared and partially not.

With the advent of democracy, it has become even more important to ensure
that collective and individual ownership and management issues that arise
within sectional titles should be handled in a manner that is consistent
with the spirit of the new constitutional order. Therefore, for instance,
numerous steps have been taken with these two Bills to protect the ability
of bodies corporate to manage their affairs properly. Consequently, the UDM
supports the two Bills. Thank you.

Mrs I C DITSHETELO: Deputy Speaker, we welcome the fact that this amendment
seeks to introduce uniformity and the application of practice and procedure
guidelines by the Chief Registrar of Deeds. This will result in coherent
services at deeds offices across the country and this is what we would like
to see at all government service points. Service must not be discretionary,
but uniform.

We also agree that the appointment of alternate members to the board is a
time and cost-effective move and ensures that there shall be no undue
delays in the board taking decisions as a result of absenteeism. The UCDP
supports both Bills. Thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Deputy Speaker, the MF welcomes the amendments to both
pieces of legislation. Government’s mandate to deliver houses for the
ordinary suffering masses is one of the greatest challenges that we
experience.

The fact that the Bill speaks to creating wealth and assets for those that
have been previously disadvantaged, is gratifying. However, there might be
obstacles in achieving these desired goals. One of the most devastating
impacts is the issue of managing agents. With respect to this, it is rather
important for the piece of legislation to provide for managing agents not
to sell out people’s properties. Indeed, government’s mandate to deliver
houses will nullify the policies.

The other aspect is the issue of long delays and, therefore, the amendments
must speak to the competence skills in various municipalities where people
are delayed to achieve the sectional titles and wait for over 21 years.
Both pieces of legislation are welcomed by the MF, provided that it
achieves its desired goals and fast-tracks solving the issues of those that
are waiting to achieve their long-awaited sectional title deeds. We support
both Bills. Thank you.

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Deputy Speaker, the ANC supports both Bills. The
introduction of these two Bills must be seen against the broader
transformation programme that the ANC envisages in dealing with land and
its registration and property rights, how these are administered and what
should happen with this when a dispute arises.

The ANC in governing the state and the vast scope of its operations has to
apply in a consistent and coherent way the necessary transformation tools
that will both address the constitutional requirements and the policy
objectives of the ANC.

In doing this, the need to transform historical systems that were designed
under previous political regimes whose ideology and philosophical
orientation does not reflect the building of a national democratic society
means that there are a range of structural, systematic and process matters
that will require major transformation. This is true of the two Bills that
are before the House today for debate.

Chairperson, the process of administering systems whose designs do not
reflect the values of the new South Africa has brought with it the need for
specific changes to existing legislation.

Coupled with this is the campaign of the ANC to root out corruption where
we find it within any given system of government. The extent of the
administration of the government has become a haven for certain dishonest
practices by individuals who do not have the interest of the state and the
new democratic order in their hearts.

Painfully, we have come to realise that not all share the vision of the
future national democratic state that we are trying to build and that they
rather seek to undermine the systems that operate it to gain personally,
temporary and short-term material benefits.

This has meant that, in particular when it comes to matters of property,
property rights and their regulation, we have to ensure that we have the
requisite legislation and regulations that will include in our society the
values that we are trying to espouse.

This means that legislation will become one of the first areas we need to
visit in order to strengthen our systems and install a culture that is
commensurate with the national democratic society we are building.

Certainly, if we root out corrupt practices, tightening of legislation
becomes necessary. It is from our experiences that we bring today before
this House such legislation that will both reflect the spirit and intention
of the new order, but also safeguard the state and the private citizen from
corrupt and unscrupulous individuals.

It would be true to say that the integrity of the existing systems has come
into disrepute in certain cases and, therefore, as the legislative arm of
the state, we are duty bound as the ANC to ensure that this is corrected
speedily.

The deeds registration is a system where documents are recorded in the land
registry as the evidence of title, while the registration of the title is a
system where the register itself is the primary evidence.

The South African system is regarded as one of the most effective systems
in the world. It is against this backdrop that the proposed amendments,
built on the achievements attained, enhance the future development of a
better system of deeds registries.

The Bill amends the Deeds Registry Act of 1937 so as to conform to current
uniform practices of deeds registration. The ANC in government has assessed
the existing legislation and has clarified its mind that improvements to
the existing legislations are both overdue and necessary. The improvement
of the technical skills of staff and institutional arrangements will be
enhanced by the proposed amendments. This in turn will assist in the
increasing demands that are being brought onto the services of the deeds
registries.

Through the land reform programme the state is transferring large tracts of
land to previously disadvantaged communities, who will own land communally
or individually. As a result, it impacts upon the work of the deeds
registries. Experience has shown that we need a more complex registration
system and, in particular, certain procedures that are going to deal with
the bad practices. In turn, this requires the retaining and development of
staff.

Further challenges in the deeds registry system relates to registrars not
being obliged to follow practices, procedures and directives that are
issued from time to time by the Chief Registrar of Deeds. This is untenable
and it is a practice that cannot be allowed to continue. It leads to
fragmentation and a breakdown in the line function of any state
administration.

Therefore, varying practices and procedures only lead to poor service
delivery and begin to render a system operating at a suboptimal level.
Critical in any state administration is the need for mechanisms to be in
place to ensure uniformity and conformity to practices and procedures.
South Africa still operates in a dual property system, one formal system
based on common law ownership and one system that resembles customary law
adapted to suit the political needs of colonialism and apartheid, or
colonialism of a special type as we like to refer to it. Clearly in a new
democratic order this must change.

As we amend the Deeds Registry Act, it is important to remind ourselves of
the challenges confronting people living in rural areas, in particular the
former so-called homelands. The majority live under weaker forms of
security of tenure in that they do not own the land they occupy in the
title deed, whether communally or individually. This is in contradiction
with the Constitution which guarantees entitlement to tenure reform.

A person of community, whose tenure of land is legally insecure as a result
of the past racially discriminatory laws or practices, is entitled to the
extent provided by an Act of Parliament, either to tenure which is legally
secure or to comparable redress.

Considerable progress has been made towards a unified, comprehensive, cost-
effective and modern system of record keeping of the rights in land that
will ensure security of title to land owners. However, there are still
challenges with regard to the system of the rural areas. The extent to
which rural people can apply for certificates of registered titles for
their individual share in land is extremely limited because the majority of
them do not own the land on which they live.

Speaker, whilst many would say that this Bill is technical in nature, in
reality the Bill again begins to address the questions of class, race and
gender, in that it deals with property rights, the rights of exclusive use,
the rights of extension, and it also redefines boundaries.

All of this with our history and economic location have historically
created tension and a conflict of interest. The settling of these matters
brings into play issues of class, race and gender and, of course, access to
legal backing.

Whilst our Constitution gives rights, it equally expects obligations —
especially when we deal with property-vested interests that arise and which
seek to threaten the spirit and intention of the nature and type of society
we wish to build. Clearly, the state cannot be dragged into matters of
private property disputes, but it equally has to oversee how disputes are
settled and by whom as well as the fairness and the equality thereof.

Boundaries have huge implications and often lead to severe disagreements.
It is the duty of the ANC government to have in place legislation that can
ensure equity in dealing with property rights and access. This Bill amends
the Sectional Titles Act of 1986 in order to amend definitions, redefine
boundaries, deal with issues of common property and how it is demarcated
and to regulate the substitution of bonds registered in respect of
different pieces of legislation.

The Bill further provides for the issuing of certificates of real rights of
extension and certificates of real rights of exclusive use of areas. Under
the Bill, the issuing of a certificate of registered sectional title is in
respect of an undivided share in a section.

The vesting of rights of exclusive use of reas where an owner ceases to be
a member of a body corporate are also covered by this Bill, as is the
provision of the cancellation of exclusive use of the area rights. From
what I have just said, it becomes obvious that this is not a technical
Bill. Rather, the ANC seeks to ensure that we have a more equitable manner
in which to deal with vested interests when it comes to property rights
under sectional title. I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Deputy Speaker, I
sincerely appreciate the support that we received from all the parties that
spoke here, thanks very much for that; secondly, thanks also for the
insights that have been thrown into the debate, we fully appreciate that.

The point that has been made about the Deeds Office in Pretoria and
elsewhere is valid. Part of what contributed to that breakthrough is a
scoping exercise that we are carrying out in the deeds registration system.
We are scoping out the potential fraud, corruption and collusion. That is
part of what happened in this situation. We thank hon Steyn for that
comment. Indeed the broad transformation question is at play here.

Cabinet has instructed us to look at the deeds registration system with a
view to deeper transformation of that system in the lines that the hon
Matlanyane has commented on here. So, indeed the process has already
commenced there. We are hoping that we will soon align the deeds
registration system with the principles of the Constitution for a
democratic South Africa. Thank you very much, hon Deputy Speaker.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, are there any objections to the Deeds
Registries Amendment Bill being read a second time? No objection? Agreed
to. Are there any objections to the Sectional Titles Amendment Bill being
read a second time? None. Agreed to.

Deeds Registries Amendment Bill read a second time.

Sectional Titles Amendment Bill read a second time.
 NEW ECONOMIC GROWTH PATH TO TACKLE THE CHALLENGES OF SOUTH AFRICA’S CURRENT
                                 CONJUNCTURE

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mrs E M COLEMAN: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister and Deputy Ministers, hon
members, the ANC at its 52nd conference helped South Africa in
characterising the challenges facing the economy. The conference was able
to define South Africa’s economic growth progress and, at the same time, it
managed to acknowledge challenges and also identified opportunities. It
also came up with a roadmap of issues to be addressed and opportunities to
be explored. Even though this happened before the actual economic crisis
showed its ugly face, there were signs to that regard and the issue might
be the analysis of the extent of the effect.

We realised that, at this juncture, our country’s biggest challenges are
the high rate of unemployment, poverty, and inequality. We recognise that
central to addressing these challenges is to implement policies and
programmes that will promote high rates of economic growth as measured by
our gross domestic product. However, experience in the last 15 years has
shown us that economic growth on its own is not sufficient to address these
challenges. We have thus come to the conclusion that it is rather equally
the quality of growth that will make a difference.

In the years between 1994 and 2007 our economy experienced its highest
gross domestic product, GDP, growth rates of between 3% and 5,3% on annual
bases. During this period and since the dawn of democracy in 1994,
substantive changes and improvement in the lives of our people were made as
a result. Notwithstanding this, the challenges of unemployment, poverty and
inequality still remain.

Unemployment remains high by international standards and when comparing
South Africa with other middle-income countries. Consistently over the
years the unemployment rate has been estimated at between 23% and 35% of
the economically active population. Equally, South Africa is now ranked as
the number one most unequal society in the world. It is estimated that the
richest 10% of households in South Africa receive more than 40% of the
country’s total national income as compared to just over 30% in most upper
middle-income countries and the rapidly growing economies of Asia.

As a result of the entrenched colonial and apartheid legacy, the structures
of our economy, in terms of production and ownership, are still dependent
on exportation of raw materials, especially mining- and agriculture-based
goods. Ownership generally remains highly concentrated, as characterised by
the existence of monopolies in almost all sectors of the economy. The
predominance of monopolies has often led to high costs and economic
inefficiencies with resultant negative consequences for the working people
and the poor.

To address these challenges, we have decided, as the ANC-led government, to
speed up and deepen our economic transformation agenda for the country.
This will be done through accelerated growth within the context of
effective strategies of redistribution that build a new and more equitable
growth path. Our approach is to ensure that, while we achieve accelerated
growth, we transform the quality of that growth through appropriate
policies and programmes. These must ultimately result in changes in the
structure and patterns of our economy.

Our vision as defined in our policies is that of a mixed economy where the
state, private capital, co-operatives and other forms of social ownership
complement each other in an integrated way to eliminate poverty and foster
shared economic growth. While appreciating the centrality of accelerated
and inclusive growth, we will put emphasis on sustainability and
environmental protection management.

For us to achieve a sustainable and equitable economic growth path, its
content must include sustainability and green economy principles. We
recognise the enormous challenges associated with the legacy of both the
colonial and apartheid economic systems. Spatial management and economic
patterns led to millions of black people, in particular, bearing the brunt
of poor sanitation. They were located where the most polluting industries
existed, and were denied the basic rights to defend themselves against
harmful economic activities.

The legacy of apartheid spatial planning, which has resulted in massive
inequalities and uneven development based on race, is still a feature of
our economic landscape to date. High growth rates achieved up to 2008 when
the recession hit our economy have not dislodged these patterns of spatial
inequalities. In fact, in some areas they were reinforced as a result of
unintended consequences of some of our macroeconomic policies. In addition,
growth did not dislodge the historically deep-rooted structural impediments
to our long-term economic development. In geographic, economic and social
terms, there are huge differential disparities between our provinces as
well as urban and rural areas in economic development.

Having realised that high economic growth on its own does not solve the
critical challenges of unemployment, poverty and inequalities, we decided
to speed up and deepen our agenda for economic transformation. This
involves charting a new way of developing an accelerated sustainable
economic growth that is inclusive, equitable and based on the green
economic principles. The fundamental features of this growth path is the
implementation of policies, strategies and programmes that promote faster
growth and job creation, as well as ensuring sustainability through better
management of our natural resources and the environment.

As a step towards that, we are currently implementing the new Industrial
Policy Action Plan 2, Ipap2. Some of the key objectives — I think members
know — include the green economy, which is the most critical aspect of this
growth path. The green economy is also an aspect I would want to focus on,
because it deals with sustainable development. In pursuing our new economic
growth path as the ANC, we have stated in our policy positions that we
embrace a transformative environmentalism based upon the idea of
sustainable development, which is built upon the interconnection of
environmental, social and economic justice.

We have stated further that our vision of the future includes a sustainable
economy where all South Africans, including present and future generations,
realise their right to an environment that is not harmful to their health
or wellbeing. It is imperative, therefore, that this vision guides all our
policies, strategies and plans for the new economic growth path as
exemplified by the inclusion of the promotion of a green economy in the
Ipap2.

It is now an established scientific fact that the current forms of economic
growth that are reliant on energy, which is dependent on coal, oil and gas,
are unsustainable and detrimental to the environment. This fact is
particularly important in South Africa, because the structure of our
economy has historically been based on mining.

There is increasing evidence of climate change which results in a
significant rise in global temperatures. This is causing an increase in the
quantities of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere generated by human
activities that include burning of fossil fuels, deforestation,
industrialisation, inefficient road transportation and intensive methods of
agricultural production. It is predicted that with climate change, South
Africa will become hotter and drier.

South Africa, by comparison, is generally a country where water is scarce.
The impact of climate change will put even more pressure on the country’s
meagre water resources, with devastating prospects for our economic
wellbeing and development. This is likely to affect some of our key
industries such as agriculture, tourism, industrial production and
biodiversity. As a consequence, there would be an increase in unemployment
and poverty levels, with the resultant threat to the livelihood
opportunities for the poor.

In recognition of these environmental challenges, our new accelerated
sustainable and equitable growth path is aimed at promoting green
industries and energy efficiency. To foster this economic agenda in such a
way that it also supports job creation, the Ipap2 aims to implement
measures that would mitigate that.

In conclusion, we believe that the tasks of transforming our economy in a
manner that encourages it to grow should be inclusive, equitable,
sustainable and green-orientated. It will require partnerships between all
of us. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: I think in Rule
25(a) that deals with quorums in the House, it says that the Assembly may
proceed with its business irrespective of the number of members present,
but may vote on a Bill or decide on any question only if a quorum is
present in terms of subrule 2, where it says that the majority of the
members of the National Assembly must be present before votes may be taken
on a Bill or an amendment to a Bill. During the second reading of the
Sectional Titles Amendment Bill and the Deeds Registries Amendment Bill, I
doubt very much that we had a quorum in the House, so I ask for your ruling
on that matter.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am advised that that intervention was supposed to
have been done at that time. There is an assumption that there was a quorum
when it happened. It is done now; we cannot go back to an item that we have
agreed on.

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I reply to that?

HON MEMBERS: No!

Ms A M DREYER: I just want to point out that I have alerted the Table twice
during the debate on that Bill to alert them to the possibility that we
might not have a quorum. [Interjections.] So, they were aware of the fact,
and they said that they would check on that.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, still ...

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Deputy Speaker, if there wasn’t a quorum then it’s not
valid.

HON MEMBERS: There was a quorum.

Ms A M DREYER: If it is not valid, it would be an unlawful decision.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we move from this item, because, surely, you drew
the attention to the Speaker and to the House that there might not be a
quorum, and the business is suspended. If you check with the Table instead
of drawing the attention of the House to that, and we move from the item
under the impression ... We don’t know at the moment if there was no
quorum. We don’t know if there was no quorum ...

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr R A P TROLLIP: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a
point of order: If the Table is here to assist you and this Parliament, and
one of my members goes to alert the Table and they do nothing about it
twice, what is the Table actually doing in this Parliament? What is their
responsibility and role in informing you as the Deputy Speaker and
presiding officer whether we have a quorum or not?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are right, hon Trollip, they might have failed then
if they thought there was no quorum. But, the responsibility of a member is
to bring that to the attention of the House. If it was done at that time,
definitely it would have been an issue for me. We would have stopped to see
whether we have a quorum. If it’s only now, when we are dealing with a
completely different item, that the issue is being brought to my attention,
there is nothing I can do about it. But if the member had brought that to
the attention of the House, at that time, it would have been addressed.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Speaker, I agree that it is difficult
for you to do something about it now because members may have left the
House, but it is equally your responsibility as the presiding officer, when
we consider legislation, or make decisions regarding legislation, to see
that we have a quorum and that of your officials that are there to support
you to take it into account when they are alerted.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: In fact, sitting here and allowing people to speak,
when I looked around I didn’t see a number that was far, far less than when
we started. If there were — you know, objections — I would have stopped and
counted. But to be honest, looking around, I didn’t see a number that was
far less than when we started. Hon members, can we move from this item?

Dr D T GEORGE: Madam Deputy Speaker, on Tuesday, Statistics SA released
Gross Domestic Product, data for the second quarter. The seasonal real GDP
increased by an annualised rate of 3,2% compared with the increase of 4,6%
during the first quarter. This increase was below the Reuters Consensus of
3,7%, which means that our economy is recovering from the recession at a
slower pace than generally anticipated. If this decelerating pace of
recovery continues, we are unlikely to reach 3% growth in our economy this
year.

This is not good news for South Africans, especially those who have
experienced the pain of losing their jobs during the recession. Despite the
modest recovery, our economy continues to shed jobs and poverty remains
firmly entrenched in communities across the country. The Minister of
Finance has stated that we need a sustained growth rate of 7% for our
economy to create jobs and reduce poverty.

Our current growth path will not achieve this objective. Events in the
global economy are not working in our favour. The developing economies face
the very real prospect of sliding back into recession after experiencing
mild recoveries in the wake of the world financial crisis. If this double
dip does happen, our own economy will be negatively affected.
As an emerging economy, South Africa aspires to join the Bric nations, an
informal group of major emerging economies that includes Brazil, Russia,
India and China. Expectations are that these economies will be the
forefront of global economic growth as developed economies take time to
fully recover. We are currently excluded from Bric, because our economy is
not considered to be in the same league. This is an easy conclusion to
reach when we consider the growth rates that the Bric countries are
achieving in comparison to our own. They have emerged far stronger than we
have, because they are more sharply focused on achieving economic success.

Before the world financial crisis began, our economy was already lagging
behind its full potential. The International Panel on Growth identified
several barriers to growth, but its recommendations were lost in the noisy
transition from the Mbeki administration to the Zuma administration. The
panel exposed poor policy choices that were made by the ANC government,
particularly in education, resulting in a significant mismatch between
skills available to our economy and skills required by our economy, and in
its misdirected microeconomic interventions that stifled economic activity
rather than it being promoted.

Although our room for manoeuvre is limited by a combination of adverse
global events and domestic constraints, it is possible for us to craft a
new economic growth path that will lead our economy to the forefront
amongst emerging economies. It requires government to make the right
choices and to exercise the necessary political will to do the right things
for all the people of South Africa and not only for its politically
connected cronies.

The role of government in the economy and its shaping of economic policy
need to be clarified. The ANC government makes reference to the
developmental state, but we still do not have clarity on what this actually
means. The model applied to the state-owned enterprises doesn’t work and we
are still waiting for the review that was promised last year. We are also
waiting for Minister Manuel’s National Planning Commission to plan and for
clarity on how it will interface with Minister Patel’s advisory panel. It
appears that political tension in the tripartite alliance has paralysed
coherent economic policy-making and implementation. Investors are unsure
about our economic policy direction. The prospect of nationalisation makes
them extremely nervous.

The world financial crisis offered several lessons that we should apply to
our economy. Most significantly we have learnt that government can perform
a vital function in intervening where the market fails. In the South
African context, this has important implications for government in
positioning itself within the economy.

The ANC government seeks to position itself at the centre. This is a poor
policy choice. From this central point, it seeks to control all aspects of
our economy. In this way, it can dispense patronage to its loyal cadres and
exert control over the population by providing or withholding access to
jobs and poverty alleviating services. It should rather focus on
encouraging people to make choices for themselves within an environment,
facilitated by government, which enables them to become everything that
they are capable of being. Government’s primary objective, post recession,
is to facilitate economic activity and not to attempt to act as a job
provider, which it has proved unable to do in any event.

Our economy needs to be attractive to local and international investors.
Our macroeconomic framework needs to facilitate this environment. South
African businesses invested R44 billion in Ireland because the Irish
government offered an attractive tax regime. We need to consider fiscal
incentives to attract and retain foreign capital and to encourage South
Africans to save more, especially towards funding their retirement.

Poor policy choices by the ANC government include unattractive corporate
tax rates, an overly complex and complicated tax regime, suggestions to
implement a Tobin tax, and a pension reform process that has dragged on for
over seven years. To resolve this, we need a commission to review our tax
regime and deadlines for completion of the pension reform process.

Millions of South Africans are neither employed nor in education. This is
an enormous waste of human capital and the result of poor policy choices.
Our education system is not producing the skills that our economy needs. To
achieve a new growth path we need to ensure that our basic learning
institutions provide quality education and that our higher learning
institutions, of various kinds, can absorb far more students than they do
now. Good policy choices would include incentives to establish more
learning institutions and generate the specific occupational skills vital
to our economic prosperity. If government builds the path to quality
education, our people will walk on it and our economy will benefit.

Our rate of unemployment remains amongst the highest in the world and we
are currently experiencing the phenomenon of jobless growth. Employers are
reluctant to employ because poor policy choices make it really difficult
for an employer to correct job mismatches and impossible for an individual
to negotiate the terms of his or her own employment. Entrepreneurs thrive
across the African continent, and we should be no exception. The
environment needs to be conducive to the entrepreneurial spirit and good
policy should remove obstacles to starting and operating a business
enterprise. Technology and infrastructure needs to be developed and made
available to those who are on the road to business development. It is
currently very cumbersome for small businesses to operate in South Africa;
for a new economic growth path, this needs to change.

A wide range of good policy choices can also be made to encourage employers
to absorb more people from the available labour market; a wage subsidy is
one of them. Although the Minister of Finance mentioned in his Budget
Speech that a wage subsidy to encourage employment would be pursued, it now
seems clear that it does not possess the political muscle to drive the
policy to implementation.

The quality of life of millions of South Africans is unacceptably low. Many
live in extreme poverty and do not have access to basic service delivery.
Quality health care for all has not been achieved and results from poor
policy choices. We know that the market does not provide universal access
to quality health care and that government intervention is required, but
instead of fixing the broken system that it currently operates, the ANC
government looks to implementing a National Health Insurance Scheme that
has not been comprehensively costed and is likely to make health care even
more expensive.

Many other policy improvements are needed, including a more efficient and
effective procurement process and a model for public/private partnerships
that avoids patronage for the politically connected. Time is limited and
the people will not wait forever.

On his recent visit to China, President Zuma said that plans are being
developed in order for us to achieve a target growth rate of at least 7%
per annum in the near future. The actions of the ANC government, to date,
do not inspire confidence and the current public sector strikes point to
deep divides within the tripartite alliance. Its previous plans have either
failed or fizzled out under the weight of political agendas that cannot be
reconciled within the ANC. Hoping for a bailout from China, as we have seen
happen in Zimbabwe, is not good enough.

The people of South Africa deserve more. They deserve a government that
will facilitate the economic activity that is required for them to achieve
their full potential. They deserve a government that will focus on
eradicating poverty at its root causes. They deserve a government that will
work for the people, and not the other way around. Most importantly, they
deserve a government that is capable of making the right policy choices.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Hon House Chair, Cope strongly believes that the
overarching challenge for South Africa is to achieve a 7% sustainable
growth path. Our people are very unhappy, as poverty is increasing without
any hope of a meaningful reversal.

Last year, according to Statistics SA, 870 000 people lost their jobs in
the formal economy. As we speak, millions are jobless and half of our
population live below the poverty datum line. Our society, in terms of the
Gini coefficient index – which measures inequality – is rated as the most
unequal society in the world. Cope wants to see substantial growth. We need
to see it now.

At present, the contribution to GDP from agriculture is a mere 0,9% and
from industry 20,6%. Mechanised services, on the other hand, account for
78,5% of GDP. These proportions are totally skewed and very wrong. A
paradigm shift is what is needed at the present moment.

Here are some of Cope’s proposals for a new economic growth path: Being the
most developed economy in Africa, we should be the super megastore for ICT
for the continent. Much as Dubai is for the Middle East, South Africa
should be for Africa.

Our marketing of ICT products should encompass a continent-wide view so
that we achieve the scale of distribution to reduce prices, as Dubai does
to attract buyers from all over the Middle East. Already MTN and Vodacom,
which are headquartered in South Africa, have a continent-wide footprint.

South Africa is well placed to be the ICT hub of Africa and will,
therefore, be able to attract Africa to shop for ICT products and services
in our country. South Korea’s Presidential Lead Programme has shown what
can be done in this regard if the political will to overcome the digital
divide is there. We now live in a knowledge economy and everything we do
must reflect that.
With greater investment in skills, we can have the capacity to service the
whole of Africa in the field of ICT. Blue IQ is an example of what can be
done to catalyse sustainable economic growth. We must overcome the
constraints of the digital divide. North-South trade in Africa is grossly
underdeveloped. South Africa must be a market for African products from all
over the continent. Two-way trade must be escalated. We must scale up our
Research and Development, R&D, expenditure and support innovation. Hundreds
of people are sitting with small innovative ideas which they cannot bring
to market because they lack capital. The state must baby-sit new
manufacturing projects until they become viable and then sell them off at
the point where banks will lend money cheaply. Within this context,
entrepreneurship must be encouraged to spread like wildfire.

Agriculture has been steadily declining and that is why jobs have been shed
in such large numbers. Our food security is in jeopardy. We import what is
highly subsidised elsewhere and we are thereby destroying our own capacity
for agricultural production. Agriculture accounts for less than 1% of our
GDP. That simply cannot be. It is disturbing that, until now, government
has not put forward any turnaround strategy for agriculture.

Sustainable productive manufacturing is critically important for our
economy. However, in steel pricing, ArcelorMittal has shifted fully to the
Black Sea import-parity pricing ... [Time expired.]
Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Madam Deputy Speaker, Professor James earlier
talked about the cost of government talking. The greatest part of the cost
is the opportunity cost. There is in the English language a beautiful,
archaic word, “velleity”. Velleity is volition which does not come into the
fruition of action. We have seen a great deal of velleity within
government. Government does not make money; it can only spend money. Social
programmes need to have a higher rate of economic growth to be financed.
Government’s Growth, Employment and Redistribution strategy, Gear, began
with a 6% estimated growth rate and ended up with 3%.

We need to do something fundamentally different, or this may be remembered
as the season of lost opportunities. A crisis offers an opportunity for
restructuring. We have missed the opportunity; we are in the process of
missing it.

Hon George made reference to the Bric countries – Brazil, Russia, India and
China – which are products of fundamental restructuring made ahead of need
with vision. They are ready to go. We are still within the mould of an
economy shaped by international sanctions, by economic isolation and by a
government programme that keeps alive what is not viable, with a constant
transfer of money from the aggregate of paying, innocent taxpayers to the
industry.

If we are serious about dealing with the major problem of this country,
which is unemployment, we need to have the courage to implement the policy
which we heard the Minister of Finance – who is not here – the Minister of
Trade and Industry – who is not here – and the Minister of the National
Planning Commission – who has somehow left the House – mention very often,
which is that of reducing the excessive costs of the Rand which makes our
country uncompetitive. This is the easiest way of putting people to work
and having products capable of being exported.

The issues, too, on which there has been a great deal of debate, are about
how we should manufacture partnerships between government and state, the
assistance of the state, and moving beyond the model of free-market
enterprise if we are to have a developmental state. That would be a
wonderful world, but the issue confronting this country, like any other
country in the global village, is not how but what are we going to produce?
What are we going to manufacture? This is crucial, and I do accept what hon
Ngonyama said. He said that the state should be ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Is it a point of order, hon
member?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS: Chair, this is just to make sure that
incorrect information is not captured by Hansard: The hon member may not
know me, but I am present in the House. Thank you.

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: I did not mention you. I don’t know where all this
comes from, but it is eating into my time. But I guess I can get it back?
[Laughter.] It would be much nicer if every now and then we listened to one
another. It is a novel idea, but we could experiment with it! [Laughter.]

We need to look at the issue of productivity. It is serious. We need to
find ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, your time has expired.
[Laughter.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Well, what can I say! [Laughter.]

Mr P S SIZANI: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, poverty, food
insecurity and environmental degradation are part of the reality that
developing countries are confronted with on a daily basis, and have been
recognised as critical development challenges that need the highest
priority in the developmental agenda.

The Food and Agricultural Organisation of the UN defines food security as a
“situation that exists when all people at all times have physical, social
and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets
their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life”.

The consequences of food insecurity are clearly visible, and appear in the
form of deteriorating health situations and breakdown of communities and
family structures, as families are forced to migrate in search of
livelihoods.

Poverty, inequality and joblessness in South Africa are the consequences of
centuries of underdevelopment and exploitation consciously perpetrated on
the majority of the population, which had the most destructive and enduring
impacts on rural communities. Consequently, the structural faults that
characterised the apartheid rural economy remain with us today.

The 52nd National Conference of the ANC, therefore, resolved to pursue a
programme of economic transformation based on, amongst others, a
comprehensive and clear rural development strategy, which builds the
potential for rural sustainable livelihoods, particularly for African
women, as part of an overarching vision of rural development with strong
interventions in the private land market, combined with better use of state
land for social and economic objectives. It also transforms patterns of
landownership and agrarian production, thereby restructuring and
deracialising the agricultural sector to be sustainable, inclusive,
equitable and produce decent jobs.

Unemployment is disproportionately high in rural areas where the majority
of those with jobs earn poverty wages. Limited opportunities of sustainable
livelihoods in rural areas, insecurity of tenure and widespread evictions
contribute directly to the growth of informal settlements in cities and
towns. The challenges of urban poverty and migration to cities are
therefore inseparably bound with the struggle to defeat poverty, create
work and build a better life for South Africans living in rural areas.

Many rural areas still lack basic infrastructure such as roads, water and
electricity supply. This lack of infrastructure entrenches the problems of
chronic poverty and limits the potential of communities to sustain economic
growth, rural livelihoods and social development. Efforts to extend free
basic services to all our people are slowest to reach rural areas and farm
dwellers. Moreover, access to government services, such as education and
health care, are the weakest in rural areas.

Social grants are making a huge contribution to pushing back the frontiers
of poverty, fighting hunger and improving potential for economic growth in
rural areas. However, in the struggle to build a better life for all,
grants are no substitute for a broader strategy of rural development and
employment creation.

Millions of our people who farm on small agricultural plots do make a
substantial contribution to poverty reduction and the creation of
sustainable livelihoods in the most adverse conditions. Part-time and full-
time agriculture in these areas, therefore, remains a critical opportunity
in our people’s efforts to combat poverty, provide social security for
themselves and build sustainable livelihoods.

The prevailing structure of commercial agriculture is the outcome of
centuries of dispossession, labour coercion and state subsidy for the
chosen few. Since 1994, commercial agriculture has continued to develop in
a manner that is characterised by growing concentration of ownership and
farm size, underutilisation of vast tracts of land, capital intensity, job
shedding and the casualisation of labour.

While deregulation, liberalisation and the resulting competitive pressures
on the sector have eliminated many of the privileges of the large-scale
farm sector, various aspects of policy and legislation still reinforce the
legacy of the past, making it difficult to redistribute land to a modern
and competitive smallholder sector. At the same time, commercial
agriculture has also reacted to legislation intended to protect the rights
of workers and farm dwellers by sharply reducing their number, resulting in
significant job losses and painful evictions of people living on farms.

Rural development is a central pillar of our struggle against unemployment,
poverty and inequality. High levels of rural poverty and inequality inhibit
the growth of our economy and undermine our efforts to ensure that growth
is more equitably shared amongst our people.

Programmes of rural development, land reform and agrarian change are being
integrated into a clear strategy that seeks to empower the poor,
particularly those who already derive all or part of their livelihoods from
the exploitation of productive land. In line with the Freedom Charter’s
call that “the land shall be shared among those who work it”, the critical
beneficiaries of change are rural women, farm dwellers, household
producers, small businesses and rural entrepreneurs and residents that wish
to engage in agricultural livelihoods.

Since the majority of the poor in the country are in rural areas, it makes
sense that rural development emerged as a key strategy of the ANC-led
government to fight poverty. The aim of rural development is to enable the
rural poor to take charge of their destiny by creating sustainable rural
livelihoods through optimal use and management of natural resources.

The Letsema programme was implemented in 2008-09 as part of the land and
agrarian reform project and managed by provincial departments. The main
focus was increasing household food production on fallow land, and it
targeted disadvantaged rural communities. It became popular through the
provision of agricultural starter packs in response to increased food
prices associated with the economic recession.

A once-off allocation of R96 million was made in that year with additional
allocations of R1 billion being made over the medium term to further
strengthen the programme. The additional allocation is commendable and it
is hoped that the increase will produce the desired outcomes in terms of
sustainable household self-sufficiency in rural areas and increased
agricultural production that will subsequently create decent jobs.

I call upon members to look at The Cape Times on Tuesday this week, on 24
August 2010, where one of these projects is working here in the Western
Cape and it is quoted as being a very good example.

The participation of the poor in the design, implementation and monitoring
of rural development programmes is a key objective of the developmental
state. And it must be supported by appropriate structures to give voice to
affected communities and structure their engagement with government
programmes. Again, I call upon the members to look at the Muyexe pilot
project where the community members participate in the design of their
future.

The developmental state has a central role to play in leading and
sustaining rural development. This includes leading the process of land
reform, promoting sustainable change in social and economic relations and
supporting the goals of growth and development in the rural economy.

Rural development therefore is taken beyond implementation of projects to a
more integrated programme, requiring the financial commitments by various
Ministries and co-ordinated centrally. Food production and food security in
these economically depressed areas go beyond the narrow definition of rural
development to the creation of economic nodes that can contribute to the
economic recovery in a visible way.

The department of Rural Development and Land Reform was established by
President Jacob Zuma on 11 May 2009, when he announced his Cabinet, with a
mandate to develop and implement a comprehensive rural development
programme throughout the country. And the key focus is to ensure
sustainable land and agrarian reform that contributes to rural development,
food security and improved quality of life in rural areas, in line with the
ANC-led government’s key objective to combat unemployment and poverty.

The department, however, cannot do all this work alone. Rural development
is a transversal function and for the government to achieve its key
objective of vibrant and sustainable rural communities and long-term
outcome of social cohesion and development, rural communities have to be
both objects and subjects of all processes affecting them. [Time expired.]
Mr S Z NTAPANE: Hon Chairperson, hon members, the UDM has, for many years
now, advocated for a more assertive government approach to economic policy.
The South African economy fails to provide opportunities for millions of
adults who are capable of a productive contribution. This directly
translates into millions of households that live in abject poverty. They
hover at the periphery of suffering.

Increasingly, these disaffected and marginalised masses are showing their
frustration through community protests that are a countrywide phenomenon.
The indisputable truth is this: Political freedom without economic freedom
is not real freedom. We must face this truth before we discover too late
that democracy has no legitimacy in the eyes of millions of our fellow
countrymen. Thus, unemployment is not merely an economic statistic, but a
constitutional and moral issue.

Current and previous economic policies have failed to address the
unemployment crisis. There are three broad changes in approach that the UDM
has been advocating. Firstly, we need government to invest in real
infrastructure on a grand scale. Roads, electricity and water
infrastructure barely exist in vast areas of the country, while existing
infrastructure in the developed areas is poorly maintained and falling into
disrepair. Roads, electricity and water infrastructure are the arteries of
an economy. Without these, real economic growth will never happen.
Secondly, we need to reduce the countless legislative and bureaucratic
obstacles that prevent business, especially new entrepreneurs, from
creating new wealth and job opportunities. We must never lose sight of the
fact that no amount of redistribution policies will increase wealth and
jobs; it merely amounts to rearranging the deckchairs on the Titanic.

Thirdly, we need an education system that prepares learners and students
for the marketplace. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr B A RADEBE: Hon Chairperson, during the NEC lekgotla of the ANC in
January, the ANC identified five challenges which must be tackled quickly
to turn around the economy of the country. One of the questions which had
to be answered was: How far did we progress as a country in ensuring that
the people share the wealth of the country, noting that the Freedom Charter
demands that the mineral wealth beneath the soil, the banks and monopoly
industry shall be transferred to the ownership of the people as a whole?

Arising from the demand of the Freedom Charter, the issue of
nationalisation of mines had to be debated so as to give meaning to the
above-mentioned clause of the Freedom Charter. The NEC also had to
acknowledge that the ownership of all mineral deposits has reverted to the
state and that private operators pay royalties to the state.

The above challenges, which were raised by the ANC, were necessitated by
the fact that the structure of the economy of South Africa has not changed
over the past 500 years. This economic structure is characterised by the
extraction and export of unprocessed minerals, agricultural products,
marine resources and other raw materials. There is minimal or no
beneficiation of these raw materials, which leads to hampering the creation
of the tertiary goods.

This economic structure was also characterised by a poorly skilled migrant
labour. Because of the poor skills in the economy, the economy was unable
to reach its maximum development. This is evidenced by the fact that when
the economic growth was at its zenith, the unemployment rate continued to
be above 23%. During the global economic meltdown, the unemployment rate
increased to about 30%. When taking into account the expanded definition of
unemployment, it could have easily reached 40% of the population. In these
figures, the unemployed youth of the age 18 to 24 is estimated to be about
2,8 million people. No government can sit back and allow such a situation
to thrive.

That is why the ANC in its January 8 statement committed itself to building
a developmental state which is democratic, people-driven and people-
centred. This developmental state will pursue a sustained development based
on an inclusive growth path. Since South Africa has very high levels of
inequality among all races, the new growth path should factor in the
equitable distribution of wealth and job creation in order to move towards
an inclusive economic development.

With the above-mentioned high unemployment levels, it shows that we are far
away from sharing the country’s wealth. Since we know from time immemorial
that the market system has proved that it was never geared to redistribute
wealth equitably, the state must intervene and correct the market failures.
An example of a classical market failure is in the steel industry where a
state-owned enterprise, Iron and Steel Industrial Corporation, Iscor, was
privatised and the South African economy is still bleeding from high steel
prices, although there are plenty of ore and coal reserves in the country.

The example of how the country can be ripped off is in the fight between
ArcelorMittal and Kumba. When ArcelorMittal was getting cheap ore from
Kumba that benefit was never transferred to the consumers of steel;
instead, they were slapped with a high import parity price. These high
steel prices led to the lowering of the economic growth. What is worse in
the scenario is the continued export of iron ore, even when there is
evidence that if iron ore is processed into steel, more jobs can be
created. For example, if the selling price of one ton of iron ore is $180,
only 0,17% of the people will be employed at a cost of about R8,5 million;
whereas when one ton of iron ore is processed into structural steel,
structural steel will be sold at $3 000 a ton and create about 30 jobs at
an investment cost of about R0,5 million.
This shows that when we beneficiate the iron ore the process is labour-
intensive as opposed to capital-intensive when the iron ore is unprocessed.
The local companies continue to export iron instead of processing it. For
example, in 1990 about 17 000 tons of iron was exported, and in 2008 the
export of iron ore has almost doubled to 34 000 tons. In 1990 the local
consumption of iron ore was 11 000 tons, and in 2008 it was still 11 000
tons. This flat consumption of iron ore proves that, instead of creating
jobs, the steel industry has shed the jobs. This situation cannot be
allowed to continue when we have about 4,3 million unemployed people.

This demands that a developmental state must create a state-owned mining
company which will ensure the reduction of the cost of doing business in
the steel industry and related fields. This state-owned enterprise must
develop critical skills and the expertise in the field. The creation of
this state-owned enterprise must ensure the viability and cost
competitiveness of local steel production. This enterprise must also ensure
a competitive steel-pricing regime to support the development and deepening
of value-added manufactured products in the down stream industry.

Development finance institutions like the Industrial Development
Corporation must fund such an enterprise. This enterprise must contribute
to both direct and indirect job creation. This must be done as of yesterday
because the steel industry continues to be a strategic industry for the
growth of our economy. The national objectives of promoting government
policies such as employment equity and broad-based black economic
empowerment must be at the centre of the corporate direction of this
enterprise.

The third challenge identified by the ANC was how to create 4 million
decent and sustainable jobs by 2014. The government infrastructure budget
of about R800 billion in the next Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF,
period must be used wisely to stimulate the economy and fund the new growth
path. This can be done by using state-owned enterprises like Eskom and
Transnet.

In their procurement of goods and services in their infrastructure
expansion, the Industrial Policy Action Plan demands that enterprises like
Transnet and Eskom must do fleet procurement when sourcing their goods. For
example, when Transnet is sourcing their locomotives, instead of buying two
or three locomotives at a time, it must source more than 30 so that the
components which will go to those locomotives are manufactured locally.
This must also be matched with the creation of skills like artisans,
engineers, procurement managers and other related skills which must provide
support and maintenance of the fleet.

The other challenge we face in growing the economy is the sourcing finance
for development. This demands that the developmental state must adequately
resource development finance institutions. The Industrial Development
Corporation was last capitalised in the 1950s; the IDC is expected to
source funding from the markets where it is going to pay a premium in loan
repayments. This high premium will be passed to the customers of the IDC,
hence this will increase the cost of doing business in South Africa.

The developmental state must try to use the Brazilian model of development
finance, where the Development Bank of Brazil uses a wide range of
instruments to finance development, for example, direct and indirect
operations where half of the finances go through commercial banking
systems, project finance, import and export, equity investment and
nonrefundable credit lines. Within the same system of the Brazilian
Development Bank, there is an investment bank which is capitalised to the
tune of $50 billion. Through the equity investments, the bank is
represented in all the large corporations of Brazil where they actually
play the strategic role of directing these companies to support the
economic development of the country.

Although the Brazilian capital market is well-developed in terms of
corporate governance, the Brazilian Development Bank ensures that they are
open to the minorities and historically disadvantaged individuals. It means
that the Brazilian Development Bank is being used to deracialise the
financial market of Brazil. This bank derives its strength from the regular
recapitalisation from the state. For example, last year the bank disbursed
about $69 billion, of which $48 billion went for infrastructure projects
which were worth $93 billion, and this led to the creation and maintenance
of about 4,5 million jobs during the investment period. This large
investment was possible because the Brazilian bank injected $100 billion in
the previous two years.

In the South African situation, our IDC must also be regularly
recapitalised by the government so that it can also have its footprint in
major projects which will drive the Industrial Policy Action Plan. To
achieve this objective there must be co-ordination between the Department
of Trade and Industry, DTI, Department of Finance and the IDC. The DTI must
identify the incentives as per the demands of the Industrial Policy Action
Plan, and the IDC must identify the projects which must be funded. Lastly,
the department must identify tax incentives and loans which must be given
to the IDC to fulfil its tasks.

This co-ordinated approach must direct funding towards the manufacturing
sector so that the objectives of the industrial policy plan can be
attained. The beneficiation of mineral resources and agricultural products
must be at the centre of the new growth path because they tend to be more
labour-absorbing. The Department of Trade and Industry must adopt a
developmental approach in the tariff setting. For example, those import
products which are important to the value chain beneficiation can have
their tariffs lowered or eliminated. The tariffs can be increased in order
to protect this infant industry until it is able to stand on its feet.
The development finance institutions must have the capacity to adapt and be
flexible. The strategic objectives of these development finance
institutions must be always to serve the public interest. The public
interest objective demands that the employees of the IDC must be highly
qualified and technically efficient.

During the public hearings of the Industrial Policy Action Plan there was
unprecedented unity in the inputs of the labour, organised business and
private business sectors. The unity between labour, business and government
can lead to the speedy realisation of the new growth path. This new growth
path must lead to economic development, which leads to sustainable
improvement of the country’s living standard, in an equitable manner. As
the ANC said in 2009, working together we can do more. Thank you. [Time
expired.]

Mrs M N MATLADI: Chairperson, we have forever been talking of new economic
strategies to tackle, amongst other issues, the high rate of unemployment,
but the translation of these into action seems to take ages. Our economy
continues in its failure to be labour absorbent.

Further to the 900 000 jobs losses due to the recession last year, we
continue to see massive job losses, with Statistics SA having reported
4,6 million in the first quarter and 126 000 finance jobs which were lost
in the first quarter of the year. Any economic growth must first address
unemployment as a priority. I thank you.
Mrs E M COLEMAN: Hon House Chair, let me thank members for participating in
this important debate. However, I must also indicate to the hon George that
we have opened an opportunity for you to debate, discuss, sell and come
with an alternative. [Interjections.] No, you said the obvious.

I understand you had a prepared speech, but I think you should have
listened carefully to what I was saying, because all that you said is what
I had said and acknowledged in my speech. It is important, though, that we
also inform you that we have a good relationship with the Bric and Impsa
groups or countries. Actually, we have strong relations with Russia and
China. I do not think that there is an issue there. What is important about
this topic is that we open up discussions and are able to come with issues
and alternative policies that can make this country work.

We have done so during other events that we held as a country. Obviously we
don’t have any room for pessimists in this country. We want people who are
positive and want to contribute positively. We are sure that with the 2010
World Cup spirit that we had, we could continue to build this country and
realise the growth that we are so desperately looking for as South Africa.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, I just wanted to
appeal that in future the Whippery should take their responsibilities very
seriously; because members were making a lot of noise. I even heard the
members recruiting each other; and others talking about visiting each
other. I think next time the Whippery should really make sure that their
members listen and that those who want to continue with their discussions
should go to their offices and continue there.

Hon members, that concludes the debate on the subject and I hope that no
one will object when I say, that also concludes the business of the day and
therefore the House is adjourned.

The House adjourned at 16:54.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bill passed by National Council of Provinces on 26 August 2010:


          a) South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly

 1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Police on the Independent Police
    Investigative Directorate Bill [B 15 – 2010] (National Assembly – sec
    76), dated 25 August 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on Police, having considered the subject of
      the Independent Police Investigative Directorate Bill [B 15 – 2010]
      (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it, and classified by the
      Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the Bill with
      amendments [B 15A - 2010].

2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform
   on the Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill [B 9 – 2010] (National Assembly
   – sec 76), dated 25 August 2010:

   The Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform having
   considered the subject of the Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill [B 9 –
   2010] (National Assembly – Section 76), referred to it and classified by
   the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) as a Section 76 Bill, reports as
   follows:

    1.      Background
    The Black Authorities Act, No 68 of 1951 (hereinafter BAA) was one of
    the legislative cornerstones of apartheid engineering which sought to
    control communities of black people. It laid the foundation for the
    establishment of statutory tribal, regional and territorial authorities
    to administer the affairs of black people; and also defined the
    functions of those black authorities. It has remained a symbol of past
    racial divisions and discrimination and is entirely repugnant to the
    values and human rights enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic
    of South Africa, Act 108 of 1996.
    The Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill [B 9 – 2010], tabled in
    Parliament on 7 May 2010, seeks to repeal the BAA thereby removing it
    from the statutes book. Subsequent to the briefing by the Department of
    Rural Development and Land Reform, the Portfolio Committee on Rural
    Development and Land Reform invited public comments on the Black
    Authorities Act Repeal Bill [B 9 – 2010]. It received five written
    submissions and seventeen expressions of interest to make oral
    submissions. On 20 and 21 July 2010, it conducted public hearings on
    the Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill and heard submissions and
    testimonies from representatives of rural communities and
    organisations. The public hearing process was followed by consideration
    of the Bill and deliberations on the submissions received by the
    committee.


    This report outlines an overview of key issues arising from the
    submissions received by the committee and further provides an account
    of the committee’s consideration and deliberation on submissions
    received, and on the Bill.


    2.      Overview of submissions received by the Committee

    2.1.    Law, Race and Gender Research Unit


    The Law, Race and Gender Unit (LRG), based within the University of
    Cape Town, welcomed the repeal of the BAA. The following questions
    regarding the repeal of the BAA were raised:


  • Would the repeal on its own be sufficient to undo the legacy of the
    BAA?
  • Will additional processes be needed, and what would this entail?


    The LRG argued that a set of post -1994 legal provisions further
    entrenched the legacy of the BAA. Some of the post apartheid
    legislative developments were regarded as problematic and
    controversial. The Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act
    41 of 2003 (TLGFA) was cited as an example. LRG submitted that Section
    28 of the TLGFA entrenches the apartheid era tribal boundaries and
    authorities in rural areas; and perpetuates and legitimizes those
    boundaries and authorities associated with the BAA.


    The TLGFA entrenches the BAA provisions as follows:


     • It gives traditional councils the very kinds of unaccountable
       governance powers they had as traditional authorities under BAA.
     • It preserves and entrenches the obsolete and repugnant boundaries,
       authority structures and power relations between traditional leaders
       and their subjects.
     • It permits possibilities of collection of taxes and levies by the
       traditional councils (section 4(2) and (3) (note that the
       Constitution [section 43 and 104] vests these powers to National and
       Provincial spheres of government). It was argued that this provision
       is in contrast with the provisions of the White Paper on Traditional
       Leadership and Governance, which discourages imposition of taxes and
       levies by traditional authorities.


    The submission highlighted to the portfolio committee the
    Constitutional Court’s hearing on the Communal Land Rights Act 11 of
    2004 (CLARA). Deputy Chief Justice Dikgang Moseneke expressed concerns
    regarding the use of BAA as a platform for land reform. LRG contended
    that the repeal of the BAA falls short of what is required to address
    the legacy of apartheid in rural areas of South Africa.


    The LRG, therefore, asked parliament to note the following:


     ← That the Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill mentions the cut-off
       dates for continued existence of the old community, regional and
       other authorities mentioned in section 28(5) and  (6) (a) of the
       TLGFA; but that process is incomplete.
     ← The irony of repealing the BAA, whilst its key provisions live on
       in new legislation as illustrated above.
     ← The concerns of the Constitutional Court regarding the reliance on
       the BAA’s tribal authorities and boundaries as a basis for post-
       apartheid land reform.
     ← Addressing the legacy issues requires the attention of the
       Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development as
       well as that of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs.


    2.2.    Mr. Thabang Motsoeneng


    Mr. Motsoeneng, in his personal capacity, emphasised the constitutional
    rights of the rural people; in particular, the Bill of Rights. He
    located his submission within the discourse of law and the impact of
    Roman Dutch Law on indigenous and customary practices. He argued that
    the repeal of the Black Authorities Act should give due regard to the
    realisation of the constitutional rights of people in rural areas. The
    following propositions were highlighted:


     ← Enactment of laws that would give effect to secure land rights and
       dignity for people living in rural area.
     ← Availing financial resources for food production to the rural
       poor.
     ← Collaboration of traditional councils and municipalities to ensure
       development of rural areas.
    2.3.    Silwanendlala Farmers Agricultural Cooperative (Ltd)


    The submission from the Silwanendlala Farmers Agricultural Cooperative
    illustrated the experiences of the rural people in the Matsamo Tribal
    Authority, Mpumalanga. Some of the problems experienced by the rural
    people centred on issues around chieftaincy and traditional
    authorities, institutions that derived their mandate and powers from
    the BAA, which were legislated by the BAA. These contributory factors
    or problems subsequently determined the manner in which the Tribal
    Authority decided on development; selling land that it does not own;
    and imposing different kinds of levies to the residents, but does not
    provide services.

    Silwanendlala asked parliament to ensure that government put in place
    mechanisms that:

     ← Stop tribal authorities from implementing old apartheid laws.
     ← Ensure that new laws are based on a consultative process that
       takes into consideration views of the public, especially the rural
       poor.
     ← Prohibit tribal authorities from interfering with development in
       rural areas.
     ← Release title deeds of land occupied by the rural people.


    2.4.    Rural Peoples Movement (Kwazulu-Natal)


    The Rural Peoples Movement was of the view that the BAA together with
    its Tribal Authorities must cease to exist. It argued that the BAA
    undermined the dignity of black people in South Africa. The Rural
    Peoples Movement highlighted critical concerns relating to the legacy
    of the Black Authorities Act, which incorporated:


  ← Clustering of black people and imposing chiefs on them.
  ← A system of imposing taxes and levies to the rural people.
  ← Establishments of Bantustans and homelands.
  ← Divisions and disunity among black people.


    The Rural Peoples Movement was concerned that new pieces of legislation
    such as the Traditional Courts Bill (TCB) and new legislative
    developments entrenched the BAA provisions.


    2.5.    Land Access Movement of South Africa


    Land Access Movement of South Africa (Lamosa) welcomed the repeal of
    the BAA. The submission illustrated frustrations and confusion on the
    role of traditional authorities legislated for by the BAA. The case of
    Barokolokgadi of Melorane was presented. Due to forced removals from
    their ancestral land, different communities were clustered to live
    together, despite the absence of history of prior links or connection
    among those communities. They were further subjugated to tribal
    authorities to whom they did not have any allegiance.


    The Barokolokgadi community received their ancestral land under the
    land restitution programme, which transferred land to the Barokolokgadi
    Communal Property Association. Though the community does not recognise
    the tribal authority, they cannot escape the authority of the chief.
    The Barokolokgadi’s attempts to be an independent community were all in
    vain because the North-West Provincial Government believed that “the
    traditional authority cannot be dismantled, lest floodgates of problems
    are opened, and this would create administrative problems” (North-West
    Provincial Government, 2009).


    In order to ensure that the repeal of the BAA is meaningful, Lamosa
    called for parliament to:


  • Amend Section 28 of the TLGFA.
  • Not to pass the Traditional Courts Bill
  • Government should stop tribal authorities and chiefs from imposing
    levies and taxes.


    2.6.    Sekhukhune District Land Forum


    After the promulgation of the BAA, many tribal leaders ‘congested’
    Sekhukhune District and the apartheid government preferred certain
    leaders to others in order to further its own objectives in the former
    homelands. A number of changes occurred, including forced removals,
    change in governance of the homelands, introduction of taxes, and
    payment of Trust money. A major challenge today relates to the abuse of
    power and imposition of taxes by those institutions of tribal
    authorities. One of the examples given was the so-called ‘car levy’ by
    the tribal authority.


    The provisions of the TLGFA give tribal authorities (in their new name
    as traditional councils) more powers than they had previously. This
    should be amended to transform the power imbalances and adopt a
    transformative approach to the traditional authorities.


    2.7.    Rural Women’s Movement


    The Rural Women’s Movement (from KwaZulu-Natal) supported the repeal of
    the Black Authorities Act. Its submission covered a wide range of
    persistent problems confronting rural women which they believed would
    continue even after the repeal of the BAA. Such problems included the
    following:
      ← The chief’s unilateral decisions about the use of land and other
        community resources.
     ← The chief appointed 19 people as the Traditional Authority to
       conduct the Traditional Court.
      ← The injustices occurring under the traditional courts.
     ← The poor are fined heavy penalties up to R1000 for the trespass of
       livestock into the fields.


    An appeal was made to parliament to disband the current Traditional
    Authorities and Courts and create structures that provides government
    services to communities.


    2.8.    Daggakraal Committee of 12


    The repeal of the BAA was welcome. However, a major concern was that
    the BAA still resided within the TLGFA which stripped the Kalkfontein
    their status as a Community Authority. The TLGFA gives chiefs’
    authority over the community authorities even if they had existed
    independent of any traditional authority.  There was an appeal from
    this group that:
     ← Parliament repeals the TLGFA or amends section 28.
     ← Disestablish tribal structures associated with the BAA.


    2.9.    Kalkfontein B and C Trust


    Kalkfontein community, represented by Mr. Tongoane, is one of the
    communities that challenged CLARA at the Constitutional Court. He
    welcomed the repeal of the BAA. However, he indicated that the
    community remained concerned because the repeal on its own was
    inadequate to address the damage caused by the BAA. A set of post- 1994
    measures and provisions in effect entrenches the legacy of the very Act
    that is being repealed. According to Mr. Tongoane, the TLGFA, TCB and
    CLARA are an embodiment of the BAA because they bestow more powers to
    the institution of traditional leadership. The traditional councils,
    provided for by the TLGFA, were viewed as problematic structures as
    they resembled mere ‘cosmetic changes’ to the traditional authorities
    of the BAA.


    2.10.   Farm Evictions and Development Committee


    Farm Evictions and Development Committee, represented by Ms. Maria
    Mabaso supported the repeal of the BAA. Their major problem is that the
    Tribal Authority, an institution that was legislated under the Black
    Authorities Act, imposed levies and taxes to rural communities. The
    following are the kinds of taxes and levies imposed on rural people:


     ← If a girl becomes pregnant, parents of the girl child pay amounts
       ranging between R200-R1000 to the chief (only levied to the parents
       of a girl-child).
     ← When a widow has to remove her mourning dress, she pays a tax/levy
       ranging between R300 – R1000 to the chief.
     ← Development tax - for example, each family pays R500 for the
       construction of roads etc.
     ← When land reform beneficiaries acquire land (either redistribution
       or restitution), as subjects of a chief, they are compelled to pay
       levies for access to their own land.
     ← Rural communities fund the costs of private legal matters of
       chiefs. For example, they pay a fee of R150.00 per person.
     ← For weddings and unveiling of tombstones, a family pays a levy
       between R300 and R1000.
     ← An example in Emakhuzeni – each household pays R50 towards the
       education fund for the chief’s child.
     ← Other taxes - Horse tax (chief’s car), tax for the traditional
       skirt of the chief, palace and many others.
    2.11.   Cala University Students Association and Siyazakha Land and
            Development Forum


    Cala University Students Association (CALUSA) and Siyazakha’s
    submission of Tsengiwe case study illustrated a need for the repeal of
    the BAA. The submission showed that the BAA gave birth to Tribal
    Authorities that were different from people’s local customs. The local
    custom and practice in Cala was to elect their own headman. But the
    Eastern Cape Provincial Leadership and Governance Act of 2005 forbid
    this practice.


    The submission illustrated the tensions and conflicts in many communal
    areas in the former homeland areas as is the case of Tsengiwe,
    Sakhisizwe Local Municipality in the Eastern Cape. On one hand,
    traditional leaders are bestowed with legislative powers to control and
    manage development processes; and on the other hand, municipalities are
    charged with responsibilities of facilitating economic development and
    delivery of basic services to all citizens of South Africa. These
    institutions often find themselves in conflict.


    CALUSA and Siyazakha elaborated on tensions existing between the TLGFA
    and other legislation on local government. They emphasised a need to
    clarify roles of municipalities and chiefs at a local level. Their
    greatest concern was that whilst the Constitution seeks to entrench
    democracy by encouraging direct community participation, TLGFA gives
    more powers to Chiefs.


    2.12.   Bakgatla Ba Kautlwane


    The submission stressed the frustrations by Bakgatla Ba Kautlwane who,
    under the apartheid government, were forced into the authority of the
    Bakgatla Ba Kgafela (paramount chiefs). The authority of the Bakgatla
    Ba Kgafela was imposed on the Ba Kautlwane people. The impacts of being
    wrongfully subjected to other chiefs were that:


      ← Their land restitution claim was registered under the Bakgatla Ba
        Kgafela who do not have legitimate restitution claim on the claimed
        land.
      ← Misuse of revenue generated from mineral resources. The proceeds
        do not benefit the broader community of Ba Kgatla, but the Chief.


    They key message from the Bakgatla Ba Kautlwane was that they were
    concerned that some of the new legislation such as the TLGFA entrenches
    the BAA by reinforcing the status of some Chiefs on people who do not
    recognise them. They argued that those kinds of laws make it difficult
    for people like them to challenge abuse/s of power.


    2.13.   South African National Civic Organization – Eastern Cape


    SANCO welcomed the repeal of the BAA but raised concerns about some of
    the ‘cruel and unscrupulous’ pieces of legislation that emanated from
    the BAA. Those pieces of legislation included the TLGFA, CLARA, TCB and
    the Eastern Cape Provincial Traditional Leadership Act of 2005. It
    argued that those pieces of legislation were based on the old defunct
    and notorious apartheid laws. Major concerns revolved around the
    traditional authorities that remained untransformed. Despite provisions
    of the manner of composition of traditional councils in the TLGFA,
    SANCO expressed concerns with regards to the election of traditional
    councils, imposition of levies and betterment claims. It presented
    examples of areas where these processes are flawed and the effects of
    BAA will be felt long after it has been repealed; more especially in
    areas such as Qawukeni, Tsholomnqa, Mooiplaas and Kwelera, Kolomane
    village, and Gwatyu. SANCO recommended that parliament should repeal
    the BAA and seek measures to amend the TLGFA and TCB.


    2.14.   Ms. Maria Mateza


    Ms. Mateza, a trained black female farmer, bought a piece of
    agricultural land in 1983. The land did not form part of any
    traditional authority. Realising that Ms. Mateza owns that land, the
    Chief of Gcina Tribal Authority began claiming that he owned the same
    land on which she farmed and she was evicted. She was informed that as
    a woman she could not own any land. She attempted in vain to claim the
    land in terms of the Restitution of Land Rights Act, 22 of 1994.
    However, she was informed that government only took claims of people
    who were dispossessed by Whites. In 1990s, she was promised financial
    compensation but she found it unsatisfactory as a farmer. She now lives
    in a shack, a life that she is unaccustomed to. She blames this on the
    ruthless chiefs and the fact that she is a woman. She urged parliament
    to repeal the BAA in its entirety.


    2.16.   Ilizwi Lamafama Small Farmers Union (ILSFU)


    Ilizwi Lamafama Small Farmers Union (ILSFU) represented 3000 members
    from 44 villages in Buffalo City, Ngqushwa, Amahlathi and Nkonkobe
    Municipalities. They supported the repeal of the BAA. However, their
    major concern related to the many problems that will continue even
    after the repeal of the Act. Those problems include: the powers of
    Chiefs as legislated by the TLGFA. ILSFU presented experiences of its
    members with regards to elections of traditional councils. For example,
    the AmaNdlambe Tribal Authority elected the 40% component of the
    traditional council from the 60% submitted by the Chief Makinana. They
    submitted that if parliament repeals the BAA, communities will still
    remain with the very problematic BAA structures. They therefore urged
    parliament to repeal the BAA as well as its structures.


    2.17.   Access to Ancestral land by Ramunangi Family


    The submission by the Ramunangi family highlighted the issue of
    disputes around access to ancestral sacred site. According to the
    family tradition and customs, the site is very important for
    communication with their ancestors and God. The tribal authority,
    associated with the BAA, has permitted development of a picnic site on
    this piece of land. The development is interfering with the cultural
    and religious practices of the Ramunangi family.  The family argued
    that the TLGFA gives powers to traditional councils, which make it
    difficult for the rural poor to challenge the decisions of the tribal
    authorities/traditional councils.


    2.18.   Legal Resources Centre


    The repeal of the Black Authorities Act signals one of the significant
    final steps in removing the traces of parliamentary sovereignty and
    ‘indirect rule’ from democracy. However, if the repeal is to be more
    than a mere symbolic act, it is crucial that the Act that fills the
    void left by the repeal be true to the principles of our constitutional
    democracy. The repeal should, as far as possible, ensure that the
    damage caused by the BAA is undone.


    The LRC referred the committee to the ANC 52nd National Conference
    Resolutions (Polokwane), particularly resolution 84 under social
    transformation. The resolution noted the importance of strengthening
    the voice of rural South Africans, empowering poor communities and
    building the momentum behind agrarian change and land reform. It also
    advocated for democratization of allocation of customary land in a
    manner that empowered rural women and supported the building of
    democratic community structure at village level.


    The LRC further drew a link between some new legislation and the BAA,
    particularly the TLGFA and the TCB. The TLGFA allows for the tribal
    authorities established under the BAA to continue. The LRC submitted
    that the BAA did not represent living customary law and unless that
    happens, any new legislation will be unconstitutional. Furthermore, the
    TCB links to the BAA in the sense that it defines the traditional
    leader as presiding officer, representation of parties by a Spouse, and
     provides no right to opt out. The LRC urged parliament to consider a
    process of meaningful engagement by relevant parliamentary portfolio
    committees on these issues or else the legacy of the BAA will live
    continuously.


    3.      Key issues emerging from consideration of the Bill and public
    hearings


    Having considered the Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill [B 9 – 2010],
    the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform welcomed
    the repeal of the Black Authorities Act, 1951. In addition, submissions
    from interested members of the public and other organizations also
    showed widespread support for the repeal of the Black Authorities Act.
    The repeal of the Black Authorities Act was also seen as one of the
    significant final steps in removing traces of parliamentary sovereignty
    and indirect rule from democracy. However, the committee remained
    concerned with the legacy of the Black Authorities Act, 1951.


    The following section summarises some of the pertinent issues that the
    committee considered when deliberating the Black Authorities Act Repeal
    Bill:
     • The Black Authorities Act gave the State President the authority to
       establish “with due regard to the native law and custom” tribal
       authorities for African tribes as the basic unit for administration.
       Those tribal authorities have now been transformed into traditional
       councils for the purposes of Section 28 of the Traditional
       Leadership Governance Frameworks Act, Act No. 43 of 2003.  The
       Traditional Leadership Governance Frameworks Act, 2003 entrenches
       the apartheid era tribal boundaries and authorities in rural areas.


     • Tribal authorities/Traditional Councils were given extensive powers
       over the lives of the rural people. Submissions by the
       representatives of rural communities illustrated how rural people,
       under the current system, are subjected to different kinds of levies
       by the tribal authorities; for example, the so-called ‘car levy’ for
       the chief, development tax, and many other forms of levies and
       taxes. It emerged that the Traditional Leadership Governance
       Frameworks Act, 2003 perpetuates these structures and their
       unaccountable powers that were created by the Black Authorities Act,
       1951.


     • In deciding on the Communal Land Rights Act, the Constitutional
       Court raised concerns with regards to the reliance on the Black
       Authorities Act, 1951’s tribal authorities and boundaries as a basis
       for post-apartheid land reform. The Traditional Leadership
       Governance Frameworks Act, 2003; Communal Land Rights Act, 2004;
       Traditional Courts Bill [B 15 – 2008] adopted the Black Authorities
       Act model of authority and jurisdiction.


     • Implications of the Traditional Courts Bill are that the senior
       traditional leaders would have land administration powers, executive
       land use management powers, as well as law-making and dispute
       resolution powers. Centralisation of all decision making powers to
       the senior traditional leader retains the Black Authorities Act
       model of centralisation that recognised only a nominal role for the
       councilors and no role for the community.


     • Discrimination of women on access to land in their own right as well
       as the right to represent themselves during proceedings of the
       traditional courts were some of the critical issues submitted by the
       members of communities to the committee.


    4.      Recommendations


    The Portfolio Committee having considered the Black Authorities Repeal
    Bill [B 9 – 2010] makes the following recommendations to the National
    Assembly:


    • To repeal the Black Authorities Act, Act No. 68 of 1951.
    • To initiate a legislative review process for the various pieces of
      legislation that entrenches the provisions of the BlackAuthorities
      Act, 1951 and these pieces are Traditional Courts Bill [B 15 – 2010]
      and Traditional Leadership Governance Frameworks Act, 2003.
    • To refer pertinent issues related to the legacy of the Black
      Authorities Act, 1951 to the relevant portfolio committees


