---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 02 September 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-09-02
---

THURSDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:08.

The Deputy Chairperson (Ms T C Memela) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

               NO NOTICES OF MOTION OR MOTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, I have
been informed that the Whippery have agreed that there will be no notices
of motion or motions without notice. Before we proceed, I have to read out
the rulings. [Interjections.]

Mr A WATSON: Deputy Chairperson, on a point of order: I have realised that
we are starting 10 minutes late and I have not heard any explanation from
the Chair. Is there a reason why this House is not adhering to stipulated
times any longer?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): With due respect, hon
Watson, the delay was because some of the Ministers had not arrived.
[Interjections.] Hon Watson, I am still talking. Can you give me a chance
to answer? Is that accepted? Thank you. It was not of my making. We had to
have those Ministers here to answer the questions.

Mr A WATSON: With all due respect to the Deputy Chair, that was not a
reason for the House to start late. The House should start at the
stipulated time. If the Ministers are not here then we should carry on with
those who are. I happened to see that one of the Ministers was early.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Again, hon Watson, I
have made a ruling and everybody has to accept it. It is not because they
were not prepared to come in. If I can give you an example, Minister
Shiceka is not well, but today he has taken it upon himself to be available
to answer questions. May we proceed?

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, I was not criticising, but I just said we did not
get the reason. You have only given the reason now after my point of order.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, I am
saying this for the final time. I am not going to be drawn into unnecessary
debates, and that ends whatever anybody wants to say from now on. I thank
you.

                               MOTION DEFERRED

                               (Announcement)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): At the same time, I
would also like to explain that the motion on the Order Paper will be
deferred to a later date, until the administrative processes are in place
for the implementation of the scrutiny mechanism.

             OBJECTION RAISED ON 4 JUNE 2010 IN TERMS OF RULE 47

                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): There are some rulings
that I am supposed to give. Hon Watson, one of those concerns you.

The first ruling is on the objection by the hon Harris, which was based on
Rule 47. This was during the plenary of 4 June this year.

Rule 47(1) provides that:

  No member, while addressing the Council, may reflect upon any decision of
  the Council taken in the same annual session, except for the purpose of
  moving that such decision be amended or rescinded.

Mr Harris averred that a motion similar in substance had already been moved
in the Council and now appeared before the line on the Order Paper. He
further requested that the motion be ruled out of order.

After perusal of the records of the Council, I would like to inform the
House that a motion similar in substance has not been moved. Since there is
no evidence in support of the point of order raised by Mr Harris, I
therefore rule that Mr Maine’s motion was not in contravention of Rule 47.
However, since the motion was objected to prior to Mr Harris’s raising his
point of order, it will become a notice of motion and will be printed in
full on the next Order Paper.

  POINT OF ORDER RAISED ON 4 JUNE 2010 IN REGARD TO NOTICE OF MOTION BY HON
                                 DE VILLIERS

                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, I would
like to make a ruling on a point of order raised in regard to the notice of
motion of the hon De Villiers during our plenary on 4 June 2010. I want to
remind hon members that, whilst giving notice of a motion, Mr de Villiers
referred to Mr Theuns Botha as the hon “Minister”. The Chief Whip then
offered an amendment to the notice by proposing that the word “Minister” be
replaced by the words “Minister of the Executive Council”, MEC. The Chief
Whip stated that according to the Constitution of the country, there are
only national Ministers, and that the national Constitution is above any
provincial constitution.

I would like to refer the House to the national Constitution. Section 142
of the national Constitution authorises a provincial legislature to pass a
constitution for that province.

Section 143(1) requires that a provincial constitution be consistent with
the national Constitution. Further, a provincial constitution may provide
for, among others, provincial legislative and executive structures that
differ from those provided for in the national Constitution.

Section 144 requires the Constitutional Court to certify that a provincial
constitution was passed in accordance with section 142 and that its text
complies with section 143 of the national Constitution.

The Western Cape provincial legislature passed a provincial constitution.
The Constitutional Court accordingly certified the provincial constitution
as being consistent with the national Constitution. Section 42 of the
provincial constitution provides that the provincial Cabinet should consist
of the premier and provincial Ministers appointed by the premier. It is
common cause that in other provinces the executive structure consists of
the premier and members of the provincial executive as provided for in
section 125 of the national Constitution.

The province of the Western Cape has chosen to depart from this common
practice and, therefore, refers to its members of the provincial executive
council as provincial Ministers. In my view, this is the executive
structure as authorised by the national Constitution.

Therefore, I would like to conclude that Mr De Villiers was correct in
referring to Mr Theuns Botha as Minister Theuns Botha. However, I would
like to advise that in future, when members are referring to the members of
the provincial Cabinet in the Western Cape, the word “provincial” should
precede the word “Minister”. Thank you.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                                 GOVERNANCE
                                  Cluster 3
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): We will now proceed to
the questions on the Governance cluster. [Interjections.] Order, hon
members! Order!

Mr K A SINCLAIR: I am sorry, Deputy Chairperson, but the hon Adams is
harassing me here. [Interjections.] I’m sorry? No, he said that during the
time that he was still with the National Party ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Okay, let me make a
ruling.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Oh! [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Let me make a serious
ruling. We are actually here for business. Those who want to play should
please do me a favour by leaving the Chamber and playing outside. Thank
you.

I would like to announce that I’ve received a request from the Minister in
the Presidency - National Planning Commission that we take his question
first, as he is expected to attend a funeral. I hope nobody is going to
oppose that. Thank you.

MINISTERS:

   Position regarding establishment of processes to facilitate interaction
                             with regard to MTEF

70.   Mr T D Harris (DA) asked the Minister in  the  Presidency  -  National
      Planning Commission:


      Whether any processes have been established to facilitate interaction
      between the National Planning Commission, the Economic Advisory Panel
      of the Department of Economic Development and the National Treasury
      with regard to the existing Medium-Term Expenditure Framework which
      informs the Budget process; if not, why not; if so, what processes?
      CO398E

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Deputy
Chairperson and hon members, good afternoon. Thank you for the question,
hon Harris. The hon Harris asked about whether we have set up any
communication and interaction with a panel appointed by a ministerial
colleague. Madam Chair, when the hon Harris gives us his attention, then we
can reply to his question. If I have it, then I shall proceed. Thank you.
[Interjections.] I did speak through the Chair. If you had been listening,
you would know, hon member. I said, “Madam Chair”. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Minister, please
take your seat.

Mr T D HARRIS: Chair, on a point of order: I need to justify that I was
simply reviewing the question as the Minister was talking about it. That
was the only thing, and if he was talking through you, then I will respond
through you and say that I am paying full attention to his reply.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Harris, may I plead
with you? Be a good hon member as you have ... [Inaudible.] [Laughter.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Thank you
very much, Deputy Chairperson. The question is one whose relevance I don’t
understand. The National Planning Commission comprises 25 people, other
than me. I am a full-time member of the executive. Then, 25 part-time
commissioners were appointed in terms of a presidential minute as an
executive order. The names of the individuals were published and they were
effectively sworn in by the President.

The National Planning Commission has a special status. Many of the
Ministers have all manner of advisory groups. I am sure that Minister
Shiceka here has advisory panels on all manner of issues. In my previous
life as the Minister of Finance I had all kinds of advisory groups and some
have statutory functions, others not. Why the hon Harris thinks that there
is a need to equate the National Planning Commission with a committee
appointed by one Minister, I don’t quite understand.

As for relevance to the medium-term planning framework, planning remains
the responsibility of the National Planning Commission, but every line
function has its own planning responsibilities.

As for budgeting issues, these are the decisions taken by the Minister of
Finance and he is advised by the nonstatutory inter-ministerial committee
called the Ministers’ Committee on the Budget, of which I as the Minister
responsible for planning am part. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Before we proceed, may
I make an announcement that the Minister of Women, Children and People with
Disabilities is out of the country, which means that there won’t be answers
to those questions?

Order! Would the hon Rasmeni and Adams please remain with us? Thank you.

The other Minister who is not available is the Minister for the Public
Service and Administration. So, there are two Ministers who won’t be able
to answer questions.

Mr D V BLOEM: Thank you very much for the explanation. Is there any reason
for their not coming to answer questions? I’ve heard you say that the
Minister of Women, Children and People with Disabilities is abroad. Can we
please get an explanation regarding the absence of the other Minister,
Deputy Chairperson?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, I have
already said that these two are not available and that is how far I can go.
Thank you. Can we proceed? Are there any follow-up questions?

Mr T D HARRIS: Deputy Chairperson, I understand that the Minister has made
a technical response to my question that there need not be interaction
between the National Planning Commission and the advisory panel to the
Minister of Economic Development. But, you will allow me to ask, therefore:
If a decision is taken by the Minister of Economic Development and/or the
National Treasury in terms of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework and
that decision is not compatible or does not comply with the decision taken
by the National Planning Commission, is there a process whereby the
deadlock may be broken, for example by requiring presidential intervention
or some other process to solve a contradiction between two planning
functions, between the Minister in the Presidency’s planning function and a
similar kind of planning function that may exist in Economic Development or
in the Treasury? Thank you.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Deputy
Chairperson, the National Planning Commission has the responsibility
articulated in the revised Green Paper which has been through a
parliamentary process in terms of which it has certain obligations. Other
Ministers do not have a similar kind of advisory power. The powers of the
National Planning Commission are, in fact, sometimes to contradict the
executive and sometimes to advise decision-making processes. But because
the individuals who are members of the National Planning Commission are
not, apart from me, themselves part of the executive, they don’t have any
executive powers. However, they have a very special status because of the
nature of the executive decision taken by His Excellency the President in
appointing them.

The same doesn’t apply to panels appointed by ministerial colleagues. So,
the Minister of Economic Development can’t say, “Well, you can’t take a
decision like that because my panel says this.” This is why I distinguish
between that and the Ministers’ Committee on the Budget, which is a
committee of Ministers who sit and engage with the Minister of Finance on
matters relating to the Budget. As it happens, Minister Shiceka and I are
both members of that committee. We probably meet six to eight times a year
and we engage on a whole range of issues. We can advise, but ultimately the
decision is that of the Minister of Finance. When one is dealing with the
National Planning Commission, one knows that it will be required to publish
its research outputs, etc, and it has a particular status.

So, through you, Deputy Chair, I want to request the hon member Harris not
to conflate issues because I know that this story in the press has somehow
assumed the status of equity between a panel appointed by one Minister and
the National Planning Commission. My plea is simply not to give that story
legs, because it is without substance in law or in fact. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I now call upon the
Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs.
[Interjections.] No. [Interjections.] He said no.

Mr T D HARRIS: Madam Chairperson, I do have my hand up.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): You didn’t.

Mr T D HARRIS: Chairperson, sorry, my hand was up, if you will allow me
another question. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): You did that.

Mr T D HARRIS: Well, I did that.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): You did that!

Mr T D HARRIS: Deputy Chair, may I please ask another question?
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I am asking for an
apology from you,hon  Harris. Hon Harris, you said that.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, a point of order.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): You didn’t put your
hand up.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, a point of order.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): And I was about to ask
if there was any further question. [Interjections.]

Mr A WATSON: I am rising on a point of order.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Yes, Mr Watson.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Honourable ...

Mr A WATSON: You cannot ask for an apology when you did not ask the House,
or give the House the opportunity to ask follow-up questions. Mr Harris’s
hand was waving and you did not ask the House. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson, I am now
addressing Mr Harris. Thank you. Hon Harris, do you have a follow-up
question?

Mr T D HARRIS: Yes, I do. Thank you, Deputy Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Okay.

Mr T D HARRIS: Deputy Chair, I believe I have already expressed my follow-
up question in my first follow-up but, as a second follow-up, setting aside
the advisory committee to the Minister of Economic Development, what if a
ministerial decision by the Minister himself or perhaps the Minister of
Finance himself, contradicts a long-term plan as developed by the Minister
in the Presidency’s planning commission? My question is: How does the
deadlock-breaking function occur? Thank you.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: It is
actually a new question, but I will respond to it. Deputy Chair, ultimately
you have to take the approach that allows for consensual decision-making. I
don’t think that matters are that fixed and firm ever, and in the short
period that I have been a member of Cabinet, I don’t know that we’ve ever
had to vote on a decision.

There is a point of consensus and decision-making. One of the issues
articulated in our Green Paper, and certainly dealt with by the National
Planning Commission since, is that if you want the National Planning
Commission to function properly, then it needs to be beyond the time range
of decisions that the executive takes.

Let me cite an example. Minister Shiceka and I would be working along with
the Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform, the Minister of Water
and Environmental Affairs, and the Minister of Human Settlements in a
process to try to deal with spatial planning. Space is one of the issues
that still have a large overhang from apartheid. The poor, primarily black
people, live far from their places of work. This still continues. You need
only look at the interrelationship between places along Moloto road —
kwaMhlanga and others — and Pretoria, and the amount of time that people
spend travelling. In dealing with the issue, it is incumbent upon the
National Planning Commission to understand that we have to look at the
longer term and set a series of normative conditions for that. Minister
Shiceka, in working with the two provinces under local authorities, which
would be Gauteng and Mpumalanga, would need to deal with some of the
spatial planning norms that are immediate.

In understanding those relationships, it is also important that we are able
to work through this, so that in the long-term interests of the country we
are able to communicate collegially that a lock-in of a bad decision would
have consequences. That’s how we have to work through it. It is taking
Chapter 3 of the Constitution, which is about co-operative governance and
premised largely on the interrelationship between the spheres of
government, but understanding that collegially we also have a
responsibility towards each other.

This arises in a myriad of areas. If the Minister of Public Enterprises was
heavily involved in coal fire power as the only option into the future, it
would certainly have an impact on the international commitments we have
made on climate change. We are looking at these issues and collegially have
to be able to deal with them, so that the trade-offs are understood in the
decisions in the short term.

Our interests are these. Because we are not involved in executive
decisions, executive functions of government normally defined, we are out
there ahead of the curve, if you wish. We have a responsibility to work
collegially and mostly behind the scenes so that we can all take these
decisions together. Thank you.

 Number of employees dismissed and allowed to re-enter municipal employment
62.   Mr K A Sinclair (Cope) asked the Minister for Co-operative  Governance
     and Traditional Affairs:

     Whether any statistics are available on the number of employees who
     were dismissed and allowed to re-enter municipal employment; if not,
     why not; if so, (a) from which municipalities were these employees
     dismissed and (b) what disciplinary action has been taken against
     these employees?                                   CO384E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, I must express the fact
that I am privileged to be invited to speak here. It is the first time that
I am speaking in public. I said I couldn’t miss coming to speak in the
NCOP, irrespective of my state of health. As long as I am able to talk I’ll
come and speak here – even though one is coming from the jaws of death! But
I have survived and I am here now!

On the question put by hon Sinclair on the issue of whether we have
statistics in a register of people who were dismissed from one municipality
and have gone to another, the response is that there is no requirement or
obligation in terms of statutory requirements that a municipality must keep
records of dismissed persons.

What is happening is that we have identified the problem; we have submitted
the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act to the National Assembly where
we are amending that. We want to ensure in regulation that if you are
dismissed from one municipality because of wrongdoing, you can’t be
employed by another municipality.

As we speak, it is happening. For example, in one municipality, called
Moretele, an employee stole money and a decision was taken by the High
Court in Mafikeng about the punishment of this employee. This employee
thereafter applied for work at Kungwini. He was employed at Kungwini,
without any checking — a person who is a thief, having been found guilty by
a court of law!

We are saying therefore that we are addressing the issue, but at this point
in time there is no legislative requirement, which means therefore there
are no statistics available in municipalities. Thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: This is through you, Deputy Chair, to the hon Minister. I
hope it’s not going to be out of context here. We have recently had a case
where a municipal manager from the Free State — one of the municipalities
there, to be exact Kroonstad, Moqhaka Local Municipality — was just
promptly moved over and he took the position of municipal manager in
Klerksdorp, North West province, and he is now under suspension on an
allegation of mismanagement of funds to the amount of R500 million. Here we
have a classic case which has happened recently. I would just like to ask
the Minister for his comments on that. Thank you.
The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Mr Worth,
what you are raising is something that we discovered last year, that the
municipal manager from Moqhaka was employed at Matlosana. We raised the
matter strongly with the mayor that the gentleman had not performed. On the
basis of his performance in Moqhaka, why was he employed there? We don’t
take decisions about the employment of municipal managers and section 57
managers — it is a decision of the council — but what we can say is that we
were proven right in saying the person was not suitable to be employed.

That is why we have taken a decision in regard to the Bill that we have
submitted to the National Assembly and which will be coming to this House,
that anybody who is employed must be qualified, must be skilled, and so on.
We are setting the criteria for employment.

If that person is employed, we are also saying the municipality must give a
report to the MEC for local government and the Minister for Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs. In that report, if we find that
procedures were violated or flouted, or the individual concerned is not
properly qualified as we would want, the MEC must intervene within 14 days
of having this matter come to his or her attention. If the MEC cannot
intervene within 14 days, the Minister must intervene and ensure that that
situation is corrected.

We are trying to ensure that local government is staffed with
professionals. We want to avoid a situation in which we employ people for
reasons other than the skills and contribution that they will make, because
they are bringing local government into disrepute by not being able to
deliver what is required. Therefore, in the case of Matlosana we are
monitoring the situation very closely and we are happy that there is a new
mayor there – he was a member of the National Assembly — who is promising
to ensure that he gives direction. Thank you very much, Deputy Chair.

Mr D B FELDMAN: Hon Deputy Chair. I would just like to follow up on hon
Sinclair’s question. The Minister is referring to the future, what is going
to happen. I think the second part wasn’t answered. What disciplinary steps
will be taken against those who have already committed fraud or have stolen
money? I would like to know whether there is a process going on. Thank you
very much.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, of course, in every municipality it is expected of and it is
incumbent upon that institution that it take disciplinary action against
people who have violated the rules of the game. That is happening in regard
to this issue.

The question that was raised was: Are there any statistics on people who
have been dismissed by one municipality and employed by another? Therefore,
the hon member is putting a new question completely concerning the issue
that we are raising here, but to us it is immaterial; we’ll respond to it.
That is why I’m saying from our point of view that the issue that has been
raised by the hon member is that this has been taken to all the people who
have violated the law. In fact, we are looking at monitoring the situation,
because we are saying that we want to stop a situation where you are
employed by a municipality, you commit a crime — which is a problem — and
then you are employed by another municipality. We want to ensure that, not
only in the municipalities but also in other spheres of government. We are
saying that the employees who undermine government by whatever action must
be blacklisted and not be employed by government again. Thank you.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Hon Deputy Chairperson, in regard to section (b) of
Question 62 by hon Sinclair, I would like to ask the Minister this. It says
there: “what disciplinary action has been taken against these employees?”
My problem is that very often a golden handshake is offered for the
employee to leave and due process of disciplinary action does not take
place. What action is being taken to prevent this? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, on the issue of golden handshakes, since I came into the Ministry I
have said that no official must be given a golden handshake when they have
committed a crime.

Secondly, nobody who resigns can be allowed to resign without facing the
consequences of their actions. It happened in Tshwane — the municipal
manager wanted to leave and get a golden handshake, but we refused. In many
municipalities we have said no. If it comes to our attention we say no,
they should face the consequences and be disciplined so that we know their
fate and they don’t go while having a cloud hanging over their head because
we don’t know what has happened. From our point of view, we believe that
golden handshakes, if you have committed wrong things, cannot be allowed
and cannot be justified in public.

The third thing is that we must make sure that you are disciplined if you
have committed something, so that your name is cleared or you are found
guilty. Thank you very much, Chair.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Madam Deputy Chairperson, one hears the argument of the
hon Minister and it’s fine to give that type of direction, but in reality
local government is an independent sphere of government. In terms of the
remarks that the Minister has now made, he can have the best intentions but
if the local government decides to pay those officials golden handshakes
there is very little that he can do. What is his response to that?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Well, hon
Mr Sinclair, I am told you have been in the NCOP for some time. One of the
things that is supposed to be known by a member of the NCOP is Chapter 3 of
the Constitution. That is co-operative governance. That part does not talk
about independence; it is about being interdependent and autonomous. There
are two different things there. There is no independence of local
government – it is autonomous and interdependent.

In responding to your issue let me say – and you must check the
Constitution — we are putting it into law. That legislation is going to be
tabled in this House and debated.

We are saying there must be interventions and, to be honest and frank with
you, I think when we came up with the local government level, we gave so
much to them. We created fiefdoms — 283 of them across the country — that
is why we have these problems. We are trying to address that because in
South Africa we have one country. Therefore, we can’t have this situation
where every person who is in local government wants to be a boss who cannot
be touched by other spheres of government, because you bring the government
as a whole into disrepute.

Therefore, I’m saying we are very clear about this, determined and
committed to ensuring that local government is really dealt with in a
proper way. Whatever may have been committed in the past, we are trying to
address it now. We are going to intervene; there is no doubt in our minds.
Thank you, Deputy Chair.

 Plans to enhance municipal contribution through local economic development
63.   Mr K A Sinclair (Cope) asked the Minister for Co-operative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs:

     Whether, with regard to the problems that have been identified with
     the local government, his department has put any further plans in
     place to enhance municipal contribution to (a) job creation and (b)
     sustainable livelihoods through local economic development; if not,
     why not; if so, (i) what economic development plans are in place to
     ensure sustainable job creation through municipal contribution and
     (ii) how will this be (aa) monitored and (bb) implemented?
           CO385E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, the interventions that we are making already in regard to local
economic development are quite serious, because the revenue for
municipalities has gone down. This situation has been compounded by the
fact that there was the problem of the global recession.

When revenues for municipalities in South Africa were conceptualised in
terms of intergovernmental fiscal relations, the thinking was that 95% of
the revenue of municipalities was going to be generated by them. Only 5% of
nationally raised revenue would be due to them, which they get. But the
reality, as we speak, is that almost 40% of municipalities’ income is
dependent on grants. Others are almost 100% dependent on money from other
spheres of government. Clearly, something has to be done.
I can tell you that we have not managed to crack local economic development
in South Africa over the past 16 years. It has been seen more as tenders,
and so on, than actual utilisation and empowerment of people on the ground.

There are two things that we are doing. The first one is that we are
involved in a programme called the Community Works Programme. We have an
amount of about R500 million, where we are looking at intervening in areas
of municipalities to ensure that people are able to create jobs, and that
jobs are there on the ground.

The first intervention is that we are looking at a situation where, by
2014, there must be at least two wards per municipality. We must be able to
have that.

The second intervention is in regard to the co-operatives. We are saying
that if you read the Local Government Turnaround Strategy, it is very
clear: It says that there must be a co-operative in every ward, a co-
operative where people will say that these are the resources that they have
— land and other things — and how they are using them to generate income
rather than waiting for the big truck of government to deliver services.

They are asking, “What can we do in our own area of jurisdiction?” And
government must be able to help there because in the past people were
helping themselves, but today people are waiting for the government for
everything, including disciplining their children! Clearly, we are building
a society of lazy people who can’t do things on their own, and that could
make us uncompetitive across the globe.

That is why we are saying we want to come up with co-operatives in every
ward so that people are able to generate income, looking at the resources
that they have and what they can do that can be useful. We are moving those
programmes so as to ensure that economic development and resources that are
prevalent in local areas are utilised, not by the few but by the majority
of the people of South Africa. They are part of the economic activity; but
as you see them now, they are not.

Those are the two interventions that we are making, and we believe that
they are going to be able to go a long away in ensuring that South Africa
becomes a nation at work. Thank you very much.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Hon Deputy Chairperson, once again, in regard to the
response, the intentions of the Minister and the government are very good,
but in reality, in terms of the evidence that we’ve got, it’s not working,
and it’s not going to work in the future.

Referring to the Expanded Public Works Programme Phase 2, EPWP P2, let me
say it’s good. It’s a good initiative — it must be co-ordinated and it can
work. But in regard to the second one, of co-operatives, I want to ask the
hon Minister if he’s aware that only 12% of co-operatives in South Africa
are functional. Now the department and the Minister want to try to convince
us that to stimulate the local economy it would be better to start new co-
operatives. The question is, do we need more co-operatives or don’t we need
better partnerships with private entrepreneurs and the sectors in the local
towns? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, Mr Sinclair is comparing apples and oranges, in the sense that there
is not a single provincial government and very few municipalities — and far
between — that have taken conscious decisions to establish and create co-
operatives. The only province that did that on a limited scale was KwaZulu-
Natal. Now, you can’t come here and say that this thing has failed. Who has
attempted it? Is it government?

The department has taken a conscious decision, in terms of the Local
Government Turnaround Strategy, that, for the employment of the masses of
South Africans, so that they are part of the economic activity, we’ll take
this route. We’ll utilise all the resources that there are. What we are
talking about when we speak of the private sector is the fact that it is
part of the resources that are available in a ward, because every
institution and business is within a ward. Those are a part of the
resources that will be utilised to ensure that we are going to move
forward. Therefore, from our point of view, we believe that that is the
route to take, and we are going to succeed, working together.

There’ll be a lot of challenges. We’ve studied the issue of the 12% success
rate in regard to co-operatives, and so on, but we understand the
mitigating circumstances and reasons for that. That is why we are saying
that, despite all that, this is the best route. I mean, if you go to many
other countries in the world, such as Italy, their economies are based on
co-operatives, where you ensure that you get economies of scale in whatever
you are doing. From our point of view, Mr Sinclair, that’s what we must do.
Observe us — we have not implemented it before, but we are going to do it.
Thank you very much.

Mr D A WORTH: Hon Deputy Chair, this is again a question to the hon
Minister and my previous chairperson of our committee in this esteemed
House. I hope it’s within the scope of the question on job creation by
municipalities.

A lot of the municipalities employ consultants to do the work and there’s
no skills transfer, whereas if that did not take place, it might take more
people at that municipality, there would be more local skills, and more
jobs would be created. Likewise, they subcontract a lot of the work, from
window cleaning to you name it, where there’s a municipality which could
take direct control, creating jobs locally, probably being able to employ
more people at the same amount. Thanks.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Hon
Deputy Chair, to Mr Darryl Worth, my former colleague on the committee,
we’ve identified what you are saying. It’s not only applicable to
municipalities but to the provincial and national governments as well, and
even to other departments. When you ask officials to do work, they give it
to a service provider who does the work, and they come and give it to you
as if they had done the work themselves. You find that in the process
people don’t develop and hone skills themselves, because they give the work
to outsiders.

We are ensuring that what we are doing in local government specifically is
a skills audit to look at what skills these municipalities have and, on the
basis of that, what they are capable and not capable of doing. We are
therefore looking at assisting them in ensuring that we reduce the number
of consultants, that people are able to do the work, and that with those
employed and paid with taxpayers’ money we will get value for money. That’s
what we are doing.

In that respect, we therefore agree with you, hon Worth. We are saying it’s
something that we are turning around. We hope that before the end of the
year we will have concluded a skills audit in every municipality in South
Africa and, on that basis, we’ll understand the gaps that must be filled
and ensure that we deal with the situation. But we want people to do the
work themselves so that we get value for the money that we are paying.
Thank you very much.

Mr R A LEES: Deputy Chair, through you to the hon Minister: Hon Minister,
you have indicated that you are aware of the dramatic failure of co-
operatives — some 20 000 co-operatives that have failed over the past five
years, I think it is — and that you can do the job better than the other
departments which set up those co-operatives. Could you give us an idea of
the kind of things that you believe you will do which will make those co-
operatives a success, whereas the other ones, the 20 000 odd, have failed?
What would you do differently? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, the first thing that is very important to the masses of our people
is access to finance. That becomes a major problem when you find that
people have ideas and see things that they can do, but they don’t have
access to resources.

The second thing that is important is training. People must be able to be
trained and understand. Besides training, it’s mentoring.

These co-operatives fail because people want to see returns by tomorrow.
You start work today with the co-operatives and want to see profits by
tomorrow. It is so that you are be able to see things. We want to encourage
our people to understand that business is not run like that. Once they have
these resources, they want to buy beautiful cars, move and cruise, go on
holiday, and all that, not understanding that you must be able to reinvest
in business, so that you are able to make more money when you go forward.

We have looked at a myriad of issues that must be attended to to ensure
that we address this problem. What you must actually understand is that the
majority of Africans are not used to business because of the apartheid
legacy. When you had a business, a spaza shop on the corner there, you were
not exposed to business. The areas that are involved in economic activity
are two in the main, one of which is the stokvels and so on. These stokvels
prepare for deaths or to go to church.

The masses getting involved in economic activity does not exist. It means
we must be able engender a spirit of entrepreneurship for people to
understand that business is run differently. That is what we are trying to
do in going forward.

There are many of these things that we think we will do, and we feel that
this is the route that we must take going forward, colleague. We think that
the NCOP and all public representatives must support this initiative. So,
wherever you are in your wards, you must check whether a co-operative is
being established, because all of you here come from a ward. You must
therefore look at this in your own areas to ensure that our people become
active in economic activity. Thank you very much.

Mr O DE BEER: Deputy Chairperson, through you to the Minister: Minister,
you know that economic and industrial development don’t benefit all our
people. Only individuals benefit out of these frameworks. What else can you
come up with so that the broader society will benefit, because all that we
have benefits only an exclusive few people?

You referred to the capacity of local government, which can’t even raise
its own revenue. It is true. But when the new demarcations are considered,
economic hubs in the different municipalities are not considered when we
come with our proposals in our demarcations.

Do you know that in a country like France their system has a bridge to
close the gap between those who have and those who don’t have? If you cross
the bridge, and you can be economically sustainable, then you are able to
help assist someone else. But in South Africa, because we have this culture
of nonpayments and handouts, to me it clearly seems we are going to need
another 20 years to change, to have an impact at the local government
level.

I also agree that maybe a solution, and one system of services to the
public, might partly be pooling skills so that you can deal with the issue
of nonperformance in local government. Thank you very much.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chairperson, I still have to be convinced by anybody who says that co-
operatives don’t involve the broader society, because there everybody is
equal. It’s unlike private entities where you have a situation where some
benefit more than others. Here is a situation where we believe that
everybody is equal. In that respect, the involvement of the masses is what
we are aiming for to ensure that they are part of it, so that the economic
activity is not the preserve of a few.

When you talk about issues of demarcation, if you look at the Act that
deals with demarcation, one of the criteria is to look at the economic
nodes, and I think that’s all you are doing. The problem is not with the
demarcation; the problem is with our being able to crack local economic
development to ensure that people, as South Africans, are involved in the
economic activity of this country. That is why we are raising this issue.

Let me give two examples. In South Africa, 60% of the red meat comes from
the O R Tambo District Municipality area. But I can assure you that the
O R Tambo area is a poor area in South Africa because people have not seen
value in actually having these cattle. To them cattle must grow and be old,
and zingabinamazinyo [become toothless] and then to them they benefit. They
want to look at them. They don’t look at them in a modern way and say that
they should ensure that they look after the cattle that they have, and so
on.

If you look at that O R Tambo district, it is the richest amongst South
African districts in terms of the land – the land is rich – but the people
are not utilising the resources that they have in order to be able to move
forward.

They always look at umlungu, ndiy’ eGoli [the white people, or going to
Johannesburg to find work].

They must go to the mines and be employed. We are saying, “Let’s create
mines wherever we are. We have the land and resources; whatever you have in
your own area, utilise it. Government will give support, mentoring, access
to finance and everything that is required, but do the work wherever you
are.” These are examples that I’m giving; there are many, many examples.

When you go to the mining towns in South Africa, you find that the local
people are not benefiting; the people who are benefiting are outsiders,
whilst they have resources in their own areas. We want to change all that.
That’s what we want to do in going forward. Therefore, from our point of
view, we are saying we want to close the gap, as you are correctly pointing
out, between the haves and have-nots. Thank you very much.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Sinclair?

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Deputy Chair, it is not a follow-up. It’s not a follow-up;
it’s a question of clarity.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): There have been follow-
ups and I’ve exhausted the follow-up questions.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Madam, with due respect, I indicated that it’s not a
follow-up. It’s a ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I did hear that, but
right now we’re dealing with follow-ups to the questions, and this question
was actually put by you. Can I proceed?

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Madam, I just want your ruling on the procedure. With due
respect, I want to raise some statistics that are very questionable with
the Minister. I just want to engage him on that.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): May I ask you to put it
in writing? Thank you.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Thank you, Madam.

  Methods adopted by government to deal with dramatic increase in number of
                                   rodents
64.    Mr  M  W  Makhubela  (Cope)  asked  the  Minister  for   Co-operative
     Governance and Traditional Affairs:

     Whether the government has encouraged municipalities and other local
     government authorities to build suitably designed and sited nesting
     boxes for breeding owls to encourage natural and continuous control of
     rodents in areas where they are proliferating; if not, how is the
     government dealing with the dramatic increase of rodents in many areas
     of the country, which is posing an enormous health risk; if so, what
     are the relevant details?
                       CO386E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Thank you
very much, Tatana [father]. Wa swi tiva Tatana ... [You know, father ... ]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Excuse me! Excuse me!
Minister, take your seat. Hon Watson, I saw you doing this gesture in my
direction; can you explain why you did that?

Mr A WATSON: You are very, uh ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I’m not blind.

Mr A WATSON: Yes, I did do that, but I was just telling Mr Mashile in front
of me that he is not the Chair. He was trying to make rulings and I told
him that if he wanted to replace you, he should go there and tell you. So I
was protecting you, Madam Chair, not waving at you. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson! Hon Watson,
don’t hide behind that desk.

Mr A WATSON: I kicked the bucket.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Wait, wait, ...

Mr A WATSON: I kicked the bucket, Madam.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Okay. Hon Watson, I
respect you very much. You are a senior citizen; you should be exemplary.
Thank you very much.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, can I just explain, please? I wasn’t hiding. I
kicked the bucket. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Thank you
very much, Deputy Chair. Well, Tatana wa swi tiva [you know, father,] if
you are able to breed owls in a township, bazakuthi uyathakatha [they will
say you are practising witchcraft]! Besides that, you see, owls in an
African community are seen as something that is a bit of a problem when you
have them.
Now, think about when one is breeding them so that they eat pests and rats;
that can become a challenge. Yes, the idea is very attractive. It is also
environmentally friendly because pesticides won’t be used to kill rats.
However, it can be very challenging in African and rural areas because when
an owl is found to be making a noise at the gate, that is something else.

Therefore, we have not moved in that direction. What is happening is that
the pest control systems of municipalities are the ones that are being
used. The requirement is that they must link up with the provincial
department of health when they deal with these issues. That is what is
happening, Tatana, in relation to dealing with the management of rodents.
Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Is there a follow-up
question?

Mr R A LEES: Deputy Chair, is the hon Minister saying to this House that it
is his view that the control of rodents by the use of owls should not be
pursued because of traditional difficulties with that and, if so, does he
believe in these traditional difficulties with owls? [Interjections.]

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Well, the
first thing is that I’m the Minister for Traditional Affairs. As Minister
for Traditional Affairs, I cannot say I don’t believe in traditional
matters. In fact, I’m a believer in traditional matters and I think that is
why I was given this position.

Therefore, whatever we do, we must make sure that it doesn’t antagonise and
alienate the majority of South Africans. In that respect, we must use
methods in relation to what we do that are acceptable to all, in general.
We believe that the pest control systems are a way to go. They have worked
and they must continue to work. We avoid breeding owls. Thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Deputy Chair, this is a comment more than anything else. I
think there is a fantastic opportunity here for job creation by the
municipalities because they can get people to catch the mice to feed the
owls! Thank you. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order, order! Hon
Worth, do I take that as a follow-up question or is it just a statement?

Mr D A WORTH: It is a statement.

Mr T D HARRIS: Deputy Chair, with regard to the Minister’s response to a
follow-up question earlier on, I think the implication was that, as
Minister for Traditional Affairs, he needs to believe these traditional
things. If there is a traditional difficulty, as he said, around having
owls as a pest control mechanism, can I ask: If the Minister had a pest
problem in his own house, would he then reject the use of owls to tackle
those pests in line with his beliefs?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, the issue here is whether we can say all South Africans must breed
owls in order to deal with rodents. That’s the question. I’m saying that
the majority of South Africans won’t favour breeding owls because of the
connotations that are associated with owls generally. Therefore, if someone
requested me to breed owls to deal with rats, I wouldn’t be able to do that
myself. [Laughter.] It’s something that I don’t subscribe to. It can’t be
done actually; it can’t find favour. Therefore, hon Harris, we agree that
maybe the next generation can look into this approach. Thank you.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Hon Deputy Chairperson, I am confused, and since we do
have the Minister for Traditional Affairs here – well, yes, co-operative
governance but it’s traditional affairs that is the problem — would the
Minister mind informing me of the culture around the owl? What happens when
there is an owl, and what’s the dislike in the community? Can he tell me
the story, please?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Okay, okay, order! A
lot of people are now murmuring, “What is it?” Can I ask the Minister to
answer?

Mr A WATSON: There is an owl in the House.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Thank you, hon Watson.
That I understand very well because there is a funny noise going around
here. You said it; I didn’t say it.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, well we are excited to be able to educate the hon member.

Simrhabulise, afumane Umrhabulo ongunombolo-19. [We must educate her, and
give her a copy of Umrabulo volume 19.]

With regard to the issue of owls, in an African community an owl is known
as something that brings bad luck ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): It’s a bad omen.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: ... and
is ill-omened. When you see an owl flying over your house, or at your gate,
that is something which is very serious. You must get up and look for a
traditional healer to cleanse and deal with the issue. That is the view of
the majority of South Africans. That is why I’m saying that whatever we do
as government must find resonance with the majority of the people;
otherwise, if we don’t do that, we will be alienating people who must deal
with the issues. That is why I’m saying we must look at that.

Let me give you an example of things that are a challenge to other groups.
Some people have suggested to me as a Minister for co-operative governance
dealing with local government that the best thing to do — because of the
land space not being available — is to cremate our people instead of
burying them. When I raised that with people, they turned blue, because to
them, the majority, burning a human being is something else because they
want to go to the grave and talk to the remains. Therefore, whatever we do,
we must be sensitive to the majority of our people. That is why we are
raising this owl issue.

You might not believe it, it’s your right. South Africa is a democratic
country that allows people to practise their beliefs without fear, favour
or prejudice. If I believe in it, let me continue. If you don’t, let’s
coexist and understand that there is diversity amongst us. But,
irrespective of that, we must remain united as a nation. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Thank you very much, Deputy Chairperson. Minister, welcome
back from your bed of illness. I’m very happy to see you. Madam, I think
that we are now busy with a topic that belongs to the Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, SPCA, and not here. The Minister is now
being asked to explain about owls, rats and so on. We must consult the SPCA
to come and help on this matter!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, I take it
that that was just a statement.

Mr D V BLOEM: Thank you very much, Madam.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): In that case, I’ll take
the hon Dan.

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Deputy Chair, in view of the fact that there are members
who are experts in the breeding of owls in the House, I would most
certainly volunteer myself to be trained as one of those who would be keen
to do business in the use of owls to track down rodents. However, such owls
which have been hatched and ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Montsitsi, is that
a follow-up question or a statement because ...

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Yes, I’m coming to the question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Can you get to your
question, please?
Mr S D MONTSITSI: Madam Deputy Chair, I’m saying that with such expert
training and the owls that I shall have hatched, I would most certainly use
them in the constituency of hon Harris to track down the rodents there. In
my own constituency it would be a little bit difficult for me to run a
profitable service. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Can we proceed?
[Interjections.] Can we proceed?

   Updating of Land Use Planning Ordinance, 1985 (Ordinance 15 of 1985) by
                                 department

65.    Mr  M  W  Makhubela  (Cope)  asked  the  Minister  for   Co-operative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs:

      Whether his department will (a) initiate a move to request all
      provinces to update the Land Use Planning Ordinance, 1985 (Ordinance
      15 of 1985), that predated the coming into force of the Constitution
      of the Republic of South Africa Act, Act 108 of 1996, and other
      statutes since then and (b) make such ordinances into new legislation
      consistent with the provisions of the Constitution and the new
      statutes; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                             CO387E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Madam
Chair, I think you will recall that land use planning is in Schedule 4 of
the Constitution, meaning that it is part of the provincial governments’
responsibility — and also municipalities — in terms of Schedule 5 of the
Constitution.

In that respect, national government doesn’t have, in terms of the
Constitution, a responsibility for planning as a function. Its task is to
do oversight on what has to be done at that level. Now, in relation to land
use — this is still a misnomer — it is driven and led by the Department of
Rural Development and Land Reform.

The department tried to come with a Bill called the Land Use Management
Bill, LUMB. That Bill was not finalised by the old administration before
2009, and it was shelved. The Department of Rural Development and Land
Reform presented it in Cabinet. It was withdrawn because some people were
not consulted or engaged on it, so we are still engaging them.

That matter is in the pipeline. I don’t know how long the pipe is before
the matter reaches you, but it is coming. From our point of view, as the
Minister was saying, it is something that we are discussing because the
issue of land use patterns is a problem.

For example, traditional leaders take a decision to demarcate land where
people should be living and so forth. You find that they clash with
municipalities. But not only that; you may go to many places and discover
that the land use legislation is not working properly. Let’s take the case
of the land between Pretoria and the airport — land that was rich for
agriculture. This land is being used for housing because it makes a lot of
money.

All those things are things that we think must be dealt with and handled.
From our point of view, as you heard the Minister in the Presidency —
National Planning Commission say, we are working together to ensure that we
manage this thing properly. But it’s a question that is quite serious and
important because it tells us how we should use the land, and for what
purpose going forward. Thank you.

Mr Z MLENZANA: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson. Minister, with our
understanding of the explanation and the predicament that government is
actually put in by the whole question of the legal processes, particularly
the to and fro of legislation, may I ask if there is no thinking around a
moratorium on land use itself? I’m raising this question, Deputy
Chairperson, because the hon Minister will agree with me, particularly in
regard to the small rural towns in the Eastern Cape, that, whilst we are
busy debating, a lot of wrong is being done. This is whilst we are still
waiting for the finalisation of the land use planning. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chairperson, while we are sympathetic to the hon member in relation to the
sentiments expressed and the views espoused, the issue of land use is about
economic activity. If we could put a moratorium on it, it would mean that
the economy must come to a standstill.

The best thing to do, though — which I think is important and maybe you can
follow up on that — is to ensure that the land that is owned by
municipalities is not disposed of, so that we are able to use the land for
strategic purposes going forward. I can assure you, the way land is being
sold at that level creates a lot of problems.

As you were saying, I think that particularly now, when we are going into
the election, some people will be looking for a soft landing. Therefore
they will be looking at the resources that are available and dealing with
those. I think it is a matter that we will consider, ensuring that there is
a moratorium on the disposal of land until we are able to engage in regard
to these questions. That’s what we will consider strongly. Thank you.

     Position regarding conversion of Land Use Planning Ordinances into
                             provincial statutes

66.    Mr  M  W  Makhubela  (Cope)  asked  the  Minister  for   Co-operative
     Governance and Traditional Affairs:

     Whether all the Land Use Planning Ordinances that were passed before
     1994 were converted into provincial statutes; if not, what is the
     position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        CO388E

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Minister, it is
another question from Mr Makhubela.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, we have not engaged provinces to check whether they have changed
their laws. What we know is that generally all the provinces, except the
three which are more urbanised, have not changed their laws. The Western
Cape has its own law around land use. Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal each have a
development planning Act. For all other provinces to be able to approve
things, they are still reliant and dependent on the ordinances.

Therefore, from that point of view, we believe that the Land Use Management
Bill will be able to assist in giving guidance, although it was agreed that
in its current form it was not revolutionary enough. That is why it was
withdrawn in order to be engaged on at that level.

From our point of view we are saying that only three provinces have their
own laws, and the others are still struggling. Thank you very much.

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chairperson, it is not a follow-up but I would like to
commend the Minister for doing such wonderful research and coming up with
the gist of the matter. Minister, we thank you very much for that.

     Investigations into viability and sustainability of municipalities

67.   Mr R A Lees (DA) asked the Minister for  Co-operative  Governance  and
     Traditional Affairs:

     Whether his department has conducted any investigations into the
     viability and sustainability of municipalities; if not, why not; if
     so, (a) which municipalities and (b) what recommendations were made to
     change municipalities?                             CO389E

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, this is the last one, I guess, and we are able to save you from
further torture!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): There are still more
questions.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Of these
questions? All right.

The department has conducted a comprehensive analysis of all municipalities
in South Africa. It is something that is unprecedented and has never been
done before, even at the time of the programmes that were there before.
What we came up with is the state of local government, and if you look at
that report it will tell you what is happening in each municipality.
Subsequent to that was the Local Government Turnaround Strategy, which was
approved by Cabinet in December.

This analysis looks at the root causes of the problems. Amongst the root
causes are a low revenue base and the indigence of our people, as they
don’t have money to pay, as well as the issues of poor economic development
and the conditions in municipalities that are not that good.

Having looked at that, what we are doing now is to categorise
municipalities, because the categories that are used by National Treasury,
and which we and other departments are using, are not the same. We are
saying that there is one co-ordinator of local government in South Africa:
Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs. Therefore, we must ensure
that everybody toes the line and follows what has to be done in relation to
the issue of categorisation of municipalities, so that we can speak the
same language moving forward.

From our point of view, there are quite a number of municipalities that are
viable, but there are also quite a number that are not viable. In fact, we
think that South Africa must discuss this issue, but you can’t discuss the
issues of municipalities without also discussing the provinces, because it
means that you will be discussing governance piecemeal. For instance, do we
need district municipalities in South Africa? They are financially
redundant. Before, they were reliant on the regional services councils,
RSCs, levies but now that the RSC levies are gone, they have become
dependent, like provincial governments, on resources that are raised
nationally.

We are saying all these issues need to be looked at. In KwaZulu-Natal, they
are looking at the matter because they have 61 municipalities. They are
looking at proposing that at least 21 of them must be done away with. Other
provinces are looking at the issue. Therefore, I am saying the viability
issue is something that is a concern to us and that is being looked at
regarding these matters. We believe that we must be able to look at these
things and ensure that we change them, but we won’t do that without
engaging the people who are affected. We believe that the NCOP is amongst
the most important structures to engage on these questions.

Yes, we are making serious changes in local government. The Local
Government Turnaround Strategy is a document that will remain here for
years. Changes that are being made are based on that. It reminds me of the
document that there was in security in the past, called the National Crime
Prevention Strategy. The Hawks, the Scorpions and everything else come from
that document. It was more of a framework within which things happened. It
is like the Local Government Turnaround Strategy.

One of the things that we are doing is amending the Local Government:
Municipal Systems Act. We are also amending the Local Government: Municipal
Property Rates Act. I could not understand why people in rural areas who
have never seen any delivery by government, whether it is water,
electricity or anything, are charged rates. What are they being charged
for? Now we are looking at that, where we are saying that we can’t continue
doing that because people have not seen any development. Government has not
enhanced their properties by developing the area, so on what basis are they
being charged?

We are looking at all those things going forward. We are also looking at a
situation where the ward committees are not toothless structures without
power. We say ward committees must do a lot of things. Amongst others, if
you develop an area and you want to build a school, a clinic or a road, you
must consult your ward committee. Tell them beforehand, as a developer,
what it is that you are going to do. Even after you have finished doing
what you were doing, go to them to let them know that you have finished.

We are saying that developers must not be paid retainer funds without tacit
approval and support from the ward committees. We are giving power to the
people. Government cannot monitor every space where development is
happening. That is what we are doing to ensure that we change things. From
our point of view, we believe that we are making a lot of changes, and we
want to ensure that things happen in South Africa. Thank you very much,
Deputy Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Is that a follow-up
question?

Mr R A LEES: Indeed it is, Madam, and I believe it is my prerogative.
Deputy Chair, through you to the hon Minister: The hon Minister talks about
21 municipalities that are under investigation in KwaZulu-Natal as not
being viable. Could he please tell us which municipalities those are?

In regard to ward committees, we all know that ward committees are
undemocratic structures which are not elected by the people in that ward;
they are elected by whoever happens to turn up at the meeting. Is the
process of giving teeth to these ward committees, which I think is the
expression used by the hon Minister, also going to mean a change in the
Local Government: Municipal Electoral Act to ensure that ward committees
are elected by the voters in a democratic way, as are the other structures
of government in the country? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, on the issue of the ward committees – I think that is your question
– being undemocratic, I am not sure how you define democracy. Do you define
democracy as something that must be in the legislation, in terms of calling
for elections, or do you define democracy as something where people are
consulted by and large, and where they choose to come, or not to come if
they do not want to come? It is part of democracy, because you can choose
to go to a meeting or not; choose to vote or not.

Let’s take the local government elections. The average in terms of voter
turnout is 48%, which is less than 50% plus one when we talk of a simple
majority. Are you saying then that all the councillors that there are are
undemocratic because of the voter turnout that is 48%? The point I’m
putting across here ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I’m sorry to disrupt
you, Minister, but can you sit down? Hon Lees?

Mr R A LEES: Hon Deputy Chair, on a point of order; I asked the Minister a
question. Please ask him to desist from asking me questions directly across
the floor.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, I’m asking the question through the Chair. If you listen to me, you
will hear that I always refer to Madam Chair.

The point that I’m putting across is that democracy, in this case, is a
relative term because only 48% of South Africans, in terms of the trends,
come out to elections, particularly at the local government level.
Therefore, 52% of South Africans do not vote for local government. Now what
do you call that? That is the point that I’m putting across.

The system that will be followed in appointing or in establishing ward
committees is still a matter for debate; the jury is still out. However, we
have concerns that the ward committees at times represent political
parties. Ward committees are supposed to represent sectoral interests — the
issues of the safety of our people, the economy, social development, and so
on. But these structures are sometimes hijacked by other forces, and they
don’t run them in a proper way.

How we are going to counter that is still a matter that is being discussed.
How we are going to ensure that these structures enjoy popular support is
still a matter for discussion. How are we going to ensure that these
structures are accountable to our people? Sometimes they represent their
own jackets! They go to a meeting, come back and do nothing. From our point
of view, it is something that is still being looked at, and we will be
happy if the NCOP itself contributes in enriching the debate. Thank you
very much, Deputy Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, you wanted
to say something earlier. Oh, hon Lees, can I take Mr Bloem because it is
the second time I’ve had to stop him? All right, you may proceed then.

Mr R A LEES: On a point of order, Madam Chair: my question regarding the 21
municipalities in KwaZulu-Natal has not been answered.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: On the 21
municipalities, I don’t have the figures with me here. What you can do is
to write to the member and request to be sent those municipalities. Thank
you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Lees, are you
satisfied? Proceed, hon Bloem.

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chairperson, I like the Minister very much. He is
hands-on and a person who is trying to do things ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, is it a
question or a statement?

Mr D V BLOEM: No, it is a question, Madam.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Okay. Be precise.

Mr D V BLOEM: What I want to hear from the Minister is: In regard to all
these things that he is mentioning now – low income and so forth — does he
have any timeframe? I know he is a hands-on man. Can he give the House a
timeframe as to when he is going to address these problems, because in
local government most of the municipalities are bleeding out there? The
Minister must tell us the timeframe to address these problems. Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, well Baba Bloem, I know that your municipality Moqhaka is in a state
of disrepair. It is in a bad state, that area.

What we are doing is we have signed an agreement with the President that
outlines what we are going to do annually until 2014. Our mandate ends in
2014. Therefore, we are looking at a situation where we can give the
information to the hon member in writing, but only after we have announced
about our agreement with the President, because that is where targets and
timelines are, in regard to what is going to be done by when.

Therefore, in that respect, Mr Bloem, targets are there. The overall one is
2014, but there are steps as to how we arrive at 2014 in relation to
dealing with these issues. We will be able to give you the information in
person, as a former colleague, so that you are able to hold us accountable
on these matters. Thank you very much, Deputy Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Thank you, Minister.
Hon ...

Mr D A WORTH: Worth. Deputy Chair, thank you to the Minister for his
explanation. I hope I’m not repeating myself. There was a stage in the term
of the last Parliament here that there was talk about doing away with
district municipalities. I know there are probably some district
municipalities that are viable, but I think that, of all municipalities,
district municipalities are the most vulnerable because they have such a
low-income base. We’ve got one in the Free State, Gariep, which is made up
of three municipalities, and the district municipality just survives on the
money it gets from central government, while the work is actually done by
these three municipalities. I hope this is going to be given priority, that
they rather be done away with and the councillors be put into various
municipalities. That is one aspect.

The other one very much concerns the operations of this House in terms of
section 139 where a municipality is put under administration. What does the
hon Minister feel about the three months? We have found in the past that we
would go and put a municipality under administration for three months. Then
it would start coming right again, only for it to collapse again six months
later, or there would be further problems. Could we in the context of this
question just have the Minister’s thoughts on that? Thank you very much.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, on the issues of districts, as I said earlier on, we must review the
structures of government, including the NCOP. Does the NCOP as a structure
fulfil what is expected of it? Is the NCOP really representing the
interests of provinces? Now, one of the critical things that is a challenge
to me is when you say that the NCOP is a lawmaking body but the delegations
that must come from provinces must be led by premiers — the executive. Why
is it like that?

On the issue of Salga or organised local government, why does local
government have people here as observers? Why can’t local government have
people here permanently, and then the numbers become better? Will it not
assist the NCOP to deal with many issues if you look at that? If you look
at the districts, should they continue being here? Are they serving in the
way that they were established to do?

You go to some municipalities, and what do you think about them? The same
applies to the provinces. Do we think that the configuration of provinces
as they are still serves the purpose? Let’s take the example of the North
West or Free State. You have 30 members, and out of 30 you take 11 who
become the executive, and 19 remain. The committees are generally up to 16.
There are 16 chairpersons, and you are left with four people who are
ordinary members. The issue is that when they call departments to come to
give an account of themselves — and we have done a study in the North West
— they take 10 to 15 minutes. These members have to go to other committees,
and there is no time. Look at the amount of time that is taken by the
department to prepare to come to the committee and the value thereof that
is added.

All I’m saying is that it goes a long way; I think you will recall in the
previous administration that the Free State proposed in the Constitutional
Review Committee that their numbers should increase. I’m saying that there
should be no holy cows when we look at the structures of government. We
must look at everything and say what we are proposing, what we think will
work. It is in that context, Mr Worth, that you must look at the nature of
districts, even Gariep, the one that you are raising. I know it is poor and
struggling a lot, and I must say that you represent the interests of the
Free State very well. You always look at examples from the Free State when
you speak.

Section 139 is something that we are looking at now. We are coming with a
Bill which is in the draft stage now. This Bill focuses on two areas. There
is section 100, interventions by national government in provinces and,
while we look at support and monitoring, intervention is the last resort,
because it is not done most of the time, although the first thing that
people want is to intervene. This is also the case with section 139,
because if you look at section 139(8), you see it raises the issue that
there must be national legislation to regulate this section in regard to
intervention. That has never been done. Therefore, we are looking at coming
with this law to look at section 100 and section 139. Our basis is support
and monitoring, and an intervention must be a measure of last resort.

The current interventions as they are, looking at them in terms of
successes, are successful, but they are not where we want them to be. We
want to change the approach in the way things are done so that we are able
to ensure that whatever interventions are made are sustainable, but also
that there are early warning systems that will tell us when there are
problems there, and these are not there as we speak. Thank you very much,
Deputy Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I’ve seen the hands.
However, may I at this juncture plead with all the members here not to
leave the Chamber, because after all the questions have been answered,
there will be a briefing in regard to the Provincial Week. Thank you. Hon
Watson, you may proceed.

Mr A WATSON: Deputy Chairperson, through you to the hon Minister, may I
also say that I’m glad to see our old colleague back on his feet. I hope
that he gets completely well very soon.

Chair, the follow-up question I want to pose is in regard to references by
the Minister and members that have asked follow-up questions on district
municipalities and the fact that they have exceeded their sell-by date,
they’ve gone rotten on the shelf, and they should not be there anymore. I
think the noise that I’ve heard, and the views of the Minister, will
support my saying that we should do away with district municipalities – and
not some day but immediately!

My question to the Minister is on the legislation that has been tabled in
Parliament. By the way, the Minister must please bring local government
legislation to this House first and not to the National Assembly, because
they sleep on it and we have to rush through it at the end of day.

The legislation that there is makes no reference to doing away with
district municipalities. My question is: Will the Minister support private
member’s legislation emanating from a member of this House and tabled in
this House to actually change, firstly, the Constitution, where the three
categories of municipalities are described, bringing it down to two and,
secondly, the Local Government: Municipal Structures Act where the
different categories of district municipalities are also described?

If we table a private member’s Bill, and I volunteer to do so, will he
support it? Thank you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Hon
Wattie, you are still very streetwise in the way you approach things,
because what you are doing now is selling me a cat in a bag! How will I
know what the cat looks like before I buy it?

I think in principle we support the thought that we should review things. I
hope that you will be able to sell that idea to the DA because whatever
changes we make, they think that it is because we want to control
everything at the centre, which is not the case. We are open and we are
saying, let’s engage on these matters to check whether they work based on
empirical evidence, not because of what we like.

From our point of view, hon Wattie, what I can promise you is to have a
discussion so that whatever product emerges from that is a product ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Excuse me, Minister.
Hon De Beer, that hon member, could you sit properly in the Chamber? Thank
you.

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: As I
said, hon Watson, it is so that whatever product emerges from that enjoys
the collective wisdom of the parties that are here. In that way, it can go
a long way. But I say, let’s not isolate local government. Let’s look at
the whole system comprehensively so that when we make changes, we make them
once and not in a piecemeal fashion. If we have that discussion, we are
willing to engage on that with pleasure and therefore will be able to take
the process forward. Thank you very much, Deputy Chair.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Deputy Chairperson, I think all of us will agree that the
remarks of the Minister regarding the status of our governance model in
South Africa are quite far-reaching, and we are well aware that various
bodies and institutions are investigating the possibilities.

The question is specifically regarding the Minister’s remark about the
number of provinces, the necessity for districts, and the state of local
governments. Would the Minister admit that the constitutional and
governance model that was agreed to and that has governed us since 1994 is
now dysfunctional?

The MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Deputy
Chair, I have not looked at these matters in order to be able to come to a
conclusion. You know, I’m a person who looks at empirical evidence when we
deal with issues. I have not looked at these matters in order to say that
this model is functional or dysfunctional. I would not be able to come to
that conclusion.

What I’m raising in this House is that we should have a discussion and
debate so that when we come to certain decisions or views that we want to
express, they are based on empirical evidence. That is what I’m calling
for, hon Sinclair. From my point of view I’m saying that we should work
together and not leave any stone unturned. There must be no holy cows when
we look at the structures of governance. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Unfortunately that was
the last chance for further questions, hon Van Lingen.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: I had my hand up all the time, Madam Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I beg your pardon?

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: I had my hand up from the beginning.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): It is unfortunate, hon
Van Lingen, that other people had their hands up before you. That is why I
had to jump from this side to the other side. I hope you will accept that.

Thank you very much, hon Minister. Thank you that in spite of being sick
you honoured our request to come and see us. That brings the business of
the day to a close. Please, no one is supposed to leave, because there is a
briefing.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The Council adjourned at 15:54.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         WEDNESDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Local Government: Municipal Electoral Amendment Bill [B 27 -
             2010] (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Speaker and the Chairperson
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Parliament of the Republic
        of South Africa, Vote 2, for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010, tabled in terms of section 60 of the
        Financial Management of Parliament Act, 2009 (Act No 10 of 2009).

        Correction:    The above entry replaces item 1(a) under Tablings
                  (Speaker and Chairperson) on p 2544 of the ATC of 31
                  August 2010.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
        Rights Commission (SAHRC) for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 167-2010].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Public Protector South
        Africa for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
        2010 [RP 212-2010].

 2. The Minister of Finance
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
        Southern Africa (DBSA) for 2009-2010, including the Report
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 and the Report and Financial Statements
        of the Development Bank of Southern Africa Development Fund for
        2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information of the Development
        Fund for 2009-2010.

 3. The Minister of Science and Technology

                      a) Report and Financial Statements of the Council for
                         Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2009-
                         2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
                         on the Financial Statements and Performance
                         Information for 2009-2010 [RP 194-2010].


 4. The Minister of Basic Education

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Quality
        Assurance in General and Further Education and Training - Umalusi
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.



    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
        Relations Council for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of the Transformation Fund of the Education Labour
        Relations Council for 2009-2010.
 5. The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 25 for 2009-2010 [RP 181-2010].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the iSimangaliso Wetland
        Park for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Biodiversity Institute for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
        Service  for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
        2010 [RP 121-2010].


     e) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National Parks
        (SANparks ) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 208-2010].


    f) Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living Resources Fund
       (MLRF) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
       the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.
                         THURSDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 2 September 2010:


        (a)      Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill [B 9 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Land and
             Environmental Affairs of the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and Fiscal
        Commission (FFC) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 73-2010].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
        Unit (SIU) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 220-2010].
 2. The Minister of Basic Education

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 – Department of
        Education for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 13 for 2009-2010 [RP 93-2010].

 3. The Minister of Higher Education and Training

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 13 – Department of
        Education for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 13 for 2009-2010 [RP 93-2010].

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Submission of complaints with regard to the conduct of the
           Bethlehem Magistrate Court.


           Referred to the Select Committee on Petitions and Member’s
           Legislative Proposals for consideration and report.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces
 1. Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Protocol Amending the
    Convention between the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of
    Sweden, dated 01 September 2010

      The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
      approval by Parliament of the Protocol amending the convention between
      the Republic of South Africa and the Kingdom of Sweden for the
      avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with
      respect to taxes on income, recommends that the House, in terms of
      section 231(2) of the Constitution, approves the said Protocol.

    Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the Protocol Amending
    the Convention between the Republic of South Africa and the Government
    of Ireland, dated 01 September 2010
      The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the request for
      approval by Parliament of the Protocol amending the convention between
      the Republic of South Africa and the Government of Ireland for the
      avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with
      respect to taxes on income and capital gains, with protocol,
      recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
      Constitution, approves the said Protocol.


    Report to be considered.


