---
title: 'National Assembly - 31 August 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-08-31
---

                           TUESDAY, 31 AUGUST 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 7183.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs P TSHWETE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

  That the House debates how to reduce drug and alcohol abuse amongst our
  youth.

Mrs H LAMOELA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move, on behalf of the DA:

  That the House —

     1) debates the contributions of nongovernment organisations to
        government service delivery; and


     2) comes up with solutions as to how to enhance the support that
        government can give to these organisations to further improve
        service delivery.

Mr M E GEORGE: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

  That the House debates the nature and quality of the measures that will
  be put in place to allow learners to catch up on the lost time resulting
  from the present public service strike which saw educators downing tools.

Mr M SWART: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

    That the House –


      1) debates the spending of the Expanded Public Works Programme funds
         and the effect this has on job creation and poverty alleviation;
         and


2) comes up with ways to improve spending.


Mr N J J KOORNHOF: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House discusses whether executive remuneration in the private
   sector is out of control.

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the House -


     1) debates the growing social disaster which has led to hundreds of
        babies being dumped in South Africa this year alone; and


2) considers how the state can intervene to stop this crisis.

Mr A T FRITZ: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates the acute shortage of social workers and educators
  at correctional centres throughout South Africa and its impact on the
  rehabilitation of offenders.

Mrs E M COLEMAN: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates dealing with the challenges that slow down the
   implementation of broad-based black economic empowerment as a vehicle to
   broaden and deracialise the ownership and control of productive assets by
   black people, women and youth.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the inexplicable failure by the Department of
   Labour to investigate the incidence of child labour in our country and
   its failure, therefore, to furnish Parliament with statistics regarding
   child labour which is in contravention of the statutes.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:

   That the House debates South Africa’s role in facilitating Kimberley
   Process approval for Zimbabwe’s Marange diamonds which, according to a
   61-page report by Human Rights Watch issued in June 2009 detailing a
   litany of abuses including forced labour, beating, torture, sexual abuse
   and mass killing perpetrated by the military at the Marange diamond
   fields, are highly contentious.

Ms C M P KOTSI: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:
   That the House debates the violation of human rights and the dignity of
   people who are abducted by and suffer other abuses at the hands of
   strikers, as happened when a nurse was kidnapped on her way from the
   KwaDukuza Hospital on Monday, 30 August 2010.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members on my right: Please reduce the noise level.
Hon Trevor, please!

 PARLIAMENT’S TWO-DAY WOMEN’S PARLIAMENT ON THE MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -


     1) notes with enthusiasm Parliament's two-day  Women's  Parliament  on
        the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) that started on Monday,  30
        August 2010, and brings  together  delegates  from  civil  society,
        provincial  legislatures  and  women  members   of   the   national
        Parliament;


     2) further notes that the objective of the Women’s  Parliament  is  to
        discuss progress on the MDGs and how they impact on women's lives;


     3) believes that the outcomes of  the  Parliament  will  contribute  a
        great deal towards identifying challenges and gaps that are in  the
        way of achieving the MDGs as well as coming up with suggestions  on
        mechanisms that should be put in place to ensure that South  Africa
        meets its MDG obligations; and


     4) supports the Parliament and  wishes  the  women  success  in  their
        deliberations.

Agreed to.

 VOLUNTEER JACOBUS LOUW OF CAPE AGULHAS NSRI STATION HONOURED WITH GALLANTRY
                                    AWARD

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Speaker, I move without notice:


   That the House —


     1) notes that on Thursday, 26  August  2010,  at  the  Annual  General
        Meeting of the National Sea Rescue Institute (NSRI), Jacobus  Louw,
        a volunteer at Cape Agulhas station, was honoured with a  Gallantry
        Award for his selfless conduct on the morning of 15 June 2010, when
        he and the crew of NSRI Rescue  Boat  7  braved  the  elements  and
        torrid seas to save the lives of five people in  distress  off  the
        coast between Struisbaai and Quoin Point;


     2) further notes that the rescue mission lasted almost five hours  and
        was conducted in incredibly dangerous conditions which included  7-
        meter high swells and a howling South Easter;

     3) recognises that the NSRI team put their lives in jeopardy  to  save
        the lives of others, who would have perished were it  not  for  the
        selfless actions of the team;


     4) further recognises that the men and women of the  NSRI  provide  an
        invaluable service to all South Africans who venture into the  sea;
        and


     5) extends its gratitude to the men and women of the  NSRI  for  their
        courageous service to South Africa.

Agreed to.

     A B DE VILLIERS RECOGNISED AS NUMBER ONE PLAYER IN ONE-DAY CRICKET
                               INTERNATIONALS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs J D KILIAN: Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House -

     1) notes that A B de Villiers continues to impress as  an  outstanding
        cricketer in all forms of the game;


        2) further notes that he  has  excelled  in  the  shorter,  one-day
           version of the game;


     3) acknowledges the contribution that his continued success  has  made
        in portraying a positive image of South Africa  around  the  world;
        and


     4) congratulates him for being recognised by the International Cricket
        Council as the number one player in the world  in  one-day  cricket
        internationals.

Agreed to.

   CONDOLENCES TO FAMILY OF FORMER CONSTITUTIONAL COURT JUDGE THOLI MADALA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N SINGH: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —

   (1)      notes that former Constitutional Court judge Tholi Madala  died
        on Wednesday, 25 August 2010;


   (2)      further notes that Tholi Madala was one of the founding  judges
        of the Constitutional Court and became the first black judge in the
        Eastern Cape and the fourth black judge in the country when he  was
        appointed to the position in 1994; and


   (3)      conveys its deepest condolences and sympathies to his family and
        friends.

Agreed to.

   CONDOLENCES TO FAMILY AND FRIENDS OF MTUTUZELI TOM, FORMER PRESIDENT OF
                                    NUMSA

                             (Draft Resolution)
The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House —


     1) notes with great sadness the passing away of  former  President  of
        the  National  Union  of  Metalworkers  of  South  Africa,   Numsa,
        Mtutuzeli Tom, on 27 August 2010, at St Dominics Hospital  in  East
        London; and


     2) conveys its sincere condolences to his family, friends, the African
        National Congress, Congress of South African  Trade  Unions,  South
        African Communist Party and the entire mass democratic forces.

May his soul rest in peace.

Agreed to.

   SPRINGBOKS CONGRATULATED ON WINNING TRI-NATIONS GAME AGAINST WALLABIES

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —

     1) notes that on Saturday, 28 August 2010, the Springboks defeated the
        Wallabies 44-31 in their second home game of the  2010  Tri-Nations
        tournament which was played at Loftus Versfeld stadium in Pretoria;


     2) further notes that Saturday's  match  marked  Vice  Captain  Victor
        Matfield's 100th game in  the  green  and  gold  of  the  Springbok
        jersey;


     3) recognises that tries by  Juan  Smith,  Gurthro  Steenkamp,  Pierre
        Spies, Frans Steyn and JP Pietersen and the boot  of  Morné  Steyn,
        Butch James and  Frans  Steyn  ensured  that  the  Springboks  were
        victorious over the Wallabies, and broke their losing streak  of  5
        losses in a row; and


     4) congratulates the Springboks on a great  victory  and  wishes  them
        everything of the best as they commence preparations for the end-of-
        year tour.

Agreed to.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I hate to draw your attention to this fact, sir,
but ever since you spoke to the hon Trevor Manuel, he hasn’t stopped
speaking for one minute. And I do honestly believe that it would be
appropriate for this House if you reprimanded him again. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Please take your seat, hon member.

  MINISTER NDEBELE SIGNS TRANSPORT-RELATED AGREEMENT WITH CHINESE RAILWAYS
                                  MINISTER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr H P MALULEKA (ANC): Hon Speaker, the ANC welcomes the ground-breaking
agreement signed by the Minister of Transport Sibusiso Ndebele on
Wednesday, 25 August 2010, on railways and other transport-related matters
with the Chinese Railways Minister Liu Zhijun. The agreement recognises the
need to find new approaches for consolidating, expanding and deepening the
rapid development in the transport sector between South Africa and China.

The agreement seeks to promote investment, industry, trade and co-operation
between South Africa and China in the area of rail. The railways agreement
will foster close co-operation in rail infrastructure, maintenance and
development, financing, network safety and regulations, technology
transfer, harmonisation of technical standards and human resource
development.

The two countries agreed that there would be an exchange of engineers and
related professionals and broad co-operation in the areas of intelligent
transport systems that are environmentally sustainable and in labour-
intensive best practices. China operates the largest network of high-speed
rail in the world: the Shanghai to Beijing railway line is the largest in
the world.

The ANC believes that South Africa can benefit from this agreement in terms
of using rail to transport people and goods efficiently, effectively and
with the least cost to the environment and the economy. Thank you.
[Applause.]

           VIOLENT SEXUAL ATTACK ON TWO WOMEN IN CHATSWORTH TEMPLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (DA): Hon Speaker, the DA wishes to publicly
condemn the recent violent sexual attack and rape of two women in a temple
in Chatsworth, Durban. The women had gone to the temple early on a Saturday
morning to prepare the place of worship for a Sunday service when they were
approached by two men bearing weapons. The men forced the two women into
different rooms inside the temple, raped them and then fled the scene.

Yesterday, I travelled to Chatsworth to meet the victims. Needless to say,
the incident has been hugely traumatic for these two women. The brutality
of the attack is accentuated by the fact that it occurred in a place of
worship where people go to seek peace and tranquillity. These crimes are
brought into stark relief considering the fact that this month is dedicated
to honouring the position of women in our society.

Since November last year there has been a deeply concerning upsurge in
violence against worshippers in temples and churches in the Chatsworth
community. It is essential that the police in that area develop a
comprehensive response to the situation by increasing visible policing
efforts, making improvements to the monitoring of planned crimes involving
places of worship, and working with local community policing forums to
develop a detailed plan to curb the occurrence of this brutal type of
attack. It must also be ensured that the suspects involved in this most
recent incident face the full might of the law. Thank you.

   REFERENDUM ON GRASS-ROOTS ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT VERSUS BROAD-BASED BLACK
                            ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W M MADISHA (Cope): Mr Speaker, Cope believes firmly that broad-based
black economic empowerment, BBBEE, is a misnomer. It is neither broad-based
nor empowering to the disadvantaged people of our country. Cope therefore
supports grass-roots economic empowerment, GEE. That is what the people of
South Africa are demanding. A referendum to ask this question will return
an overwhelming response in support of GEE. Even the ruling party’s Youth
League is vociferous in its condemnation of the very small circle of people
that BBBEE has benefited.

Cope urges the government to produce an audit, listing the people who have
been beneficiaries of empowerment and the quantity of benefits they have
acquired. This will allow the nation to judge whether the “empowerment” –
so-called, of course - has achieved its primary objectives, including these
primary objectives being met in the period set for them to be achieved.
Failure to do so will confirm the public’s view that BBBEE has been all
smoke and mirrors - a display to dazzle without delivering anything to the
target, excluding the chosen few, of course.

In respect of the distribution of benefits, even the ruling party’s allies
are scathingly critical of the government. Even the labour movement is now
characterising South Africa as a predatory state. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

      109-YEAR-OLD GREAT-GRANDMOTHER RECEIVES OWN HOUSE FOR FIRST TIME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs J M MALULEKE (ANC): Speaker, for the first time in her life, a 109-year-
old woman, North West great-grandmother Mmami Motlhokwa, is the proud owner
of her own house, after sharing a two-bedroom house with her children and
great-grandchildren for years. Mrs Motlhokwa was handed her new house in
Coligny by Minister of Human Settlements Tokyo Sexwale last week.

Mrs Motlhokwa’s house was one of 54 houses constructed as part of the
National Women Build programme, a programme that seeks to honour the 1956
march by women to the Union Buildings to protest the pass laws. In total,
1 956 houses will be built across the North West province. During the
handover process, the Minister of Human Settlements also sent a warning to
building contractors who build shoddy houses and are involved in corrupt
activities. An audit is also under way to determine the number of houses
that have been poorly constructed and need to be rebuilt in the North West
province.

The ANC-led government is committed to accelerating the delivery of houses
to our people. Thank you, Speaker. [Applause.]

                 IMPACT OF RECENT STRIKE ON EDUCATION SYSTEM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Hon Speaker, the current public service strike has
delivered yet another blow to South Africa’s struggling education system.
The timing of this strike is most unfortunate, as it leaves scholars with
little time to catch up before their end-of-year exams, this after the
stoppages for the World Cup had already delayed their studies.

The current generation of schoolchildren is already used to hard knocks.
For instance, outcomes-based education, OBE, has led to poor quality
education. Statistics show that only 30% of scholars who started Grade 1
finished school with a higher education certificate. Only 5% entered
tertiary institutions. One of the indirect impacts of this strike will be
on schoolchildren’s results. This will have a very real effect over time on
the future of this generation of schoolchildren.

Whilst the IFP appreciates that government, through the public broadcaster,
is running daily teaching programmes to assist learners to catch up with
their school work, the questions that must be asked are: How many children
can access those services? How many children in our rural areas have access
to TV or radio? The truth is that only a small number of children have
those luxuries at their disposal. Too many children are unable to access
those teaching programmes.

The IFP believes that a disaster is looming and that this will be evident
in the matric pass rate of 2010. We need answers from government as to what
urgent measures will be put in place to assist learners, especially in the
rural areas, to make up for the many hours of teaching time that have been
lost. I thank you. [Applause.]

                  DEVASTING IMPACT OF PUBLIC SERVICE STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES (FF Plus):
Speaker, I want speak on the same topic.

Wat ’n doodgewone staking oor salarisse behoort te wees, is besig om in ’n
skande vir alle Suid-Afrikaners te ontwikkel. Geen salarisdispuut regverdig
die dood van mense en vernietiging van jong matrikulante se loopbane nie.
Die dood van weerlose siekes en onskuldige babas as gevolg van die
Staatsdiens-staking is die ergste vorm van selfsugtigheid. Dit getuig van
uiters onprofessionele gedrag van die Suid-Afrikaanse gesondheidswerkers.

Die Suid-Afrikaanse samelewing wat hierdie tipe voorvalle duld, is ’n
samelewing in krisis met baie ernstige morele en dissiplinêre probleme. Uit
die radikale uitsprake van Cosatu-leiers wil dit meer voorkom asof daar ’n
verskuilde agenda agter die staking is. Cosatu-leiers het reeds hul
frustrasie teenoor President Zuma uitgespreek omdat hy nie hul
beleidsrigtings volg nie.
Onskuldige staatsdienswerkers word nou ingespan om die magstryd tussen
Cosatu en die ANC-leiers op hierdie wyse te probeer besleg. Dit is tragies
dat die slagoffers van hierdie stryd tans onskuldige babas, weerlose siekes
en jeugdige skoolleerlinge is.

Die VF Plus eis dat die verskuilde agendas opsygeskuif word en dat ’n
werkbare oplossing so vinnig moontlik gevind word, in belang van almal in
Suid-Afrika. Waar stakings gepaard gaan met intimidasie, ontwrigting en
saakbeskadiging, is dit geheel en al onaanvaarbaar. Dis ook ons taak om toe
te sien dat skole waar onderrig voortgaan, nie ontwrig word nie. Diegene
wat hulle aan hierdie onwettige optredes skuldig maak, moet summier vervolg
word. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[What should have been an ordinary strike about salaries is turning into a
disgrace to all South Africans. No salary dispute justifies the death of
people and destroying the careers of young matriculants. The death of
vulnerable sick people and innocent babies as a result of the Public
Service strike is the worst form of selfishness. This attests to extreme
unprofessional behaviour by South African health workers.

The South African society which tolerates these kinds of incidents, is a
society in crisis with very serious moral and disciplinary problems. From
the radical statements made by Cosatu leaders, it appears as if there is a
hidden agenda behind the strike. Cosatu leaders have already voiced their
frustrations to President Zuma because he is not adhering to their
policies.

Innocent public servants are now being used as a means to solve the power
struggle between the leaders of Cosatu and the ANC. It is tragic that the
victims of this struggle are currently innocent babies, vulnerable sick
people and school learners.

The FF Plus demands that the hidden agendas are pushed aside and that a
workable solution be found in the interests of all South Africans as soon
as possible. Strikes accompanied by intimidation, disruption and damage to
property are totally unacceptable. It is also our duty to ensure that
schools where teaching is still taking place are not disrupted. Those who
are guilty of such unlawful behaviour should be summarily prosecuted. Thank
you.]

      AMBULANCES BOUGHT FOR WORLD CUP NOW AVAILABLE TO LOCAL DISTRICTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M V MAFOLO (ANC): Hon Speaker, 73 ambulances bought by the North West
department of health and social development for use during the 2010 Fifa
World Cup will now be made available to clinics and hospitals in the
province. The Bojanala Platinum district received 28 ambulances, the Ngaka
Modiri Molema district received 17, and the Dr Kenneth Kaunda district
received 16.

Ten ambulances will render services in the Dr Russo Gomu Tsomo party
districts and the two remaining ambulances will provide services at the
North West Emergency Medical Rescue Services College in Orkney.

The redistribution of these ambulances will help address the shortage of
ambulances. Although this will not eradicate the problem, the
redistribution will go a long way towards addressing the transportation
needs of patients who, until now, had to struggle to get to hospital. The
ANC welcomes this initiative and urges other provinces to follow suit. We
urge ambulance drivers not to be negligent or abuse these vehicles for
private use. I thank you. [Applause.]

     REQUEST TO OPEN EAST LONDON HARBOUR PIER TO THE DISABLED AND SENIOR
                                  CITIZENS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L M MPHAHLELE (PAC): Hon Speaker, the PAC of Azania is profoundly
disturbed by the recurring acts of discrimination against disabled people
and senior citizens. Since the September 11 Twin Tower attacks, the East
London harbour has been closed to the public, including the small pier for
fishermen.

It is impossible for a disabled person to fish off the rocks and walk on
the sea sand. There is nowhere else in East London for a disabled person to
fish in the sea.

From when he was a young boy and throughout his school days, Neville
Belling has been fishing off the small pier. Following the Highgate
massacre in 1993, which left him permanently disabled, the small pier on
the harbour has been the only place in East London where he could fish in
the sea.

The PAC calls for the reopening of the pier so that it can be used by
disabled people and senior citizens. Thank you.

                  WORK OF HAWKS, NPA AND MINISTER APPLAUDED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Hon Speaker, the IFP applauds the recent excellent work
of the Hawks, the National Prosecuting Authority, NPA, and the Minister of
Justice and Constitutional Development regarding the recent arrest of
prominent civil servants and businessmen in KwaZulu-Natal and surrounding
areas.

The seizure of assets while the matter is still being investigated and has
yet to come before the courts is most commendable and is a step in the
right direction in rooting out corruption and recouping losses suffered by
the state.

Millions of rands have allegedly been embezzled. It has further been
reported that one Mr Sipho Shabalala, the former head of Treasury KwaZulu-
Natal and CEO of Ithala Development Finance Corporation, directed a
sizeable donation of R1 million to Durban advocate Sandile Kuboni, money
apparently intended for ANC coffers.

The IFP hopes that these arrests send a clear signal to any would-be
perpetrators or fraudsters that their time in the sun is at an end. The
Hawks, the NPA, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development and,
in fact, the entire country are now watching you. Thank you. [Applause.]

                     DRUG BUST IN WITKOPPIES, KLERKSDORP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs W J NELSON (ANC): Hon Speaker, on 20 August 2010 the Directorate for
Priority Crime Investigation unit in the North West province busted an
illegal drug manufacturing laboratory in Witkoppies, Klerksdorp.

In this bust, chemicals, raw materials and equipment used to manufacture
drugs were found. Alarmingly, 21 kg of final product, suspected to be
crystal methamphetamine, better known on the street as ice or tik, with an
estimated street value of R10 million, was seized.

This bust followed an intensive undercover investigation conducted after
the police’s elite unit was tipped off by the public. Two suspects, a 27-
year-old and a 28-year-old, were arrested and appeared in the Klerksdorp
Magistrate’s court on Monday, 23 August.

As the ANC, we want to congratulate the Hawks and the SA Police Service on
their sterling work. We are all aware that drug abuse is a major
contributor to the violence and abuse found in society, especially of women
and children. This bust has prevented a huge amount of drugs going out onto
our streets and contributing to the demise of our communities. We wish the
Hawks and the SA Police Service well with their further investigations.

As Parliament, we would like to see all those involved in the illegal
manufacturing and trade of these dangerous substances arrested and
prosecuted. Thank you. [Applause.]

        CRIMINAL CHARGE LAID AGAINST MUNICIPAL MANAGER AND DIRECTOR:
              INFRASTRUCTURAL SERVICES OF NDLAMBE MUNICIPALITY

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mrs A T LOVEMORE (DA): Speaker, yesterday I laid a criminal charge against
the Municipal Manager and the Director: Infrastructural Services of the
Ndlambe Municipality in the Eastern Cape.

The charge was laid at the Port Alfred police station and was laid in terms
of section 151 of the National Water Act Act 36 of 1998. This section
criminalises an intentional or negligent act or omission which pollutes, or
is likely to pollute, a water resource or which detrimentally affects or is
likely to affect a water resource.

For approximately the past five years, the sewerage treatment works in Port
Alfred have been discharging partially treated or untreated sewage into the
Kowie River. Despite repeated calls by local residents and by DA
councillors, little has been done to rectify the situation.

Sadly, the conditions at this sewerage treatment works mirror those found
at more than 50% of the works across South Africa. Similarly, the resultant
pollution of the Kowie River is mirrored in many rivers across the country.

The continual neglect by officials of their duty to prevent pollution of
the Kowie River is not only criminal; it is also ethically unacceptable as
it affects vulnerable groups who draw water from the river, and affects
recreational opportunities for the town’s inhabitants, not to mention
tourism businesses.

The DA does not lay criminal charges as a matter of course. This is a
measure of last resort. Similar charges have been laid against many
municipalities in several provinces by DA public representatives and by
residents who have found that their pleas to their municipalities for
action have fallen on deaf ears.

The right to a clean environment enjoys constitutional protection. The DA
will do all that it can to ensure that this protection is realised for all
South Africans. [Applause.]

               FRAUDULENT TRANSFER OF 33 PARKS IN JOHANNESBURG

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T BOTHA (Cope): Hon Speaker, Cope is very concerned that the corruption
in South Africa is becoming more entrenched.

In March of this year, 33 parks in Johannesburg were transferred to Zamien
Investments 45 and Zambrotti Investments 31; not a cent went to the city,
but the colluders have been exchanging millions. These properties include
Norscot in Koppies and Kingfisher in Fourways. In Sandton, the properties
that were given away for peanuts were the Mushroom Farm Park and the Ernest
Ullmann Park.
Corrupt attorneys colluding with corrupt businesspeople and corrupt
officials in the city as well with the Deeds Registry Office are ransacking
the country. It is intolerable. This is happening not only in Johannesburg,
but in every city. Nothing bears close scrutiny any longer; every little
scratch reveals the rot.

In the case of these 33 prime properties, the original title deeds for the
properties remained in the possession of the city. Yet, through dirty
manipulation, misrepresentation, forged affidavits, certified copies,
powers of attorney and other underhanded measures, the transfers of these
parks were fraudulently effected without the city knowing anything. This is
organised crime on a massive scale, with a police captain of the
Johannesburg commercial branch in the pocket of the kingpin.

Meanwhile, the Pretoria Deeds Office has suspended the registrar, Pogiso
Mesefo, and acting deputy registrar, Edmund Sibisi, while investigations
are under way.

Cope and the nation at large wish to call on the government to adequately
resource the Hawks to enable them to take on the emerging Mafia that is
ruthlessly taking over South Africa. Thank you, Sir. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

              IMPACT OF SQUARE KILOMETRE ARRAY RADIO TELESCOPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P A MOCUMI (ANC): Hon Speaker, at an estimated construction cost of
US$2 billion, the Square Kilometre Array telescope is poised to be the
largest radio telescope in the world by far, and will consolidate Africa as
a major hub for astronomy in the world. The African Union has acknowledged
the significance of the Square Kilometre Array project in bringing much-
needed development to Africa.

At the 15th ordinary session of the assembly of heads of state and
government that ended in July this year, the assembly, attended by
President Jacob Zuma, expressed its appreciation of South Africa’s efforts
to co-ordinate the bid to promote space science and technology in Africa.
It also endorsed South Africa’s collaboration with other African countries.

If Africa wins the bid against Australia – the decision will be announced
in March 2012 – this bid will be a major step towards developing high-level
skills and cutting-edge technology infrastructure in Africa and attract
expertise and collaborative projects to the continent. The support from
Africa for the success of the bid really affirms that South Africa is part
of the African continent and that our destiny intertwines with the destiny
of the continent. I thank you, hon Speaker. [Applause.]

               CORRUPTION WHISTLE-BLOWERS KILLED IN MPUMALANGA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S J MASANGO (DA): Speaker, Mpumalanga is a dangerous place to be a
politician. In recent times, there have been several assassinations of
politicians and government officials in the province. Five officials from
the Govan Mbeki Municipality recently appeared in the Bethal Magistrate’s
Court on charges of colluding to kill Bomba Ntshangase, an SACP member, who
had spoken out against corruption. Mr Ntshangase was killed on 4 May 2010
in his hostel room. His killing is allegedly related to the building of a
stalled project in Emzinoni. The Govan Mbeki Municipality has experienced
the brunt of murders of officials and politicians in the province.

In 2005 Joshua Ntshuhle, who was the Chief Financial Officer of the Govan
Mbeki Municipality at that time, disappeared from the area without a trace.
In 2007 Thandi Mtsweni, the Deputy Mayor of the Govan Mbeki Municipality,
was killed in front of her house for speaking out against alleged corrupt
tender processes at the municipality.

It appears that corrupt officials and politicians in this ANC-run province
are doing everything in their power to silence anyone who tries to expose
the looting of government funds for personal gain. Owing to the extent of
political murders in Mpumalanga, it is clear that the ANC in this province
is thoroughly rotten. Obviously, perpetrators of crime should be made to
account for what they have done, but the ANC also needs to take the
responsibility for deploying these people in the province, who are more
concerned about patronage than service delivery.

The greed of some of the politicians and officials in Mpumalanga is
disgusting. These murders and attempted murders are another reason for
government to stop the ability of politicians and officials of being able
to do business with government. I thank you.

                             DONATION OF ORGANS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E M SULLIMAN (ANC): Speaker, this year almost 3 500 patients are on the
waiting list for organ donor transplants, but only about 800 will receive
those life-saving organs before the end of this year.

Not many people think of donating their organs or tissues, until the day
when something tragic happens to them and then they find themselves in need
of organs or tissues. The demand for tissue donations includes burn
victims, cancer patients and hip replacement candidates, whilst the
shortage of bone tissues, corneas and skin is very alarming.

The month of August is Organ Donor Month, and the ANC appreciates the
generous response from all South Africans. The ANC therefore encourages all
South Africans to consider being organ donors to save more and more lives.
I thank you. [Applause.]

    WELCOMING OF MR GHERARDO CASINI FROM THE GLOBAL CENTRE FOR ICT AND MR
  FLAVIO ZENI FROM THE AFRICAN PARLIAMENTARY KNOWLEDGE NETWORK TO THE HOUSE

The SPEAKER: Order! That concludes members’ statements. Before I proceed
with the Ministers’ responses, I wish to acknowledge the presence of guests
in the gallery. These are Mr Gherardo Casini, from the Global Centre for
ICT, jointly established by the United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, Undesa, and the Inter-Parliamentary Union, as well as Mr
Flavio Zeni from the African Parliamentary Knowledge Network. They are here
as part of preparations for the ICT Conference and the World e-Parliament
Conference, and for the African Parliamentary Knowledge Network plenary,
which we are co-hosting with the Pan-African Parliament from 18 to 22
October 2010 in Midrand. They are accompanied by representatives from Kenya
and the Pan-African Parliament. I extend a warm welcome to you all.
[Applause.]

           DEVASTATING IMPACT OF RECENT STRIKE ON EDUCATION SYSTEM
    REQUEST TO OPEN UP EAST LONDON HARBOUR PIER TO THE DIABLED AND SENIOR
                                  CITIZENS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: [Interjections.] Do not provoke me. The strike is a
dispute between the employer and his employees. [Interjections.] This is
how we understand it. It is a collective bargaining matter that can only be
resolved through bargaining at the bargaining chamber. I am happy that both
parties are now back in the chamber, both determined to find a settlement.
Bargaining has never been about begging. Bargaining remains bargaining, and
therefore a solution can only be found through social dialogue.

The continuation of the strike is not in the interests of both the
employers and the workers. The costs are high on both sides. Workers know
that they will lose wages, as they know the application of “no work, no
pay”. Government knows that the strike does affect the economy and the rank-
and-file people of this country.

I have now asked the most senior commissioners of the Commission for
Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration, CCMA, to mediate - that is if the
parties find themselves incapable of reaching a settlement. We have
resolved, through the CCMA, a number of very difficult strikes in this
country. So, I will plead with the workers in the public service, and
whoever else is involved, to understand that we can settle this dispute.
They must just swallow their pride and accept the mediation.

I agree with the PAC that ...

... simele ukuba sivumelane ukuba abantu abakhubazekileyo abakaxhamli
kwimeko yezoqoqosho yeli lizwe. Ndiyavuma ukuba noxa ikhona inkqubela,
kuninzi kona ekusafuneka sikwenzile malunga nabantu abakhubazekileyo.

Xa ke, nyana wesizwe, unokuthi ubambe isandla salo mbutho we-ANC, sihambe
kunye, niyeke la maqhekeza enu ninawo e-PAC, ndiqinisekile ukuba
singaphumelela. [Laphela ixesha.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[... we must agree that the disabled people are not enjoying the benefits
of the economy of this country. I agree that while there is progress, there
is still a lot that needs to be done for the disabled people.

Chief, if you were to join the ANC and work as a collective and leave your
small groups of the PAC, I am certain that we could succeed. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

   REFERENDUM ON GRASS-ROOTS ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT VERSUS BROAD-BASED BLACK
                            ECONOMIC EMPOWERMENT
           VIOLENT SEXUAL ATTACK ON TWO WOMEN IN CHATSWORTH TEMPLE
                     DRUG BUST IN WITKOPPIES, KLERKSDORP
                  WORK OF HAWKS, NPA AND MINISTER APPLAUDED
                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY — NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Chair, on
the earlier point raised by the hon Ellis, I want to draw the attention of
the House to the fact that the hon member tripped on his mouth the other
day, which is why he has crutches, but he clearly has not learned the
lesson. Nobody else did it to him.

In respect of the issue raised by the hon Madisha on the broad-based black
economic empowerment, BBBEE, I see that the main perpetrators of the BBBEE
in Cope have now left the House. I agree that not only must it be revised
and the constitutional imperative of ensuring diversity of ownership
attained, but that we must take the lessons from the last decade or so
forward.

In respect of the issue raised by the hon Trollip about the rapes in
Chatsworth, let me join him and others in this House in expressing our
complete outrage and condemnation. It is fundamentally important, as with
the issue raised by the hon member on the drug bust, that we improve on the
activities within communities so that we are better organised, and so that
the police can be informed so that there will be a more timeous response to
these issues.

On the issue raised by the hon Singh about individuals who were arrested,
charged with corruption and had their assets forfeited, I think this House
must celebrate the fact that that happened. We must ask that it continues
to happen, so that we can root corruption out of society. This House must,
across party lines, join hands and call for it increasingly. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

               CORRUPTION WHISTLE-BLOWERS KILLED IN MPUMALANGA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Hon Speaker, this is just a
small, but important correction ... [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Like you.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: ... in relation to the ...
[Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Ellis, take your seat and please keep quiet.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: ... in relation to the
statement made by ... Ellis, I will catch you at an appropriate time.

The SPEAKER: Continue, hon Minister.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: ... in relation to the
statement made by the hon member from the DA mentioning the late Bomba
Ntshangase. Just for the record of this House, Bomba Ntshangase was a
member of the SACP, not the SAP. The SAP died with the notorious apartheid
regime. Thank you, hon Speaker. [Applause.]

        CRIMINAL CHARGE LAID AGAINST MUNICIPAL MANAGER AND DIRECTOR:
              INFRASTRUCTURAL SERVICES OF NDLAMBE MUNICIPALITY
               FRAUDULENT TRANSFER OF 33 PARKS IN JOHANNESBURG

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Speaker, I would
like to respond to the point raised by the hon member about clean
environments: the polluted Kowie River in the Ndlambe Municipality. I
experience that daily; I come from that municipality. It is very serious.
It is indeed both a threat and a reality. The problem there is that the
infrastructure is old.

Secondly, it was never meant to cater for all the people of the town. It
was meant to cater for the white people in town only. Now you have an
expanded population that draws from the same infrastructure. Now the
infrastructure cannot cope. That is really the problem.

Related to that problem ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon member!
The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: In my view, it therefore
means that it would be counterproductive to lay charges against the
municipality, because the municipality really can do very little or
nothing.

The municipality has recently acquired R30 million to try to correct the
situation. In fact, it is simply holding it, because to correct it would
mean it would have to overhaul the whole infrastructure.

The second issue I want to respond to is the deeds registration system.
This is just a question. This is the issue that was raised by the hon Botha
from Cope. I just want to say that we have scoped the situation, and we
said this last week in the House. We have scoped the situation in terms of
fraud, corruption and collusion. It is partly because of that that action
has been taken against, for example, some of the Deeds Office officials, in
Pretoria in particular, and KwaZulu-Natal.

We have roped in the Special Investigating Unit, the SIU, to take action
against specific cases. We have also ordered a forensic audit so that in
the long term we can go through that process and transform the deeds
registration system as a whole. Thank you. [Applause.]

  SKILLS SHORTAGES IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS TO ALLEVIATE
                                THE SITUATION
                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr W P DOMAN: Speaker, a survey by Productivity SA in 2008 revealed that
South Africa has the world’s highest brain drain and the worst skills
shortage of the 55 countries surveyed. In the consolidated general report
on the local government audit outcomes for 2008 to 2009 published recently,
the Auditor-General gave reasons why remedial action was not taken by
municipalities on audit outcomes of previous years. These reasons include:
“Failure by the leadership to adequately deal with the level of vacancies
and instability at senior leadership level” and “Ineffective recruitment,
training and supervision of finance staff”.

The skills shortage crisis in local government is, to my mind, one of the
main reasons for nondelivery by municipalities. For instance, since the
first democratic local government elections in December 2000, the number of
civil engineering professionals in the local government sphere were reduced
from 2 500 plus to less than 1 300, the capacity effectively being halved
within the past 10 years.

Here, I must remind you that between 1994 and 2000 no capacity was lost,
and it went well in local government because of shared, responsible
transformation, but the moment the ANC alone got their hands on the levers
of power at municipalities, capacity imploded just as dramatically as the
Cape Town power station towers two weeks ago.
Dit is ’n gemene saak dat apartheid-onderwys die oorgrote meerderheid van
ons bevolking met swak onderwys en min geleenthede vir verdere opleiding
gelaat het. Dit is ’n groot bydraende faktor dat die ekonomie vandag
vaardigheidstekorte ondervind. Alhoewel die toegang tot onderwys die
afgelope twee dekades verbeter het, het die gehalte ongelukkig nie verbeter
nie. Munisipaliteite word deesdae genoodsaak om nuwe werksoekers aan te
stel wat net eenvoudig nie oor die basiese vaardighede beskik nie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[It is common knowledge that apartheid education left the majority of our
population with poor education and few opportunities for further training.
It is an important contributing factor to skills shortages in our present-
day economy. Although access to education has improved over the past two
decades, the quality, unfortunately, did not improve. Municipalities are
forced nowadays to appoint new job seekers who simply do not have the basic
skills at all.]

However, cadre deployment at ANC-controlled municipalities has been the
biggest culprit that has robbed local government of skilled people. The
first step in cadre deployment is, of course, to get positions vacant. In
the few years that the ANC controlled the Cape Town metro, 84 senior
managers were given nice packages with the ratepayers’ money. This was a
trend all over South Africa. In the process, some highly talented people
who could have fulfilled at least a caretaker role and could have assisted
with in-house training were dismissed. [Interjections.] The ANC – listen,
Minister – alienated so many professionals ...

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Minister of Labour, order please!
[Interjections.] Continue, hon Doman.

Mr W P DOMAN: The Minister of Labour should listen to this. The ANC
alienated so many professionals that they are not prepared to be employed
directly by municipalities any more but only to be placed there by agencies
like the Development Bank or simply work as contractors. Indeed, the whole
concept of contract positions has backfired. Instead of creating
excellence, as we intended as lawmakers, it has been misused for political
expediency, and it has led to the destabilisation of senior management at
municipalities.

One of the biggest mistakes that the ANC made was to repeal the Profession
of Town Clerks Act of 1988, and the Municipal Accounts Profession Act, Act
21 of 1988, without replacing them with proper ones. No wonder that the
Institute of Municipal Finance Officers points out the lack of professional
recognition and the current status on the appointment and regulation of
municipal financial officers as the main reasons for the lack of financial
skills at municipalities. Only now a Bill is before Parliament to set
professional standards for positions and appointment procedures, which we
support and which we think can go a long way towards alleviating the
problem.
Figures indicate that there is at all times at least a 12% vacancy rate in
section 57 appointments - that is, municipal managers and managers
reporting to municipal managers. Then there are those appointees who fill
positions, but do not have the necessary skills and expertise. We know
South Africa has a shortage of skills in general, but this is compounded in
local government by the fact that at least more than 100 rural
municipalities find it impossible to attract the necessary skilled people.
If Buffalo City Local Municipality in East London, which is aspiring to
become a metro in the near future, does not have one graduated engineer,
where does this leave the other municipalities in the country?

The SA Institution of Civil Engineering says that only 51% of housing
projects are successfully completed as a result of skill shortages. This
shortage carries over to existing infrastructure as well, where maintenance
is regularly neglected. The impact of poor maintenance reduces the quality
of life of our citizens as broken pumps leave sewage in the streets, and
this compromises the health of all of us. Electrical malfunctions leave
houses in the dark, and power cuts erode business prospects. They also mean
loss of income for municipalities because less water and electricity are
sold. In summary, skills shortages reduce economic growth and job
opportunities in South Africa and negatively affect municipal service
delivery across all sectors.

If we start to look for solutions, the political mistakes, some unintended,
must be acknowledged and corrected. Firstly, cadre deployment must be
stopped. Councillors, especially ANC councillors, must appoint staff in a
balanced way, as our Constitution and laws intend. The DA believes that the
concept of fit for purpose must be applied where transformation is taken
into account, where equity is taken into account, and also where skills,
expertise and experience are taken into account and that these should all
be balanced. Secondly, stop leaving positions open if a suitable cadre is
not available. It is a pity and a travesty that skilled people are
overlooked owing to the ideological blinkers of political leaders at
municipalities. Municipalities can go a long way towards reversing the
brain drain if the message can go out to South Africans abroad that their
skills will not be overlooked and that there are plenty of vacancies at
municipalities.

Thirdly, too many municipalities fail to enter into performance agreements
so that staff can’t be held accountable, or rewarded, for their efforts. If
this is not done properly, it doesn’t encourage staff to undertake training
and to improve their skills. Fourthly, the Department of Co-operative
Governance, Salga and the Local Government Seta should make a concerted
effort to come up with applicable training and ensure that it is of good
quality. It is disappointing that the department is still struggling to
complete a skills audit of all municipalities. We are in total darkness
about how this has progressed. A complete skills audit for this sector will
go a long way towards identifying what our needs really are and how they
can be addressed.

Another solution would be for the private sector to second experienced
staff to battling municipalities. We also need partnerships with
professional organisations that can make a big difference and are ready to
assist.

Ten slotte sal die Minister van Samewerkende Regering en Tradisionele Sake
en sy departement aan die een kant en ons, as parlementslede, aan die ander
kant moet saamspan om wetswysigings deur te voer wat professionele
standaarde gaan herstel. Dankie. [Tyd verstreke.] [Applous.] (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[In conclusion, the Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs and his department on the one hand and we, as Members of
Parliament, on the other hand will have to co-operate in passing amendments
to legislation that will restore professional standards. Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]]

Ms D G NHLENGETHWA: Hon Speaker, hon members, today marks the end of
Women’s Month. The ANC has long debated and agreed on the need for women to
access decision-making structures. It has also long emphasised that
quantitative presence or access is not necessarily representation of women
in decision-making, nor is it an achievement of gender equality, but it has
recognised the importance of access and presence as only one of the
critical pillars of indicators on the road map to gender equality.

The critical issue for women wherever they are is to enter these spheres
and grab power to use it for transformation. It is accepted that women do
not enter spheres as representatives of women, nor as the ones solely
responsibly for raising the gender flag. It is imperative that women lead.
They should lead in a sense that they participate in capacity-building
programmes. They are part of skills development programmes.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: The motion on the Order
Paper deals with skills shortages in local government, and possible
solutions to alleviate the situation. [Interjections.] But the hon speaker
at the podium at the present time somehow appears to be using this
opportunity to have yet another debate on women. I would suggest, Sir, that
she sticks to the topic.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Ellis, I think you are being
unfair, because she has hardly begun her second paragraph. You don’t know
whether what’s she has said is still part of the introduction. Let’s just
hear whether your point is in order.

Mr M J ELLIS: It is a very long paragraph in that case, sir.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): That’s fine. It is the right of the
speaker there. Hon speaker, continue.

Ms D G NHLENGETHWA: Chairperson, this hon member is not a member of the
ANC. He won’t understand what I’m talking about. You are not part of the
ANC component. So just listen and hear what I’m going to say. I’ve given
you a chance; just give me a fair chance, too, to participate in these
issues.

Comrades, it is imperative that women must lead, leading in the sense that
they participate in capacity-building programmes because they are part of
skills development programmes.

Allow me to quote from Comrade Thenjiwe Mthintso’s letter in the ANC Today
called, “The revolutions within the revolution”: “We do not want only to
support women to enter leadership positions in all spheres of life but also
to transform these spheres.” I am emphasising this point because in the
recent service delivery protest against councillors, some of the
municipalities were headed by women.

The decision of a skills audit in municipalities is not new to us. In 1956
we adopted the Freedom Charter. It says: “The doors of learning shall be
open to everyone.” It is one of our policies and one of the ANC’s
resolutions under the social cluster that countrywide, skills audits of
municipalities must be done. This was also one of Cabinet’s resolutions on
5 March 2007.

A national skills audit steering committee was formed, which consisted of
provincial and local government: the Local Government Sector Education and
Training Authority, the SA Local Government Association, the Independent
Municipal and Allied Trade Union – Imatu - and the SA Municipal Workers
Union – Samwu. The main aim of the skills audit was to obtain baseline
information that would facilitate the implementation of capacity-building
initiatives and human resource planning in order to effectively develop
appropriate interventions to redress local government skills and competence
deficiencies. This process was facilitated over a period of 15 months in
all nine provinces. Skill audits, inclusive of section 57 managers in the
district and local municipalities, were conducted.

You are hounding me because I’m correcting what the hon Doman was saying
here. He was talking about things that happened 10 years ago.
[Interjections.] The methodology of the skills audit ... [Interjections.]
... I am debating the programmes that are in place in terms of which we can
correct the skills shortages in municipalities.

The methodology of the skills audit was based on the customisation of the
competency framework drawn from various government models, such as the
Senior Management Services Competency Framework, the National Treasury and
municipal regulations on the minimum competency level. Following all these
guidelines, a competency framework was formed that consisted of six
clusters.

I am going through all these processes to bring to people’s attention the
mere fact that because the DA has introduced this debate does not mean that
nothing has been done. Things have been done. Listen to these programmes.
[Interjections.] Through having done this exercise, we are very aware that
a vacancy rate of 13,45% exists in municipalities nationwide. We know that.
In accordance with organisational design and human resource principles,
such vacancies ...

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo):
Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it fair that the DA bench is so
irritated by the truth?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): That is not a point of order. So
long as they do not dominate the speaker and that the speaker at the podium
is still audible. That is why I am also quiet.

Ms D G NHLENGETHWA: But, Chairperson, it gives me difficulty. I need to ...

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Could I ask the member a question? I want to
find out why the ANC has qualified audits and the DA does not have
qualified audits in local government. Will she answer that question?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Could the speaker proceed with her
speech? If she does engage the issue you are raising, she will do so. But
you are protected, speaker.

Ms D G NHLENGETHWA: Thank you, Chairperson. Through this exercise we are
very aware that a vacancy rate of 13,45% exists in municipalities
nationwide. In accordance with the organisational design and human resource
principles, such a vacancy rate is close to the acceptable rate of 13,0%.

We also know that provinces that have high vacancy rates in key positions
are the Northern Cape — where the vacancy rate for chief financial officer
positions is 36,6%, for municipal managers 35,45% and directors in
community development services 25% — while the North West, the Free State
and Gauteng have the same vacancy rates, with a vacancy rate of only 25%
for directors in technical services. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Only!

Ms D G NHLENGETHWA: Yes, only! Of the total 785 section 57 managers who
participated in the skills audits that were processed countrywide, only 70%
of the submitted certificates were validated and qualified in the rate ...

We are very aware that there are challenges regarding some of the
qualifications submitted. [Interjections.] There are also people who have
not been placed in a related position according to their qualifications.
One would find a ...

Adv T M MASUTHA: Chairperson, on a point of order: It is against the Rules
— and the opposition knows it — to engage in running commentary. They have
been persistently disrupting the speaker from continuing. Could you please
protect the speaker?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, I think the point of
order is in order. There has been running commentary, so please avoid doing
it. Proceed, hon Nhlengethwa.

Ms D G NHLENGETHWA: Those people are not placed in related positions
according to their qualifications. You will find a Bachelor of Education
graduate holding a director CFO position. Those are challenges we know of
and we are correcting them.

We must not forget that officials in some municipalities from the apartheid
era are still holding critical positions. We kept them as they must
transfer their knowledge and skills. Some of them are still there, warming
their seats and not monitoring even a single junior official.

Therefore, we are saying that temporary positions of CFOs, directors and
others should be included in affected municipalities as special short-term
programmes, rather than as established programmes designed as part of the
permanent municipal structure establishment. Affected municipalities may be
required to review their structures to realign to the original mandate.
Once all this has been completed, it will be regarded as a big achievement
in terms of municipal targets.

The structure development programme of section 57 managers has been
established at a provincial level in order to expedite developments. Some
of the section 57 managers that performed consistently at an intermediate
level should be awarded the opportunity to be coached individually to
enhance their personal growth, and development managers that scored at an
advanced level are to be identified as mentors for specific competencies
across the districts.

After the completion of the skills audit, we assessed that it was very
important to emphasise training and capacity-building in local
municipalities. As the ANC has, historically, committed itself to
prosperity, this programme is being budgeted for every financial year, but
the funds have not been used properly. There are also a number of training
institutions such as the Public Administration, Leadership and Management
Academy, the Vulindlela Academy and other private training providers. They
are directly involved in the training of municipal officials and
councillors on an ongoing basis.

In this current year, a total budget of R577 million has been allocated to
capacity-building programmes. These training programmes are provided in the
form of learnerships, short courses and bursaries in areas such as adult
education and training, leadership and management, as well as
administration and finance. However, there are general complaints that
councillors do not attend such initiatives. Such people must be named and
shamed.

There are many ANC-led municipalities that are doing very well and
excelling in service delivery. [Interjections.] There are also many
municipalities that have received clean audits. There are many ANC
municipalities that have received clean audits. [Interjections.] The fact
of the matter is that the ANC as an organisation is an organisation of many
people, not of a minority. In other words, we are a majority party. We are
expected to provide services to millions of South Africans who gave us this
mandate, unlike you. [Interjections.]

It is good that you have received clean audits. We appreciate that, but how
many people have you provided with this service? [Interjections.] There are
very few minorities in the Western Cape, but what about the black people
who stay in the Western Cape that you provide with Silahla toilets? Do you
think that is proper delivery that gave you a clean audit? [Interjections.]
What about the small DA-ID municipalities outside Cape Town? I want to give
the example of the Oudtshoon Municipality. It’s a complete disaster, but
now you are coming here and saying that you have received a clean audit,
knowing that you are serving very few people. [Applause.]

Hon Doman came here and said that, as part of the solution, we must stop
cadre deployment. You are late in coming and saying that here. In terms of
the ANC January 8 statement, the President stipulated clearly that we must
come up with a Bill - the Bill that you know about. We are busy with that
Bill to rectify all those things that you are talking about here.
[Interjections.] I thought you were bringing the Bill to this Parliament to
come up with constructive criticism, with constructive solutions – together
as people who own the Western Cape with minority problems. But you are
coming here to score cheap political points and saying that you have been
receiving clean audits.

Chairperson, I won’t argue any more. I’ve got three minutes left and I will
give the three minutes to the hon Nonkonyana. [Applause.]

Mr T BOTHA: Hon House Chair, the example of some of the things that have
been referred to here has to do with the Buffalo City Municipality where,
within this period of democracy in our country, a fifth municipal manager
has been appointed within the space of less than 15 years. You cannot have
stability in that kind of situation.

The parachuting of cadres into top positions has led to grave concerns in
public service delivery. For one thing, many of them did not have the right
qualifications, or the necessary experience to enable them to manage. To
make the situation even more untenable, those who entered the public
service in the upper echelons sought to move on to greener pastures in a
short space of time.

Career-pathing in the civil service is an essential requirement. Without
it, young talent will not be drawn into the service. The move to create a
unified public service will go a long way towards remedying this situation.

Instead of best practices, government adopted the worst practices and
expected local government to function miraculously. Unfortunately, using
political connections in place of qualifications and nepotism in place of
knowledge have left local government in a dire situation.

In the rural areas the situation is worse as skilled personnel have neither
facilities nor career prospects for them to be attracted to these areas.
Unless public servants are suitably incentivised, they will give rural
districts a wide berth. These disadvantaged areas will therefore remain
seriously disadvantaged for a long time.
Rural municipalities are the institutions that are suffering the most. They
are the municipalities that receive the least amount of money because of
their surrounding circumstances. Cope has consistently called for the
professionalisation of the public service, because putting square pegs into
round holes just cannot work.

Managing municipalities requires enormous skills. Reviving the principles
of the Institute of Town Clerks and the Institute of Municipal Treasurers
of a good code of conduct and minimum skills requirements were necessary.
In fact, it was necessary to restore these codes of conduct.

Furthermore, an organisational structure must be built around the idea of
making the public service an attractive area to draw skilled personnel: a
system where qualified people would want to stay and work in their local
municipalities because of the opportunities presented in a broader civil
service that has to exist in those areas. Merit must be counterbalanced
with the need to transform the Public Service.

A 2007 study found that a mere 1 400 civil engineers were left in local
government; just three civil engineers for every 100 000 inhabitants,
compared to 21 000 two decades earlier. One third of local authorities have
no engineers at all. At present, just 7% of sewerage treatment plants meet
international standards.
On the financial side, qualified financial personnel or officers are in
desperate demand, as are chartered accounts, statisticians, managers,
forensic scientists and detectives. Transformation must rectify the
apartheid legacy. Transformation must, at the same time, address the needs
of the poor and the marginalised as it must address the needs for a
transformed management. It must not only seek to address the one end of the
problem to the exclusion of the other.

It is encouraging that 44% of university graduates are black. The problem,
however, is that we do not have an adequate number of suitably qualified
individuals to allow for an equitable appointment in terms of the totality
of public sector vacancies. Our skills base must be further developed and
empowered. Thank you, Chair. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Chairperson, well apart from the troglodytes in the
Department of Labour and the Employment Equity Commission and the Black
Management Forum who can’t see what’s going on around them and who seem to
think that skills shortage is a myth created by white supremacists, the
rest of us know that, in fact, there is a skills shortage in the country,
and that at a municipal level this applies to both the administrative and
the technical level.

We’ve heard already that many municipalities, far too high a percentage,
are without municipal managers at all, or without chief financial officers,
CFOs, and a far higher percentage where the MMs, municipal managers, and
CFOs are, in fact, underqualified or unqualified.

There’s a wonderful case you might like to hear about of a municipality in
Limpopo which gave the position of CFO to the tea lady. Another one has
outsourced 95% of its financial functions, because it can’t find anybody to
do the work.

On a technical level, just to remind ourselves: in the 1980s and the early
1990s there were 2 500 engineers working in municipalities. With the
increased wall-to-wall municipal system, the current number is 1 300, half
of what we had then.

So what do you expect out of all this? You get weak internal project
management, declining water quality, inadequate sanitation and waste-water
treatment and, of course, the potholes everywhere — and corruption and
patronage.

So, we have a real problem here. Now, of course, the government
acknowledges, fortunately, that it is partly to blame. The District Manager
who is sitting there now said, in fact: We overestimated their political
depth; we overestimated government experience and technical capacity at
local government level. So what can be done now to solve the problem?

Well, the first thing we need to do, of course, is to approve the Bill that
the two colleagues before me have mentioned that is before the House. Some
of this should have been introduced years ago.

Mrs F F MUSHWANA: Chairperson, on a point of order: Would the hon member
take a question, because he is talking about Limpopo?

Mr P F SMITH: No, I have three minutes and you wasted half of it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Smith, just wait.

Mr P F SMITH: I have said no already, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): It was not a point of order. It
should have been whether you would take a question. So, you put it wrongly.
Could we just leave it there then? You said “point of order” so we thought
it was a point of order. It was never a point of order. Now you are asking
a question. [Laughter.]

Mrs F F MUSHWANA: Thank you, Chair. May I correct it? I’m very new here.
Could the hon member please take a question?

Mr P F SMITH: No, Chair. I’ve got one minute left, so it won’t be very
useful to do so, will it? [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you very much. Hon Smith,
continue.

Mr P F SMITH: So what do we do, Chair? Three things: We approve the Bill
that’s going through Parliament now, because it deals with some of the
problems we have, such as making contract staff permanent, reducing the
politicisation of senior staff and establishing special purpose vehicles to
ensure delivery of municipal infrastructure.

We need far better linkages with the private sector. You can outsource many
functions with skills transfers; you can establish a core of experienced
engineers at a provincial level to engage in work at municipal level; you
can second local staff to contractors to get skills.

But on the government side we really must say that much, much more needs to
be done in respect of formal training. This includes training of
councillors, of course, and more particularly focusing on the calibre of
management.

Compulsory performance monitoring, which is due and is meant to be there in
law - we don’t really do it - is all very well, but that only works if the
people you are monitoring are capable to start with. International
experience tells us that if you don’t secure the right talent from the
beginning, you are not going to get the right outputs.

Fortunately, government at long last is doing something about the problem,
having lived with blinkered eyes for a long time. But, nonetheless, we will
therefore support what is being done to address the problems and give
advice when asked. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon member. Hon N M
Kganyago ...? Oh, I skipped you, hon Smith; you will follow after him, my
apologies. Kganyago, continue, then Smith will come after you. Oh, Smith
has spoken. Kganyago, you are the right person. The confusion is who’s
sitting there, hon Groenewald.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: ... [Inaudible.] ... Chair. So I don’t know where he
came from.

Mr N M KGANYAGO: No, I was sitting right there. Maybe you didn’t see me.

Chairperson, the skills shortage in local government is a long-standing
concern of the UDM. Indeed, in our most recent election manifesto it was an
issue we raised, particularly in terms of poor service delivery. It is
indisputable that a significant part of the frustration that communities
express during service delivery protests relates directly to failures by
municipalities. In turn, these service delivery failures are often the
result of skills shortages in critical areas such as engineering,
management and financial planning.

However, we need to be clear that the phrase “skills shortage” has become a
more palatable way of saying “vacancy”. The amount of critical vacancies in
local government must be one of the first issues that must be addressed if
we intend to address the widespread failure of local government.

Local government administration has suffered in many cases from undue
political interference by councillors and the executive in the day-to-day
running of a municipality. This is the root of the corruption which seems
to accompany poor management.

In addition, there is anecdotal evidence that many vacancies stem from
officials and politicians undermining or actively removing effective and
dedicated specialists because these officials would not tolerate
incompetence and corrupt behaviour.

Cadre deployment, which has become a byword for “nepotism”, has rewarded
political and personal connections over skill; just as it has celebrated
mediocrity over competence. The net result is that the government,
especially at local level, has lost many skilled professionals. The UDM
repeats its policy proposal of filling some of these vacancies at local
government level from among the ranks of the many qualified professional
young people who are unemployed. I thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, ek het verlede jaar ’n vraag aan die
agb Minister gestel, en die Minister het erken dat daar minstens 33
munisipaliteite is wat verlede jaar geen ingenieur in diens gehad het nie.

Die debat wat ons hier voer, gaan oor die tekort aan kundigheid. As ons
gaan kyk na die finansiële verslae, dan sien ons in die hele totale sfeer
van plaaslike regering dat daar ’n gebrek aan kundigheid is.

Die agb Doman is korrek. Hy het die punte hierso een vir een aangespreek,
byvoorbeeld vakatures wat ontstaan wat nie gevul word nie.

Maar, wat ek nie verstaan nie, is dat die agb Doman nie kan verstaan hóékom
dit nie gevul word nie! Die ANC noem dit regstellende aksie, en die agb
Doman behoort aan ’n party wat regstellende aksie ondersteun.

Voorsitter, u het hoeveel sprekers van die DA op hierdie podium gehad wat
sê dat daar regstellende aksie moet wees. Agb Doman sê hy bevestig dit,
maar hy kan mos nou nie kla daaroor as hy nou begin saai wat hy gemaai het
nie.
Agb Doman, u versterk die ANC in hul soeke na regstellende aksie. U is die
vennoot van die ANC in hierdie aspek. [Gelag.]

Voorsitter, ek wil vandag vir u sê, die Vryheidsfront het Suid-Afrikaanse
talent. Ons het hoeveel CVs van professionele mense – ingenieurs, ouditeurs
– wat beskikbaar is. Ons bied dit aan u. Kom na ons toe; ons sal vir u die
name gee om daardie kundigheid te herstel. Dankie. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, last year I posed a question to the
hon Minister, and the Minister admitted that there are at least 33
municipalities that didn’t have any engineers in their service.

The debate that we are conducting here is about the shortage of skills.
When we have a look at the financial reports then we find that there is a
shortage of skills in the entire sphere of local government.

The hon Doman is correct. He addressed the issues here one by one, for
instance, vacancies that become available that are not being filled.

But, what I cannot comprehend is that the hon Doman cannot understand why
it is not being filled! The ANC calls it affirmative action, and the hon
Doman belongs to a party that supports affirmative action.
Chairperson, you have had many speakers from the DA on this podium who
stated that there has to be affirmative action. Hon Doman is saying that he
upholds this, and then he shouldn’t be complaining about it now that he has
to start reaping what he has sowed.

Hon Doman, you are strengthening the ANC in their quest for affirmative
action. You are in partnership with the ANC in this regard. [Laughter.]

Chairperson, I want to say to you today, the Freedom Front is in possession
of South African talent. We have many CVs of professional people —
engineers, auditors — who are available. We offer them to you. Come to us;
we will give you the names in order for those skills to be reinstated.
Thank you.]

Mrs M WENGER: Chair, the skills shortages in local government are evident
throughout the country, particularly in the engineering field. The SA
Institute of Civil Engineering, Saice, in a recent presentation stated that
only 1 300 civil engineering professionals were available to serve a
population of 47 million. There is thus only 2,8 civil engineering staff
available per 100 000 people.

During a recent ad hoc committee oversight visit to Mpumalanga, we were
informed that only three engineers were in service in municipalities to
serve the entire population of the province, and this shows.
Skills shortages will continue to hamper service delivery at municipal
level in the absence of engineers, technologists and technicians in
particular as projects will fail and huge amounts of money are wasted.

Municipalities are failing owing to limited capacity; funding; support for
technical solutions; operations, maintenance and asset management; and
leadership, discipline and corruption. Infrastructure projects fail mainly
owing to limited capacity and control. Four percent of contractors abandon
their projects as they cannot cope. One percent of contractors abandon
projects as the municipality does not pay them timeously.

In the housing sector, 7% of contractors’ work needed remedial work, while
18% was of a poor quality. Eleven percent had faulty designs.  At the end
of it all, only 51% of the work was completed satisfactorily with minor
problems.

The above figures demonstrate the dire situation and wastage of funds that
could have been put to better use.

The lack of maintenance in water and sanitation will continue to be one of
our major challenges. We often say that water is life but, sadly, not all
our communities have access to this basic need. In many instances, sewage
runs down the streets and into our rivers. Pumps are broken, roads are
impassable and many areas still do not have access to electricity.

Most of our municipalities suffer great losses in water, resulting in a
loss of revenue to the municipality while, at the same time, causing
structural damage to many of our roads. In Gauteng alone, R1,295 billion
has been lost owing to leaking pipes. If we had efficient and competent
engineers employed, this would not have happened. All too often the cost of
their professional salaries is used as an excuse, but, if we take into
consideration the figures of the losses, these amounts could rather have
been used for professional fees.

In many instances, positions are politicised instead of professionalised.
The time has come for all municipalities to appoint professional,
registered, senior officials - with the assistance of the SA Institute of
Civil Engineers - that have sound track records. Why are we not using the
skills of professionals? Saice has developed job descriptions, training
plans and policies that we should be looking at adopting instead of shying
away from. Past experience has shown that, many a time, officials who are
commissioned and tasked to do the interviewing are not qualified enough or
competent enough to make the right decisions, but are rather biased through
their political affiliations.

An action plan is needed urgently to avoid any further delivery problems.
We should bring the professionals on board through Saice to assist
municipalities by seconding young engineers, staff and apprentices under
their professional watch. They could be responsible for assessing backlogs,
come up with plans on how to refurbish and rehabilitate ailing
infrastructure and put in place a maintenance plan that could be beneficial
to the particular municipality.

This should also be linked to education and training. Tertiary institutions
should consider offering courses that are geared towards local government,
such as national diplomas in municipal engineering. There could also be
courses offered in operations and maintenance as well as asset management.

We could also engage with the private sector and request them to assist
with experienced professional staff in order to be effective, people who
could assist in turning around the shortcomings that we are currently
experiencing. There are solutions to the problem. What we need is
commitment, commitment and commitment. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, the ACDP acknowledges that the culture of apportioning
blame rather than finding solutions is decidedly unhelpful, and we enter
this debate with this in mind.

If we are to alleviate the present skills shortage, local government must
have the option to employ scarce skills from wherever they can be found —
internally or externally — and to do so quickly and efficiently. Pervasive
skills shortages imply that closed-economy solutions to the problem will
not be sufficient or speedy enough to solve the skills crisis we are
experiencing.

In 2008 there were at least 70 municipal authorities in the country without
a single engineer or artisan. Government said that affirmative actions and
employment equity policies would not be allowed to stand in the way of
municipalities and local authorities, but we have yet to see this
implemented. Unless we produce at least 2 400 artisans and engineers a
year, we are not going to cope with the skills shortages in the country.

Right now, South Africa has a broad range of hard skills that could
contribute directly to alleviating the skills and business management
crisis in most municipalities and add considerable value to the areas of
housing, health care, finance and many other critical areas. Not ensuring
access to the skills of African nationals already within our borders, and
being chained to affirmative action when service delivery is at stake, is
irrational.

As the quality of life in South Africa deteriorates, crippling service
delivery protests are likely to erupt again. The ACDP proposes drastically
reduced restrictions on skilled foreign immigrants working in South Africa.
Schemes like the one in the UK — that allow people that reside in the
Commonwealth to work in the country for specified periods — should be
considered.

South Africa needs expensive, highly qualified workers. We must find ways
to encourage them to work here, and we must ensure that their skills and
professional work ethics are transferred to local workers. Thank you.

Mrs M N MATLADI: Chairperson, efforts like the public-private partnership
driven by Microsoft SA, the SA Local Government Association, the Local
Government Sector Education and Training Authority and the Development Bank
of Southern Africa are appreciated and welcomed.

It is initiatives like these that will ensure that the legacy of the skills
shortage in local government is changed for the better.

We also need a broader, comprehensive definition when we talk about a
skills shortage. It should not only be about the scarcity of a qualified
and employable workforce, but must also be linked to productivity.

Clearly, the co-ordination was very poor between the Department of Labour
and the Sector Education and Training Authorities, Setas, which is why we
are still sitting with the problem of skills shortages.

However, the UCDP hopes that, with the Department of Higher Education and
Training holding the reins, there would be desirable progress. I thank you.

Mr R B BHOOLA: Mr Chairperson, government has lacked foresight since 1994
because, on the one hand, you have a large number of qualified people who
are unemployed coupled with an utter failure to direct matriculants towards
embarking on careers in which there is a shortage of manpower.

We should have recruited matriculants, taken them to municipalities, and
shown them that we need town planners, administrators and people in
municipal government, so that by now there should have been an oversupply
of skilled manpower. It is a failure on the part of government not to have
had the foresight to train people.

On the other hand, you have the Setas. Money is allocated for training and
education, but there is no monitoring. So Seta has now become “cheater”!
Those that are getting the money are cheating the government and taxpayers.
And, of course, we should do things and get away from affirmative action
and the equity policies. We should treat all South Africans as true South
Africans and equal citizens and not do things according to race.
It is the MF’s considered opinion that had we started training our people
since 1994, we would not have had a skills shortage in local government; we
would have had an oversupply. I thank you.

Mr K J DIKOBO: Chairperson, we will start by stating the obvious: the
answer to the skills shortage is skills development and training; it is
identifying scarce and critical skills and redirecting young people to take
up courses in the identified skills.

Municipalities must offer bursaries to young people in these scarce and
critical skills so that these young people can, in turn, come and render
services to the municipalities.

The Local Government Sector Education and Training Authority is charged
with dealing with skills shortages in their sector. With the move to the
National Skills Development Strategy III, NSDS III, it may be necessary for
the Department of Higher Education and Training to commission an impact
study to evaluate the impact that the Local Government Seta and other Setas
have had on skills development in the country. The country is spending a
lot of money on skills development, but is there value for money?

But then, is it correct, hon members, to say that there is a skills
shortage in local government, or has nepotism and corruption in employment
or cadre deployment brought us to where we are? Many professionals are
reluctant to move to municipalities because the sector is unstable and
experiences a lot of interference and suspensions of officials. Thank you.

Mr M NONKONYANA: Hon Chairman, hon Ministers present here, colleagues, hon
members, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, first and foremost,
thank you, Chair, for giving me this opportunity to air the views of the
people’s movement that I represent, the ANC.

The ANC is committed, and consistently so, to improving the role played by
all organs of state in all spheres of government in order to achieve our
broader objectives as a movement. Progress has been made by the movement in
transforming local government while we also acknowledge the challenges and
obstacles still besetting this sphere of government.

The Reconstruction and Development Programme document set out our policy as
follows, and I quote:

  Local government is of critical importance to the RDP. It is the level of
  representative democracy closest to the people. Local government should
  be structured on a democratic, nonracial and nonsexist basis.


The ANC has been at the forefront of championing the transformation of
local government, hon Doman. This transformation agenda has always been
informed by the strategy and tactics, in particular, of the task of
building a developmental state. It is therefore imperative that the future
political trajectory of developmental local government be consistent with
the attributes of the developmental state.

The ANC’s 2006 local government manifesto, amongst other things,
acknowledged the following: one, to ensure that more resources and trained
personnel are provided for local government; two, to audit skills in each
municipality; and, three, to employ more competent managers and
technicians.

The 52nd National Conference of the ANC in 2007 provided another important
platform for our movement to confirm and redouble its efforts relating to
transformation of the state, in particular of legislature and governance.
Again, the conference, through its commission on strategy and tactics,
defined and articulated its understanding and vision of the key attributes
of the South African developmental state. The four key attributes are
outlined as follows – and listen, DA. They are strategic orientation,
capacity to lead in the definition of a common national agenda, the state’s
organisational capacity, and the state’s technical capacity. I lead now,
and I am going to do that by also teaching you.

The local sphere of government must be assessed and positioned in
accordance with the above attributes of a developmental state. It is also
imperative that all organs and spheres of government are aligned and guided
by the same vision of building a developmental state.

Our achievements thus far ... [Interjections.] ... Listen! As the ANC we
have committed ourselves to providing a better life for all. As such, the
transformation of the apartheid local government was a central pillar in
achieving our objective. The local government transformation process was a
complex one, and it involved the basic and most critical services that
affect our people on a daily basis. You were privileged at the time,
fortunately.

The ANC has made significant strides towards local government
transformation and towards ensuring that the majority of our people have
access to basic services. Over the past 10 years, the ANC has succeeded in
directing a huge process of transformation that has certainly put
municipalities on an irreversible path towards achieving our objectives of
ensuring united and integrated nonracial communities, building critical
infrastructure for communities and deepening democracy.

The ANC government ensured that massive strides were made by municipalities
in extending service delivery to our people. This is clearly indicated in
the community survey of 2007. For instance, we showed national levels of
access to basic services to be as follows: 92% for water, 69% for
sanitation, 81% for electricity, and 64% for refuse removal.

Despite the significant progress made, there remain some constraints in
accelerating service delivery. The cornerstone of the ANC government
programme is redistribution and poverty eradication in all municipalities.
Meeting the basic needs of the millions of South Africans living in poverty
remains our fundamental objective. The local government sphere is critical
in our efforts to achieve our goals of a better life for all, and this
sphere can only do more by all of us working together. [Applause.]

Local government, therefore, have challenges that can be categorised in two
parts: structural challenges and system challenges. Let me deal with the
structural challenges so that you understand, and these include service
delivery backlogs. There are high levels of backlogs regarding municipal
service delivery, in that the overall national level of access to basic
municipal services - water, sanitation, electricity and roads - stands at
54%, and we know that. The lowest level of access in some provinces stands
at 15%.

Secondly, the need to roll out service infrastructure to previously
neglected areas while still maintaining infrastructure in the well-serviced
areas has placed an enormous financial and capacity burden on
municipalities. Thirdly, the financial viability of some of the
municipalities is questionable. A proper assessment of the financial
viability of many of the municipalities, particularly the smaller
municipalities, has yet to be determined in the context not only of newly
drawn geographical and factional boundaries, but in terms of the impact on
revenue streams.

Fourthly, with regard to rapid urbanisation and migration, the urbanisation
of our cities is accelerating at a rapid pace. The cities are constantly
required to extend services to new migrants. The migrations experienced are
from people from rural areas and also migrants from outside South Africa.
Lastly, in terms of building the local economies, the municipalities are
continually faced with the challenge of building their local economies to
provide sustainable employment.

Let us deal briefly with the systems. Poor financial government is a key
challenge for municipalities, which is reflected in the audit opinions over
the past few years. The overall number of municipalities with qualified
audit opinions only decreased by 28%, from 199 in the 2007-08 financial
year to 144 municipalities in the 2008-09 financial year.

Corruption at the local level is also a trend that requires decisive
intervention. [Applause.] This is evident through the collapse of the basic
government system, blatant transgression of legislation passed by this
House on supply-chain management and inappropriate appointment of people to
key positions in municipalities, including the DA-controlled
municipalities. There is a shortage of some required capacities to
implement and manage the new system and the functions of local government.
This is especially the case for smaller, rural municipalities that are not
able to recruit the necessary technical expertise.

Financial and engineering capacities are specific challenges in many
municipalities.

What are the key issues for consideration, because the DA is moaning and
moaning? These include the following: the system that we have is complex
and ineffective; the system is different in every province, that is, there
is no consistency in functional arrangements; the system creates challenges
of unfunded mandates for local government; the system creates four layers
of government; and the system creates a high level of grant dependency.

There are little developmental planning facilities, redistribution and
support for local government. There is poor intergovernmental cohesion
between local municipalities and district municipalities. Districts perform
few functions with capacity, including priority functions such as
development planning, water services, bulk supply of electricity, domestic
waste removal and municipal roads.

We believe good governance and professionalism of local government is key
here, and I want the DA to listen carefully. Democratic and professional
local government is not incompatible. The professional integrity of
municipalities requires strengthening from various perspectives.
Furthermore, professionalism in local government must be seen as an
additional quality to the atavistic, responsive, accountable, effective and
efficient municipal system that we seek to build. [Applause.]

Specific issues to consider to improve the overall professionalism of
municipalities should include the following: Government must develop a
clear policy that clarifies the roles of troika plus one; the municipal,
executive and legislative functions must be separated more clearly; the
code of conduct of elected public representatives and appointed officials
must be strengthened; the framework of government relations between elected
and appointed officials must be reviewed; and mandatory internal audit
functions in municipalities, which are accountable to the independent audit
committee of municipalities, must be introduced. That is not all.

The municipal public accounts committees must be established as a legal
requirement that operates similar to public accounts committees at national
and provincial spheres. A statutory inspectorate for local government must
be established. I am sorry to tell you, hon Doman, we are not going to go
back to what you want us to go back to, that is, to have the old apartheid
legislation of town clerks in place. Not at all. [Applause.] We want to go
forward; we have buried the apartheid that you are so fond of forever.
We must ensure that the professional associations monitor the code of
conduct of their members in local government. All section 57 managers must
belong to a professional organisation and a statutory inspectorate.
Therefore, a statutory inspectorate for local government must be
established and will be established by the ANC government.

On suspension of section 57 managers, all municipalities must get
concurrence from the MECs, as well as our national Minister. Again, common
and/or compatible ICT systems must be in place across all municipalities to
accelerate service delivery, improve efficiency and accountability. The
internal capacity of municipalities must be strengthened to reduce reliance
on external consultants. Apparently, your friends - those people who were
skilled and who had experience in local government – left when the new
democratic government took office, because they couldn’t serve the people’s
government and they turned themselves into consultants and are actually
milking us of millions of rands. [Interjections.] That is not going to
happen. Qualified and skilled staff should be appointed to oversee the
implementation of bylaws. Also, the induction of new municipal councillors
must be standard.

Last but not least, I have heard the hon Minister Shiceka and the Deputy
Minister, Comrade Carrim - and I am happy the Deputy Minister is also here
- saying that they have heard the voice of the people through the ANC, and
it is indeed music to their ears. We’ll do everything to make sure that we
have disciplined and dedicated personnel properly skilled and dedicated to
do more. [Interjections.]

Chairman, the people of South Africa, and I dare say those of Africa and
the world, have confidence in the ANC, and we are humbled by this and
determined to accelerate the pace of delivering a better life even more,
and we trust that the people will encourage us by voting for the ANC more
in the 2011 local government elections. [Interjections.] I need to also
advise the DA, through the hon Doman, that a rabble-rousing argument cannot
impress anyone. I understand that the DA is a concoction of liberals and
“verkramptes” of old and, of course, the ultra right, and cannot impress
the people of this country ... [Applause.] But, perhaps, they impress only
the rabble, themselves, the DA.

I want to point out, therefore, that whatever you have said against the ANC
is not founded at all. [Interjections.] We have not appointed people on the
basis of political connections, as you have done in the Cape Town
municipality. [Interjections.] And that is why the people in Langa and
also, unfortunately, the people that you are using as pawns in many parts
of rural Cape Town are suffering today, as Comrade Nhlengethwa correctly
pointed out.

To you, Comrade Botha and Cope: I see my comrade’s one finger pointing at
the ANC, but foursquarely at Cope. I mention this as it is a pity that my
comrade from the Eastern Cape, the hon George, has just left because he was
talking about a city that we all know or the municipality we all know
about, Buffalo City Municipality. He knows - I come from the Eastern Cape –
as he was the ANC chairperson of the Amatole region then, before the
divorce papers were filed by the hon Terror Lekota ... [Interjections.] ...
that whatever he was doing, he was doing ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, I would like to thank the Whips for allowing
this debate and to thank everyone who took part. I think that there is
general agreement that we are sitting with a big problem and that we do not
only want to apportion some blame, but we also want to provide solutions.
By working hard and, at last, acknowledging all the things that have gone
wrong, we can change things around.

On the issues of vacancies and the skills shortage, there is no question
that the ANC dropped the ball. I think that the voters must punish them
next year in the election. Even the President acknowledged that cadre
deployment should no longer take place. I just want to say to the hon
member Nhlengethwa that I am not against cadre development. I wish that
there was a lot of cadre development. What I am against is cadre
deployment.

But the hon Nonkonyana comes here and he doesn’t want to acknowledge what
even his President acknowledged. I must tell him that the facts speak for
themselves. If the voters take into account what the ANC has done to local
government in the past decade, there should be no support for them next
year.

Die agb Groenewald is baie moedswillig. As dit kom by regstellende aksie,
het ons mos ’n ooreenkoms in die Grondwet bereik. Op grond van daardie
ooreenkoms is die wetgewing geskryf. Ons ondersteun die Grondwet en ons, as
die DA, ondersteun die wetgewing. Ons probleem is hoe die ANC dit toepas.

Ek is baie teleurgesteld dat die VF Plus nou hier met ’n radikale standpunt
kom dat daar geen regstellende aksie moet wees nie. Dit sal miskien julle
kiesers tevrede stel, maar vir ons in ons land sal dit nie ’n goeie ding
wees nie. Ons het verantwoordelike regstellende aksie nodig, waar nodig, en
die DA ondersteun dit. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The hon Groenewald is very mischievous. Regarding affirmative action,
surely we have reached an agreement in the Constitution. It was according
to that agreement that legislation was drawn up. We support the
Constitution and we, the DA, support the legislation. The problem we have
is the way the ANC implements this legislation.

I am very disappointed in the radical approach now taken by the FF Plus
that there should be no affirmative action. It might satisfy your voters,
but it would not be a good thing for us in this country of ours. We need
responsible affirmative action, where necessary, and the DA supports this.]

Chairperson, thank you very much to everyone that took part in the debate.
I really hope that we will be able to address the skills shortage. I am
sure that there are people outside there who are ready to assist, but we
just need the political will, especially from this side of the House, to
acknowledge it and to make use of those people. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 15:58.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 27 AUGUST 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

   1. Submission of Public Protector Report No 20 of 2010-11
     a) A letter, dated 23 August 2010, has been received from the
        President of the Republic, submitting to the National Assembly a
        report of the Public Protector on an investigation conducted in
        terms of section 3(1) and 4(1) of the Executive Members’ Ethics
        Act, 1998 (No 82 of 1998), the President’s comments thereon and
        action taken in regard to the report’s recommendations.

                           TUESDAY, 31 AUGUST 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a money Bill:

          a) Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 28 - 2010] (National Assembly
             – sec 77).
    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Transport Laws Repeal Bill [B 19 - 2010] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

          b) Voluntary Disclosure Programme and Taxation Laws Second
             Amendment Bill [B 29 - 2010] (National Assembly – sec 75).
2.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 31 August 2010:


          a) Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Bill [B 2B –
             2009] (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Social Assistance Amendment Bill [B 5B – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 76(1)).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Submission of Public Protector Report No 19 of 2010-11

     1) A letter, dated 15 August 2010, has been received from the
        President of the Republic, submitting to the National Assembly a
        report of the Public Protector on an investigation conducted in
        terms of section 3(1) and 4(1) of the Executive Members’ Ethics
        Act, 1998 (No 82 of 1998), the President’s comments thereon and
        action taken in regard to the report’s recommendations.

    Correction:  This announcement replaces Item 1 under Tablings by the
               Speaker on p 2497 of the ATC of 24 August 2010.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Parliament of the Republic
        of South Africa, Vote 2, for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010, tabled in terms of section 59 of the
        Financial Management of Parliament Act, 2009 (Act No 10 of 2009).

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the Auditor-
        General for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010 [RP 229-2010].

 2. The Minister of Tourism


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 25 for 2009-2010 [RP 181-2010].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism for
        2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.

3.    The Minister of Labour


     a) Report and Financial Statements of Department of Labour – Vote 15
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information of Vote 15 for
        2009-2010, the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information of the Sheltered Employment
        Factories for 2009-2010 and the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of the National Skills Fund for 2009-2010
        [RP 129-2010].


     b) Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
        Development and Labour Council (NEDLAC) for 2009-2010, including
        the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        for 2009-2010.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
        Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 84-2010].


    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund for
        2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


    (e)     Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment Insurance
        Fund (UIF) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010 [RP 134-2010].


    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of Productivity SA for 2009-
        2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
        132-2010].


   4. The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Public
        Enterprises – for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 201-2010].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Proprietary) Limited
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.



COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1. Report of the Constitutional Review Committee On 2009 Public
   Submissions

1.    Introduction

      In terms  of  section  45  of  the  Constitution,  Parliament  has  to
      establish a joint  committee  to  review  the  Constitution  at  least
      annually.

      In  giving  effect  to  this  provision,  the  Constitutional   Review
      Committee placed advertisements in the media on 17,  18  and  19  July
      2009  inviting   public   submissions   regarding   changes   to   the
      Constitution.  In all, 15 submissions were received.


      The Committee requested the Parliamentary  Legal  Services  office  to
      consider  each  of  the  submissions   in   the   light   of   current
      jurisprudence.


      Hereunder are brief summaries of the submissions  of  the  public,  as
      well as the Committee’s views and its recommendations.


     2. Summaries of public submissions

      Submission 1 by Mr Jerome Veldsman

      The  submitter  suggests  that  “the  value  of  human  dignity,   the
      achievement of equality  and  the  advancement  of  human  rights  and
      freedoms” require that “the Constitution ought to be sanitised of bias
      in favour of religious persons to the disadvantage of persons  who  do
      not hold supernatural or deity beliefs.”  He proposes  the  review  of
      sections 6(5)(b)(ii),15(2), 16(2)(c), 35(2)(f)(iii), the first item in
      the Table of Non-Derogable Rights in section 37, and Schedule 2 of the
      Constitution.

      Section 6(5)(b)(ii)

      Section 6 (5) (b) (ii) requires that  the  Pan-South  Africa  Language
      Board (Pansalb)  “promote  and  ensure  respect  for  Arabic,  Hebrew,
      Sanskrit and other languages for religious purposes in South  Africa.”
      The submitter argues that Pansalb is  an  organ  of  state  funded  by
      public resources.  Therefore the use of public resources “is repugnant
      to the rule of separation of State  and  Church”.   He  suggests  that
      section 6(5) (b) (ii) to be deleted in its entirety.


      The Committee feels that the suggestion that section 6  (5)(b)(ii)  be
      deleted would not be necessary.  The rule which the submitter uses  as
      a premise; namely, the rule of separation of state and church  is  not
      part of South African constitutional jurisprudence.


      Conclusion


      The Committee is of the  opinion  that  the  proposal  made  does  not
      warrant a review of the Constitution.


      Section 15(2),
      Mr Veldsman argues that the provision in section 15(2),  which  allows
      “religious observances”  at  state  or  state-aided  institutions,  is
      logically inconsistent.  He submits that the practice at any state  or
      state–aided institutions is to integrate  religious  observances  into
      meetings where attendance is not free and voluntary.  Further he holds
      that the national policy on religion and education is  “intellectually
      dishonest” in its provision that pupils may be excused on  grounds  of
      conscience  from  attending  a  religious  observance  component.   He
      suggests that the inclusion of sub-clause  (d)  to  section  15(2)  in
      order to provide that “no religious observances may  be  conducted  at
      state or state-aided institutions at any meeting or activity at  which
      attendance is not free and voluntary”.


      The Committee acknowledges that the  argument  by  Mr  Veldsman  is  a
      constitutional matter.  However, it is of the view that the suggestion
      is tautologous, as  section  15(2)  (c)  already  provides  for  this.
      Furthermore, the Constitution is not opposed to religion,  but  values
      the role it plays in the society.


      Conclusion


      The Committee is of the opinion that the submission does not warrant a
      Constitutional amendment.


      Section 16 (2) (c),


      Mr Veldsman suggests that section 16 (2) (c), which provides that “the
      right to freedom of expression dose not extend to advocacy  of  hatred
      that is based  on  race,  ethnicity,  gender  or  religion,  and  that
      constitutes incitement to cause harm” is deficient,  as  it  does  not
      include the  full  ambit  of  human  contemplation.   He  argues  that
      advocacy of hatred based on conscience, thought, belief and opinion is
      as repulsive as the advocacy of hatred based on religion.  He suggests
      that the omission of these words in section  16(2)(c)  might  even  be
      construed as permitting advocacy of hatred based  on  conscience.   He
      therefore suggests that the terminology used in  section  15,  namely:
      “conscience, thought,  belief  and  opinion”  should  be  included  in
      section 16(2) (c).


      The Committee is of the view that section 16(2)(c)  circumscribes  the
      right to freedom of  expression.   However,  developing  the  inherent
      limitation  contained  in  section  16(2)(c),  as  suggested  by   the
      submitter, would limit the right to freedom of expression..


      Conclusion


      The Committee is of the opinion that the suggestion by  the  submitter
      is  a  policy  matter  and  does  not  warrant  any  review   of   the
      Constitution.


      Section 35(2)(f)(iii)


      Mr Veldsman argues that there is no  logical  or  rational  reason  to
      restrict the nature of counselling  in  section  35(2)(f)(iii),  which
      permits everyone who is detained , including every sentenced prisoner,
      to communicate with, and be visited by, the persons “chosen  religious
      counsellor”.  He suggests that section  35  (2)(f)(iii)  ought  to  be
      amended by omitting the word “religious” and substituting it with  the
      insertion of the word “contemplation”.


      The Committee, in deciding on its position on this matter,  considered
      the approach of the Constitutional Court in  the  Christian  Education
      case, in which the  Constitutional  Court  found  that  the  right  to
      freedom of religion, belief and opinion  in  an  open  and  democratic
      society contemplated by the Constitution  is  important.   Further  it
      decided that, although the rights of non-believers and minority faiths
      must be fully respected , the religious  beliefs  held  by  the  great
      majority of South Africans must be taken seriously” (at par [89]).


      Conclusion


      The Committee is of the opinion that there is no need to amend section
      35(2)(f)(iii), if the view of the  Constitutional  Court  is  accepted
      that not all religions are deistic.


      Table of Non-Derogable Rights found in section 37


      Me Veldsman argues that there exists no logical or rational reason  to
      distinguish between the protection of  the  right  to  equality  “with
      respect to unfair discrimination solely on grounds  of  …religion”  in
      the first item in the Table of Non-Derogable Rights found  in  section
      37,  from  “any  derogation  “  under  a  state  of   emergency,   and
      contemplation that does not include  supernatural/deity  beliefs.   He
      therefore suggests that the word “religion” be replaced with the words
      “conscience, religion, thought, belief and opinion”.


      The Committee does not agree with the proposal of replacing  the  word
      “religion” with “conscience, thought, belief and opinion”.  Developing
      the non-derogable rights as suggested by  the  submitter  would  allow
      less scope to achieve the aims of the state of emergency, which is  to
      restore peace and order.  The Committee views this as a policy  matter
      that does not warrant a review of the Constitution.


      He further argues that the inclusion of the words “(In the case of  an
      oath: So help me God.)” in the  oaths  found  in  Schedule  2  is  not
      necessary and contradicts the Constitutional  Court’s  view  that  the
      Constitution is secular.  He therefore suggests that  those  words  in
      Schedule 2 should be deleted.


      The Committee is of the view that the  approach  applied  in  the  two
      cases, namely Christian Education South Africa v Minster of  Education
      (2000 (10) BCLR 1051 (CC) at par [36 ]  and Minister of  Home  Affairs
      and Another v Fourie and Others; Lesbian and Gay Equality Project  and
      Others v Minister of Home Affairs and Others (2006 (3) BCLR 355  (CC))
      , in which  the  Constitutional  Court  indicated  the  importance  of
      religion, should be applied here.


      In reading the two cases, the Committee is of the view  that  it  does
      not  appear  that  the  Constitutional  Court  regards  protection  of
      religious communities in the  Constitution  as  contradictory  to  the
      secular nature and legal interpretation of the text.


      Conclusion


      The Committee is of the opinion that  the  submission  made  does  not
      warrant a review of the Constitution.

      Submission 2 by NABCAT Limpopo

      The  submission  proposes  a  review  of  the  Construction   Industry
      Development  Board  Act  38  of  2000.   NABCAT   alleges   that   the
      Construction Industry Development  Board  (CIDB)  was  established  to
      groom emerging contractors  and  capacitate  them  to  participate  in
      government projects, but has failed to do so. It further alleges  that
      the CIDB’s rating of construction companies disadvantages  black-owned
      construction  companies  and  perpetuates  past  imbalances   in   the
      construction industry.


      Conclusion


      The Committee is of the view  that  the  NABCAT  submission  does  not
      propose the review of  a  constitutional  provision,  but  rather  the
      possible review of an Act of Parliament relevant  to  this  particular
      issue.


      The Committee recommends that matter  be  referred  to  the  Director-
      General of the Department  of  Public  Works  and-  the  submitter  be
      advised as such.


      Submission 3 by Rashid Patel & Company


      The submission is on the infringement of Constitutional  rights.   The
      submitter  proposes  that  the  Constitution  should  be  amended   to
      incorporate a provision which  will  give  subjects  a  right  to  lay
      criminal charges against officials when they  infringe  Constitutional
      rights.


      The Committee is of the view that the submission does not specify  the
      Constitutional right(s) that  officials  allegedly  breach.   However,
      section 38 of the Constitution deals with the enforcement of rights.
      The Committee is therefore of the view  that  the  proposal  does  not
      warrant any amendment to the Constitution.

      Conclusion
      The Committee has recommended that this  matter  be  referred  to  the
      relevant Parliamentary Committee and/or the  Director-General  of  the
      Department of Public Service and Administration  -  the  submitter  be
      advised as such.


      Submission 4 by Mr McLeod


      It was submitted that all  references  to  God  be  removed  from  the
      Constitution to confirm the secular nature of  the  Constitution.   It
      was also suggested that the Constitution should establish and  include
      basic rights in accordance with the precepts of  Ubuntu  for  sentient
      beings, including animals.


      The Committee is of the opinion that the Constitution  is  founded  on
      the equality principle and is the supreme law.  As such  there  is  no
      confusion or conflation of the Constitution with ‘God’s law’.  Section
      15(2) indicates that the state has  a  strong  interest  in  religious
      bodies.  Further it found that the  Constitution  is  not  opposed  to
      religion, but values the role it plays in the society.


      On the proposal on the establishment and inclusion of basic rights  in
      accordance with the precepts of Ubuntu for sentient beings,  including
      animals, the  Committee  does  not  support  the  suggestion  for  the
      inclusion of positive rights for animals in the Constitution. It draws
      its conclusion on this matter from the judgements in the cases of Port
      Elizabeth Municipality v Various Occupiers 2004 (12)  BCLR  1268  (CC)
      and the Azanian Peoples Organisation and Others  v  President  of  the
      Republic of South Africa and Others 996 (8) BCLR 1015 (CC), as well as
      the judgment of Mokgoro J in S v Makwanyane and Another 1995 (6)  BCLR
      665 (CC) which recognized that fundamental rights were already infused
      with the precepts of Ubuntu. It feels that legislation that guarantees
      the protection of animals is sufficient.
      Conclusion

      The Committee is of the view that the submission does  not  warrant  a
      constitutional review..


      Submission 5 by Sekwele Centre for Social Reflections (SCSR)

      The submissions by the SCSR are as follows:

      (1)   Children’s Rights: section 28


      The proposal is for the limitation of section 28 of  the  Constitution
      so as to “restrict the conditions in which  termination  of  pregnancy
      should be performed”.  The submitter recommended that abortion  should
      be limited to instances where pregnancy poses a  health  risk  to  the
      baby or the mother, and where pregnancy was a result of rape.


      The Committee is of the view that section 28(2)  of  the  Constitution
      provides that the child’s best interests are of  paramount  importance
      in every matter that  concerns  the  child.   This  section  does  not
      regulate abortion.  The Choice of Termination of Pregnancy  Act,  1996
      (Act No.92 of 1996) deals with the termination of pregnancy.  It would
      seem  that  the  submitter  proposes  for   the   amendment   of   the
      Constitution,  bypassing  legislation   that   gives   effect   to   a
      Constitutional right.  The Committee notes the legal principle applied
      in the case of NAPTOSA and others v  Minister  of  Education,  Western
      Cape and Others 2001 (4) BCLR 388 (C).


      Conclusion


      The Committee is of the opinion that the submission does  not  warrant
      any constitutional review.


   2) Education Rights: section 29(1)(a)(b) and section 29(3)

      The SCSR proposes that an amendment should be made to section  29  (1)
      to provide for free basic education at least up to a Grade  12  level.
      The Committee is of the opinion that it  would  not  be  necessary  to
      amend the relevant section, as it already places a positive obligation
      on the state to take reasonable measures to  progressively  make  both
      basic and further education available and accessible to everyone.

      SCSR also suggested that section 29(1)(b) should be amended so  as  to
      relieve graduates of the legal obligation of repaying a loan  obtained
      through the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NASFAS).


      Conclusion


      The  Committee  decided  that  these  should  be   referred   to   the
      Parliamentary committees on Basic and Higher  Education  respectively,
      and the submitter should be advised as such.
   3) Section 25 : Property


      The SCSR proposes the scrapping of section   25 of the Constitution in
      its entirety.  The argument  is  that  this  section  is  serving  the
      interest of the rich at the expense of the poor. It further holds that
      section 25 is the cause of the widening gap between the rich  and  the
      poor.


      Conclusion


      The Committee has decided that  the  submission  be  deferred  pending
      further consultation by the political parties.

   Submission 6 by Dr M Pheko

   The  submission  proposes  an  amendment  in   section   25(7)   of   the
   Constitution.  The proposal concerns the effectiveness of section  25  of
   the Constitution in addressing past injustices.


   Conclusion


   The committee decided that the submission  be  deferred  pending  further
   consultation by the political parties.


   Submission 7  by  Mpumalanga  Provincial  House  of  Traditional  Leaders
   (MPHTL)


   The submission by the MPHTL suggests the following:


   1) The roles and functions of Traditional Councils  must  be  defined  in
      Chapter 12 of the Constitution.
   2) The status of the House must be defined  -  whether  it  is  a  public
      entity or part of Parliament.
   3) Recognition of traditional  leadership  must  include  all  layers  of
      traditional leadership.
   4) Intergovernmental relations must be amended to include the institution
      of Traditional Leadership.
   5) The House’s financial management must be regulated  by  the  Financial
      Management of Parliament Act.

   The submission by the MPHTL is still under consideration.


   Submission 8 by Mr or Ms Ruiters

   The Committee could not consider the submission as it was not legible and
   the submitter could not be traced.


   Submission 9 by Anne-Marie Robb


   The submitter requests the  Committee  to  address  the  issue  of  legal
   capacity, especially in  relation  to  mental  health  care  users.   She
   suggests that the Constitution should make it clear that  legal  capacity
   of persons cannot be taken away from them arbitrarily.  She also  submits
   that  the  term  “conscience”  may  seem  to   suffice,   but   including
   “psychosocial/physical disability “will enrich the Constitution  in  line
   with  the  United  Nations  Convention  on  the  Rights  of  People  with
   Disabilities.


   The Committee is of the  view  that  the  request  by  the  submitter  is
   sufficiently addressed in the Constitution, the Mental  Health  Care  Act
   and in general in the South African law of persons.


   Conclusion


   The Committee recommends that the submission be referred to the Director-
   General of the Department of Justice and Constitutional  Development  for
   further explanation on issues of legal capacity status- the submitter  be
   advised as such.


   Submission 10 by Mr Thamsanqa Robert Ncube


   The submission deals with the connections between material and  political
   inequality.  However, while the submission makes reference to the  inter-
   relationship between “material and political inequality and how  protests
   formed  around  demands  to  address  the  former   may   have   positive
   consequences”, the  submitter  does  not  propose  an  amendment  to  the
   Constitution as such.


   Conclusion


   The committee is of the view that the matter does not warrant a review of
   the Constitution.


   Submission 11 Advocates for Transformation (AFT) - Gauteng

   The submission recommends that Parliament should amend  sections  168(3),
   and 172, as well as sections 8 and 38 of the Constitution.  In regard  to
   section 168(3), the proposal is for the exclusion of  all  matters  which
   fall within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Labour  Appeal  Court  from  the
   jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Appeal.


   The AFT also argues that section 8 has  been  interpreted  to  mean  that
   common law or legislation must be relied on to invoke right in  the  Bill
   of Rights.  They argue that this is an incorrect interpretation and  that
   Parliament should amend this clause to make it clear  that  this  is  not
   what is intended.


   The AFT is of the view that section 38 of  the  Constitution  has  to  be
   dealt with in conjunction with section 172, which makes  it  clear  that,
   once a court has found that the law or conduct is inconsistent  with  the
   Constitution, it has to declare such law or conduct invalid to the extent
   of its inconsistency.


   Conclusion


   The Committee decided that the matter should be referred to the Portfolio
   Committee on Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  and  advises  the
   submitters to make a submission when the Superior  Courts  Bill  and  the
   Constitution 19th Amendment Bill are tabled.

   Submission 12 by Mr Mkhalipi


   The submission is on the distortions in the copies  of  the  Constitution
   which mark 10 years of  freedom.  The  submitter  questions  whether  the
   significance of the Constitution is appreciated in respect of the  manner
   in which the  text  is  distributed  and  its  value  is  promoted.   The
   submission indicates that the “most recent copies of the Constitution  in
   circulation contain several embarrassing  errata”  and  argues  that  the
   “oversight authority”, which is Parliament, might need to proof-read  and
   certify all updated editions of the Constitution.


   The Committee is of the view that the  issue  is  not  a  “Constitutional
   matter” that would require a Constitutional review.
   Conclusion


   The Committee recommends that the matter needs to  the  referred  to  the
   Director-General  of  the  Department   of   Justice   &   Constitutional
   Development and the publishers.


   Submission 13 by the National House of Traditional Leaders (NHTL)


   The submission proposes amendments to Chapter 12 of the Constitution. The
   NHTL also argues that the chapter of the Constitution, which  deals  with
   Local Government, deprives traditional leaders of their right  to  govern
   their own communities.  It proposes that the powers, functions and duties
   of any Local Government be performed by  traditional  leaders  to  ensure
   that service delivery and development  in  traditional  communities  take
   place rapidly.  It further suggests that, where an  organ  of  state  has
   allocated a role or  function  to  traditional  councils  or  traditional
   leaders, the organ of  state  must  monitor  the  implementation  of  the
   function and ensure that the implementation of the function is consistent
   with the Constitution.  Where a traditional council does not  perform  an
   allocated function, any resources  given  to  a  traditional  council  to
   perform that function may be withdrawn.   The  NHTL  also  suggests  that
   traditional leaders  should  be  represented  in  all  legislative-making
   bodies, including Parliament.


   The submission by the NHTL is still under consideration.


   Submission 14 by IDASA


   The  submission  proposes  an  amendment  to   section   47(1)   of   the
   Constitution.


   Conclusion


   The  Committee  has  decided  to  defer  the   submission   for   further
   consultation by parties.


   Submission 15 by Mr Ismail

   The submission by  Mr  Ismail  is  not  a  submission  in  respect  of  a
   Constitutional amendment, but rather a request for legal  advice  on  the
   legal remedies available to restitution claimants  who  are  dissatisfied
   with compensation paid to them in respect of their land claims.


   Conclusion


   The Committee is of the view that this matter does not  fall  within  its
   jurisdiction. The Committee has decided that Mr Ismail should be  advised
   to approach the nearest justice centre for advice on the legal remedies.




           Index of submissions received:


           |          |                                                      |
|Number    |Submitter                                             |
|1         | Mr Jerome Veldsman                                   |
|2         |NABCAT Limpopo                                        |
|3         |Rashid Patel & Company                                |
|4         |H Mcleod                                              |
|5         |Sekwele Centre for Social Reflection                  |
|6         |Dr M Pheko                                            |
|7         |Mpumalanga House of Traditional Leaders               |
|8         |Mr or Ms Ruiters                                      |
|9         |Ms Anne-Marie Robb                                    |
|10        |Thamsanqa Robert Ncube                                |
|11        |Advocates for Transformation-Gauteng                  |
|12        |Mr Mkhaliphi                                          |
|13        |National House of Traditional Leaders                 |
|14        |IDASA                                                 |
|15        |Mr M Ismail                                           |

   Report to be considered.

National Assembly

 1. Report  of  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional
    Development on the request by the National Assembly to  reconsider  the
    nomination of Advocate LKB Mpumlwana as a Commissioner  for  the  South
    African Human Rights Commission, dated 31 August 2010.
    The Portfolio Committee  on  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
    having considered the request by the National  Assembly  to  reconsider
    the nomination of Advocate LKB Mpumlwana as a Commissioner to the South
    African Human Rights Commission, reports as follows:


     1. Advertisements calling for persons to be nominated for  appointment
        as Commissioners to  the  South  African  Human  Rights  Commission
        (SAHRC) were placed in both national and regional newspapers in May
        2009 and, again, in September 2009. The  interviews  were  held  at
        Parliament from 14 to 17 September  2009:  Adv  LKB  Mpumlwana  was
        interviewed on 16 September 2009. After deliberating, the Committee
        recommended six nominees to the National Assembly  for  appointment
        as Commissioners to the SAHRC. Specifically,  it  recommended  that
        Adv LKB Mpumlwana be appointed to the  Commission  in  a  full-time
        capacity.


     2. However, during the debate on the nominations, certain matters were
        brought to the National Assembly’s attention. It was  alleged  that
        during his interview with the Committee, Adv Mpumlwana  had  failed
        to disclose that:


     1. He had been employed concurrently in the Premier’s  Office  in  the
        Provincial Administration of the Province of the Eastern  Cape  and
        by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC).
     2. He also omitted to disclose that he was discharged from the  employ
        of the TRC after being found guilty in a disciplinary hearing.


     3. On 12 November 2009, the National Assembly noted that the President
        had not appointed Adv. Mpumlwana to  allow  it  to  reconsider  his
        nomination.  It  amended  its  resolution  of  22  September  2010,
        omitting Adv. Mpumlwana’s name from the nomination list. The matter
        was then  referred  to  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Justice  and
        Constitutional Development for further consideration and report.


     4. The Committee  met  on  28  July  2010  to  consider  the  National
        Assembly’s request.


     1. The Committee, in particular, noted  the  judgement  in  Truth  and
        Reconciliation Commission v Mpumlwana and  Mpumlwana  v  Truth  And
        Reconciliation Commission And Another [2001]  3  All  Sa  58  (Ckl)
        which  found,  among  others,  that  Adv  Mpumlwana  “by  his  non-
        disclosure  of  his  employment  in  the  Eastern  Cape  Provincial
        Administration  fraudulently  misrepresented  to  the   Truth   and
        Reconciliation Commission that he was a fit and proper person to be
        employed by it, whereas that was not the case”.
    4.2      Adv  Mpumlwana  was  given  the  opportunity  to  address  the
        Committee on the issues raised.


     5. After considering all the material before it, and  Adv  Mpumlwana’s
        response, the Committee felt that it could not continue to  support
        his nomination as a Commissioner to the SAHRC in the light  of  the
        High Court Judgement  in  Truth  and  Reconciliation  Commission  v
        Mpumlwana and Mpumlwana v Truth And Reconciliation  Commission  And
        Another [2001] 3 All Sa 58 (Ckl).

    Recommendation


     6. The Committee recommends that the National  Assembly  withdraw  the
        nomination of Adv. Mpumlwana.

    Report to be considered.

2. Second Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
   Development on the appointment of persons to the South African Human
   Rights Commission in terms of section 193(5) of the Constitution, dated
   31 August 2010.

   The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development  having
   considered the  National  Assembly‘s  request  to  nominate  persons  for
   appointment to the South African  Human  Rights  Commission,  reports  as
   follows:


        1. The Committee conducted extensive interviews in  September  2009
           to fill the vacancies that had arisen in the South African Human
           Rights Commission.  The Committee recommended  six  nominees  to
           the National Assembly  for  appointment  as  Commissioners  (See
           report of the Committee, dated 17 September 2009).



        2.  At  the  request  of  the  National  Assembly,  the   Committee
           reconsidered the nomination of Adv LKB Mpumlwana and recommended
           that his nomination be withdrawn. (See Report of the  Committee,
           dated 31 August 2010).


        3. Dr Gladstone Sandi Baai was among those interviewed in September
           2009 and the Committee  identified  him  as  the  next  suitable
           candidate should a nominee become unavailable for appointment.

   Recommendation


   The Committee recommends to the National Assembly that Dr Gladstone Sandi
   Baai be recommended for  appointment  as  a  Commissioner  to  the  South
   African Human Rights Commission.



   Report to be considered.
3.    The following report replaces the report of  the  Portfolio  Committee
   on Rural Development and Land Reform published in the ATC dated 27 August
   2010; item 2, page 2516 under Committee Reports.

   “Report of the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and  Land  Reform
   on the Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill [B 9 – 2010] (National  Assembly
   – sec 76), dated 25 August 2010:

   The Portfolio Committee on  Rural  Development  and  Land  Reform  having
   considered the subject of the Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill  [B  9  –
   2010](  (National Assembly – Section 76), referred to it  and  classified
   by the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) as a Section 76  Bill,  reports  the
   Bill without amendments. The Committee further reports as follows:

1.    Background

The Black Authorities Act, No 68 of 1951 (hereinafter BAA) was  one  of  the
legislative cornerstones of apartheid engineering which  sought  to  control
communities of black people. It laid the foundation  for  the  establishment
of statutory tribal, regional and territorial authorities to administer  the
affairs of black people; and also  defined  the  functions  of  those  black
authorities.  It  has  remained  a  symbol  of  past  racial  divisions  and
discrimination and is entirely repugnant to  the  values  and  human  rights
enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa,  Act  108  of
1996.

The Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill [B 9 – 2010], tabled in Parliament  on
7 May 2010, seeks to repeal the BAA thereby removing  it  from  the  statute
book. Subsequent to the briefing by the Department of Rural Development  and
Land Reform, the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development  and  Land  Reform
invited public comments on the Black Authorities Act  Repeal  Bill  [B  9  –
2010]. It received five written submissions  and  seventeen  expressions  of
interest to make oral submissions. On 20 and  21  July  2010,  it  conducted
public  hearings  on  the  Black  Authorities  Act  Repeal  Bill  and  heard
submissions and testimonies from representatives of  rural  communities  and
organisations. The public hearing process was followed by  consideration  of
the Bill and deliberations on the submissions received by the committee.

This report outlines an overview of key issues arising from the  submissions
received  by  the  committee  and  further  provides  an  account   of   the
committee’s consideration and deliberation on submissions received,  and  on
the Bill.

2.    Overview of submissions received by the Committee

2.1   Law, Race and Gender Research Unit

The Law, Race and Gender Unit (LRG), based within  the  University  of  Cape
Town, welcomed the repeal of the BAA. The following questions regarding  the
repeal of the BAA were raised:

   • Would the repeal on its own be sufficient to undo the  legacy  of  the
     BAA?
   • Will additional processes be needed, and what would this entail?

The LRG argued that a set of post -1994 legal provisions further  entrenched
the legacy of the BAA. Some of the post apartheid  legislative  developments
were regarded as problematic and controversial. The  Traditional  Leadership
and Governance Framework Act 41 of 2003 (TLGFA) was  cited  as  an  example.
LRG submitted that Section 28 of the  TLGFA  entrenches  the  apartheid  era
tribal boundaries and  authorities  in  rural  areas;  and  perpetuates  and
legitimizes those boundaries and authorities associated with the BAA.

The TLGFA entrenches the BAA provisions as follows:

   •  It  gives  traditional  councils  the  very  kinds  of  unaccountable
     governance powers they had as traditional authorities under BAA.
   • It preserves and entrenches the  obsolete  and  repugnant  boundaries,
     authority structures and power relations between  traditional  leaders
     and their subjects.
   • It permits possibilities of collection of  taxes  and  levies  by  the
     traditional councils (section 4(2) and (3) (note that the Constitution
     [section 43 and 104] vests these powers  to  National  and  Provincial
     spheres of government). It  was  argued  that  this  provision  is  in
     contrast with  the  provisions  of  the  White  Paper  on  Traditional
     Leadership and Governance, which discourages imposition of  taxes  and
     levies by traditional authorities.

The submission highlighted to the  portfolio  committee  the  Constitutional
Court’s hearing on the Communal Land Rights Act 11 of 2004  (CLARA).  Deputy
Chief Justice Dikgang Moseneke expressed concerns regarding the use  of  BAA
as a platform for land reform. LRG contended that  the  repeal  of  the  BAA
falls short of what is required to address the legacy of apartheid in  rural
areas of South Africa.
The LRG, therefore, asked parliament to note the following:

  ← That the Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill mentions the  cut-off  dates
    for continued existence  of  the  old  community,  regional  and  other
    authorities mentioned in section 28(5) and  (6) (a) of the  TLGFA;  but
    that process is incomplete.
  ← The irony of repealing the BAA, whilst its key provisions  live  on  in
    new legislation as illustrated above.
  ← The concerns of the Constitutional  Court  regarding  the  reliance  on
    the BAA’s tribal authorities  and  boundaries  as  a  basis  for  post-
    apartheid land reform.
  ← Addressing the legacy issues requires the attention  of  the  Portfolio
    Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development as well as that  of
    Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs.

2.2   Mr. Thabang Motsoeneng

Mr. Motsoeneng, in his  personal  capacity,  emphasised  the  constitutional
rights of the rural people; in particular, the Bill of  Rights.  He  located
his submission within the discourse of law and the  impact  of  Roman  Dutch
Law on indigenous and customary practices. He argued that the repeal of  the
Black Authorities Act should give due  regard  to  the  realisation  of  the
constitutional rights of people in rural areas. The  following  propositions
were highlighted:

  ← Enactment of laws that would give effect  to  secure  land  rights  and
    dignity for people living in rural area.
  ← Availing financial resources for food production to the rural poor.
  ← Collaboration of traditional  councils  and  municipalities  to  ensure
    development of rural areas.

2.3   Silwanendlala Farmers Agricultural Cooperative (Ltd)

The submission  from  the  Silwanendlala  Farmers  Agricultural  Cooperative
illustrated the experiences of  the  rural  people  in  the  Matsamo  Tribal
Authority, Mpumalanga. Some of the problems experienced by the rural  people
centred  on  issues  around   chieftaincy   and   traditional   authorities,
institutions that derived their mandate and powers from the BAA, which  were
legislated by the BAA. These contributory factors or  problems  subsequently
determined the manner in which the Tribal Authority decided on  development;
selling land that it does not own; and imposing different  kinds  of  levies
to the residents, but does not provide services.

Silwanendlala asked parliament  to  ensure  that  government  put  in  place
    mechanisms that:

  ← Stop tribal authorities from implementing old apartheid laws.
  ← Ensure that new laws are based on a  consultative  process  that  takes
    into consideration views of the public, especially the rural poor.
  ← Prohibit  tribal  authorities  from  interfering  with  development  in
    rural areas.
  ← Release title deeds of land occupied by the rural people.


2.4   Rural Peoples Movement (Kwazulu-Natal)

The Rural Peoples Movement was of the view that the BAA  together  with  its
Tribal Authorities must cease to exist.. It argued that the  BAA  undermined
the dignity of black people in South  Africa.  The  Rural  Peoples  Movement
highlighted  critical  concerns  relating  to  the  legacy  of   the   Black
Authorities Act, which incorporated:

  ← Clustering of black people and imposing chiefs on them.
  ← A system of imposing taxes and levies to the rural people.
  ← Establishments of Bantustans and homelands.
  ← Divisions and disunity among black people.

The Rural Peoples Movement was concerned  that  new  pieces  of  legislation
such as the  Traditional Courts Bill (TCB) and new legislative  developments
entrenched the BAA provisions.

2.5   Land Access Movement of South Africa

Land Access Movement of South Africa (Lamosa) welcomed  the  repeal  of  the
BAA. The submission illustrated frustrations and confusion on  the  role  of
traditional  authorities  legislated  for  by   the   BAA.   The   case   of
Barokolokgadi of Melorane was presented. Due to forced removals  from  their
ancestral land, different  communities  were  clustered  to  live  together,
despite the absence of history of prior  links  or  connection  among  those
communities. They were further subjugated  to  tribal  authorities  to  whom
they did not have any allegiance.

The Barokolokgadi community received their ancestral  land  under  the  land
restitution programme, which transferred land to the Barokolokgadi  Communal
Property Association. Though the community does  not  recognise  the  tribal
authority,  they  cannot  escape   the   authority   of   the   chief.   The
Barokolokgadi’s attempts to be an independent community  were  all  in  vain
because the North-West Provincial Government believed that “the  traditional
authority cannot be dismantled, lest floodgates of problems are opened,  and
this  would   create   administrative   problems”   (North-West   Provincial
Government, 2009).

In order to ensure that the repeal of the BAA is meaningful,  Lamosa  called
for parliament to:

   • Amend Section 28 of the TLGFA.
   • Not to pass the Traditional Courts Bill
   • Government should stop tribal authorities  and  chiefs  from  imposing
     levies and taxes.
2.6   Sekhukhune District Land Forum

After  the  promulgation  of  the  BAA,  many  tribal  leaders   ‘congested’
Sekhukhune District and the apartheid government preferred  certain  leaders
to others in order to further its own objectives in the former homelands.  A
number of changes occurred, including forced removals, change in  governance
of the homelands, introduction of taxes,  and  payment  of  Trust  money.  A
major challenge today relates to the abuse of power and imposition of  taxes
by those institutions of tribal authorities. One of the examples  given  was
the so-called ‘car levy’ by the tribal authority.

The provisions of the TLGFA give tribal authorities (in their  new  name  as
traditional councils) more powers than they had previously. This  should  be
amended to  transform  the  power  imbalances  and  adopt  a  transformative
approach to the traditional authorities.

2.7   Rural Women’s Movement

The Rural Women’s Movement (from KwaZulu-Natal) supported the repeal of  the
Black Authorities Act. Its submission covered a  wide  range  of  persistent
problems confronting rural women which they  believed  would  continue  even
after the repeal of the BAA. Such problems included the following:

 ← The chief’s  unilateral  decisions  about  the  use  of  land  and  other
   community resources.
 ← The chief appointed 19 people as the  Traditional  Authority  to  conduct
   the Traditional Court.
 ← The injustices occurring under the traditional courts.
 ← The poor are fined heavy penalties  up  to  R1000  for  the  trespass  of
   livestock into the fields.

An appeal  was  made  to  parliament  to  disband  the  current  Traditional
Authorities and  Courts  and  create  structures  that  provides  government
services to communities.

2.8   Daggakraal Committee of 12

The repeal of the BAA was welcome. However, a major  concern  was  that  the
BAA still resided within the TLGFA  which  stripped  the  Kalkfontein  their
status as a Community Authority. The TLGFA gives chiefs’ authority over  the
community  authorities  even  if  they  had  existed  independent   of   any
traditional authority.  There was an appeal from this group that:

 ← Parliament repeals the TLGFA or amends its section 28.
 ← Disestablish tribal structures associated with the BAA.

2.9   Kalkfontein B and C Trust

Kalkfontein  community,  represented  by  Mr.  Tongoane,  is  one   of   the
communities that challenged CLARA at the Constitutional Court.  He  welcomed
the repeal of the BAA. However, he indicated  that  the  community  remained
concerned because the repeal on  its  own  was  inadequate  to  address  the
damage caused by the BAA. A set of post- 1994  measures  and  provisions  in
effect entrenches the legacy  of  the  very  Act  that  is  being  repealed.
According to Mr. Tongoane, the TLGFA, TCB and CLARA  are  an  embodiment  of
the BAA because they bestow more powers to the  institution  of  traditional
leadership. The traditional  councils,  provided  for  by  the  TLGFA,  were
viewed as problematic structures as they resembled mere  ‘cosmetic  changes’
to the traditional authorities of the BAA.

2.10  Farm Evictions and Development Committee

Farm Evictions and Development Committee, represented by  Ms.  Maria  Mabaso
supported the repeal of the BAA. Their major  problem  is  that  the  Tribal
Authority, an institution that was legislated under  the  Black  Authorities
Act, imposed levies and taxes to rural communities. The  following  are  the
kinds of taxes and levies imposed on rural people:

 ← If a girl becomes  pregnant,  parents  of  the  girl  child  pay  amounts
   ranging between R200-R1000 to the chief (only levied to the parents of  a
   girl-child).
 ← When a widow has to remove  her  mourning  dress,  she  pays  a  tax/levy
   ranging between R300 – R1000 to the chief.
 ←  Development  tax  -  for  example,  each  family  pays  R500   for   the
   construction of roads etc.
 ← When land reform beneficiaries acquire  land  (either  redistribution  or
   restitution), as subjects of a chief, they are compelled  to  pay  levies
   for access to their own land.
 ← Rural communities fund the costs of  private  legal  matters  of  chiefs.
   For example, they pay a fee of R150.00 per person.
 ← For weddings and unveiling of tombstones, a family pays  a  levy  between
   R300 and R1000.
 ←  An  example  in  Emakhuzeni  –  each  household  pays  R50  towards  the
   education fund for the chief’s child.
 ← Other taxes - Horse tax (chief’s car), tax for the traditional  skirt  of
   the chief, palace and many others.

2.11   Cala  University  Students  Association  and   Siyazakha   Land   and
      Development Forum

Cala University Students Association (CALUSA) and Siyazakha’s submission  of
Tsengiwe case study illustrated a need  for  the  repeal  of  the  BAA.  The
submission showed that the BAA gave birth to Tribal  Authorities  that  were
different from people’s local customs. The  local  custom  and  practice  in
Cala was to elect  their  own  headman.  But  the  Eastern  Cape  Provincial
Leadership and Governance Act of 2005 forbids this practice.

The submission illustrated the  tensions  and  conflicts  in  many  communal
areas in the former homeland areas as is the case  of  Tsengiwe,  Sakhisizwe
Local Municipality in the Eastern Cape. On  one  hand,  traditional  leaders
are bestowed with legislative  powers  to  control  and  manage  development
processes;  and  on  the  other  hand,  municipalities  are   charged   with
responsibilities of facilitating economic development and delivery of  basic
services to all citizens of South  Africa.  These  institutions  often  find
themselves in conflict.

CALUSA and Siyazakha elaborated on tensions existing between the  TLGFA  and
other legislation on local government. They emphasised  a  need  to  clarify
roles of municipalities and chiefs at a local level. Their greatest  concern
was that whilst the Constitution seeks to entrench democracy by  encouraging
direct community participation, TLGFA gives more powers to Chiefs.

2.12  Bakgatla Ba Kautlwane

The submission stressed the frustrations by the Bakgatla Ba  Kautlwane  who,
under the apartheid government,  were  forced  into  the  authority  of  the
Bakgatla Ba Kgafela (paramount chiefs). The authority  of  the  Bakgatla  Ba
Kgafela was imposed on  the  Ba  Kautlwane  people.  The  impacts  of  being
wrongfully subjected to other chiefs were that:

 ← Their land  restitution  claim  was  registered  under  the  Bakgatla  Ba
   Kgafela who do not have legitimate restitution claim on the claimed land.
 ← Misuse of revenue generated from mineral resources. The proceeds  do  not
   benefit the broader community of Ba Kgatla, but the Chief.

They key  message  from  the  Bakgatla  Ba  Kautlwane  was  that  they  were
concerned that some of the new legislation such as the TLGFA entrenches  the
BAA by reinforcing the status of some Chiefs on people who do not  recognise
them. They argued that those kinds of laws  make  it  difficult  for  people
like them to challenge abuse/s of power.

2.13  South African National Civic Organization – Eastern Cape

SANCO welcomed the repeal of the BAA but raised concerns about some  of  the
‘cruel and unscrupulous’ pieces of legislation that emanated from  the  BAA.
Those pieces of legislation included the TLGFA, CLARA, TCB and  the  Eastern
Cape Provincial Traditional Leadership Act of 2005.  It  argued  that  those
pieces of legislation were based on the old defunct and notorious  apartheid
laws. Major  concerns  revolved  around  the  traditional  authorities  that
remained untransformed. Despite provisions of the manner of  composition  of
traditional councils in the TLGFA, SANCO expressed concerns with regards  to
the election of traditional councils, imposition of  levies  and  betterment
claims. It presented examples of areas where these processes are flawed  and
the effects of BAA will be felt  long  after  it  has  been  repealed;  more
especially in areas such as Qawukeni,  Tsholomnqa,  Mooiplaas  and  Kwelera,
Kolomane village, and  Gwatyu.  SANCO  recommended  that  parliament  should
repeal the BAA and seek measures to amend the TLGFA and TCB.

2.14  Ms. Maria Mateza
Ms. Mateza, a trained black female farmer, bought a  piece  of  agricultural
land in 1983. The land did not  form  part  of  any  traditional  authority.
Realising that Ms.  Mateza  owns  that  land,  the  Chief  of  Gcina  Tribal
Authority began claiming that he owned the same land  on  which  she  farmed
and she was evicted. She was informed that as a woman she could not own  any
land. She attempted in vain to claim the land in terms  of  the  Restitution
of Land Rights Act, 22 of 1994. However, she was  informed  that  government
only took claims of people who were dispossessed by Whites.  In  1990s,  she
was promised financial compensation but she found  it  unsatisfactory  as  a
farmer. She now lives in a shack, a life that she is  unaccustomed  to.  She
blames this on the ruthless chiefs and the fact that she  is  a  woman.  She
urged parliament to repeal the BAA in its entirety.

2.16  Ilizwi Lamafama Small Farmers Union (ILSFU)

Ilizwi Lamafama Small Farmers Union (ILSFU) represented  3000  members  from
44  villages   in   Buffalo   City,   Ngqushwa,   Amahlathi   and   Nkonkobe
Municipalities. They supported the repeal of the BAA. However,  their  major
concern related to the many problems  that  will  continue  even  after  the
repeal of  the  Act.  Those  problems  include:  the  powers  of  Chiefs  as
legislated by the TLGFA. ILSFU presented experiences  of  its  members  with
regards to elections of traditional councils. For  example,  the  AmaNdlambe
Tribal Authority elected the 40% component of the traditional  council  from
the 60% submitted by the Chief Makinana. They submitted that  if  parliament
repeals the BAA, communities will still remain  with  the  very  problematic
BAA structures. They therefore urged parliament to repeal the  BAA  as  well
as its structures.

2.17  Access to Ancestral land by Ramunangi Family

The submission by the Ramunangi family highlighted  the  issue  of  disputes
around access to ancestral sacred site. According to  the  family  tradition
and customs, the  site  is  very  important  for  communication  with  their
ancestors and God. The  tribal  authority,  associated  with  the  BAA,  has
permitted  development  of  a  picnic  site  on  this  piece  of  land.  The
development is interfering with the cultural and religious practices of  the
Ramunangi family.   The  family  argued  that  the  TLGFA  gives  powers  to
traditional councils,  which  make  it  difficult  for  the  rural  poor  to
challenge the decisions of the tribal authorities/traditional councils.

2.18  Legal Resources Centre

The repeal of the Black Authorities  Act  signals  one  of  the  significant
final  steps  in  removing  the  traces  of  parliamentary  sovereignty  and
‘indirect rule’ from democracy. However, if the repeal is to be more than  a
mere symbolic act, it is crucial that the Act that fills the  void  left  by
the repeal be true to the principles of our  constitutional  democracy.  The
repeal should, as far as possible, ensure that the damage caused by the  BAA
is undone.

The  LRC  referred  the  committee  to  the  ANC  52nd  National  Conference
Resolutions   (Polokwane),   particularly   resolution   84   under   social
transformation. The resolution noted the  importance  of  strengthening  the
voice of rural South Africans, empowering poor communities and building  the
momentum behind agrarian change and  land  reform.  It  also  advocated  for
democratization of allocation of customary land in a manner  that  empowered
rural women and supported the building of democratic community structure  at
village level.

The LRC further drew a link  between  some  new  legislation  and  the  BAA,
particularly the TLGFA  and  the  TCB.  The  TLGFA  allows  for  the  tribal
authorities established under the BAA to continue. The  LRC  submitted  that
the BAA did not represent living customary law and unless that happens,  any
new legislation will be unconstitutional. Furthermore, the TCB links to  the
BAA in the sense  that  it  defines  the  traditional  leader  as  presiding
officer, representation of parties by a Spouse, and  provides  no  right  to
opt out. The LRC urged  parliament  to  consider  a  process  of  meaningful
engagement by relevant parliamentary portfolio committees  on  these  issues
or else the legacy of the BAA will live continuously.

3.    Key  issues  emerging  from  consideration  of  the  Bill  and  public
hearings

Submissions from interested members of the public  and  other  organizations
also showed widespread support for the repeal of the Black Authorities  Act.
The repeal of the Black  Authorities  Act  was  also  seen  as  one  of  the
significant final steps in removing traces of parliamentary sovereignty  and
indirect rule from democracy.  However,  the  committee  remained  concerned
with the legacy of the Black Authorities Act, 1951.

The following section summarises some  of  the  pertinent  issues  that  the
committee considered when deliberating  the  Black  Authorities  Act  Repeal
Bill:

    • The Black Authorities Act gave the State President  the  authority  to
      establish “with due regard  to  the  native  law  and  custom”  tribal
      authorities for African tribes as the basic unit  for  administration.
      Those tribal authorities have now been  transformed  into  traditional
      councils for the purposes of Section 28 of the Traditional  Leadership
      and Governance Framework Act, Act No. 43  of  2003.   The  Traditional
      Leadership and Governance Framework Act, 2003 entrenches the apartheid
      era tribal boundaries and authorities in rural areas.


    • Tribal authorities/Traditional Councils were  given  extensive  powers
      over the lives of the rural people. Submissions by the representatives
      of rural communities illustrated how rural people, under  the  current
      system, are subjected to different  kinds  of  levies  by  the  tribal
      authorities; for example, the so-called  ‘car  levy’  for  the  chief,
      development tax, and many other forms of levies and taxes. It  emerged
      that the Traditional Leadership and  Governance  Framework  Act,  2003
      perpetuates these structures and their unaccountable powers that  were
      created by the Black Authorities Act, 1951.

    • In deciding on the Communal Land Rights Act, the Constitutional  Court
      raised concerns with regards to the reliance on the Black  Authorities
      Act, 1951’s tribal authorities and boundaries as  a  basis  for  post-
      apartheid land  reform.  The  Traditional  Leadership  and  Governance
      Framework Act, 2003; and the Communal Land Rights Act,  2004;  adopted
      the Black Authorities Act model of authority and jurisdiction.


    • Discrimination of women on access to land in their own right  as  well
      as the  right  to  represent  themselves  during  proceedings  of  the
      traditional courts were some of the critical issues submitted  by  the
      members of communities to the committee.

4.    Recommendations

The Portfolio Committee having considered the Black Authorities  Act  Repeal
Bill [B 9 – 2010] submits the following recommendations:

    • The National Assembly should consider initiating a legislative  review
      of the pieces of legislation that entrenches  the  provisions  of  the
      Black Authorities Act, 1951. For example, the  Traditional  Leadership
      and Governance Framework Act, 2003.
    • The National Assembly should also consider referring issues  regarding
      the legacy  of  the  Black  Authorities  Act,  1951  to  the  relevant
      portfolio committees such  as  Cooperative  Governance.  Those  issues
      include  imposition  of  levies  by   the   Tribal   Authorities   and
      discrimination of women with regards to access to land.

Report to be considered.”


