---
title: 'National Assembly - 02 June 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-06-02
---

                            TUESDAY, 2 JUNE 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon member, we come to notices of motion. I am
looking around because I know there was a request that I have granted for a
Statement by the Minister of Correctional Services.

Ms S P KOPANE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:


   That the House debates the poor performance, ineffectiveness and wasteful
   expenditure of the entities under the Department of Social Development
   and the negative effect this has on service delivery, and come up with
   possible solutions.
[Applause.]

Dr J C KLOPPERS-LOURENS: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates declaring Basic Education as an essential service,
   and in doing so, comes up with solutions to curb the high number of
   schooling hours lost due to teacher strikes, demonstrations and union
   meetings held during school hours.


[Applause.]

Ms E MORE: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the negative impact that the Gauteng Shared
   Services Centre, GSSC, has on the quality of health care service delivery
   at Gauteng health institutions and comes up with possible solutions.

[Applause.]

Ms A M DREYER: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:
   That the House debates the appointment criteria of senior officials of
   public entities and comes up with proper guidelines for their
   appointments.

[Applause.]

Ms J D KILIAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the Cope:

   That the House debates the implications of the ill-considered about-turn
   by the Minister of Communications to revisit the issue of DVB-T standards
   for digital migration happening after state-owned entities such as the
   SABC and Sentech, as well as the private sector, have already invested
   billions of rands in the specific technological platform agreed to by
   Cabinet five years ago.

Mrs E M COLEMAN: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the new economic growth path to tackle the
   challenges of our current conjuncture.


Mr N E GCWABAZA: Madam Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the integrated Public Service as a model to
   enhance service delivery.


                 YOUTH DEVELOPMENT THROUGH FOOTBALL PROJECT


                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I hereby move
without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that Sport and Recreation SA, German  Technical  Cooperation,
        commonly known as GTZ, and the German Development Bank,  signed  an
        implementation agreement on the Youth Development through  Football
        programme and that the German government has provided €7.5  million
        for this initiative;

     2) recognises that through the delegated agreement, the European Union
        will provide funding to the amount of  € 6 million  to the YDF  and
        that this amount will be utilised for projects in South Africa  and
        ten Sub-Saharan African countries;


     3) further recognises that the implementation plans  for  the  project
        include the training of youth in all nine provinces in  development
        through sport methodologies, capacity building covering  nine  Mass
        Participation Programme hubs of activity and  two  non-governmental
        organisations per province, as well as the  implementation  of  the
        Africa Legacy Programme in Lesotho, Swaziland, Mozambique, Namibia,
        Botswana, Zambia, Ghana, Rwanda and Kenya; and


     4)  welcomes  this  initiative  as  it  will  take   sport   to   poor
        disadvantaged communities across South Africa and  also  contribute
        positively towards the improvement  of  school  sport  by  grooming
        young talent from an early age.

Agreed to.

                      WORLD ENVIRONMENT DAY-5 JUNE 2010

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby move without notice:


   That the House –


     1) notes that 5 June 2010 is World Environment Day;


     2) further notes that on 15 December 1972 the United  Nations  elected
        to dedicate a day of the international calendar to reflect upon the
        state of the environment in  order  to  heighten  global  awareness
        around this  issue  in  order  to  inspire  world  leaders  to  act
        collectively  to  take  measures  to  enhance  and   preserve   our
        environment;

     3)  recognises  that  there  are   several   challenges   facing   our
        environment, such as the issue of global warming, green  house  gas
        emissions, the depletion of fossil fuel resources and scarce  water
        resources;

     4) acknowledges that it is essential that we, as a nation and as  part
        of the global  community,  must  adopt  measures  to  preserve  the
        environment; and

   (5)      enjoins all South Africans to adopt an eco-friendly attitude  in
        their daily lives and to actively work together  to  clean  up  and
        preserve our environment.


Agreed to.

            SOUTH AFRICA WINS SILVER MEDAL AT CHELSEA FLOWER SHOW

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Deputy Speaker, I hereby move
without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes that -


          a) South Africa’s entry, entitled “Bio[logical] diversity  is  the
             variety of life”, scooped up a silver medal at the  prestigious
             2010 Chelsea Flower Show in London;

          b) South Africa, having notched  up  18  medals  in  18  years  of
             designing the exhibit,  is always one of  the  frontrunners  in
             winning medals at the Chelsea Flower Show; and

          c) the 2010 award-winning  exhibit  will  be  recreated  in  South
             Africa later this year in Port Elizabeth, Gauteng,  Durban  and
             Cape Town, giving South Africans the opportunity  to  celebrate
             another medal-winning exhibit; and

      2) congratulates designers David Davidson and Ray Hudson for designing
         an innovative interpretation of South  Africa’s  spectacular  plant
         heritage.


Agreed to.

        INTERNATIONAL DAY OF INNOCENT CHILDREN VICTIMS OF AGGRESSION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby move without notice:


   That the House –


   (1)      notes that 4 June is  International  Day  of  Innocent  Children
         Victims of Aggression;


   (2)      further notes that the decision  to  dedicate  a  day  to  child
         victims of Acts of Aggression was taken by the United Nations on 19
         August 1982;

   (3)      acknowledges that despite the fact that  28  years  have  passed
         since the world leaders collectively condemned violent acts against
         children, there are still  numerous  cases  of  aggression  against
         children, particularly in conflict zones across the world;

   (4)      recognises that the abuse of a  child  in  any  circumstance  or
         manner whatsoever is an abhorrent act;

   (5)      further recognises that as South Africa enters Youth Month it is
         essential that we reflect upon the atrocities which are perpetuated
         against children not only within the context of war but also within
         a domestic context; and


   (6)      encourages the leaders of South Africa and the world at large to
         condemn acts of violence against children in all its forms  and  to
         collectively act to reduce this scourge.

Agreed to.


                          MAIDEN VOYAGE OF GAUTRAIN

                             (Draft Resolution)


Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I am very thrilled to see that the
Chief Whip of the Majority Party bows to the superiority of the DA motions.
That is a very important factor. [Laughter.] I hereby move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes that the first phase of the construction of the Gautrain has
         been completed and on 8 June 2010 the Gautrain will undertake its
         maiden voyage between Sandton and the O R Tambo International
         Airport with scheduled stops at Marlboro and Rhodesfield in
         Gauteng;

[Interjections.]

The MINIST OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Sir, on a point of order, I thought
Mr Manamela was far better-looking. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: I want to say, Madam Deputy Speaker, that is purely a matter
of opinion. [Laughter.] And I would suggest that the hon Pandor keeps her
opinions to herself. [Laughter.]

Now, I don’t know where I was, Madam Speaker. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Start from the beginning.

Mr M J ELLIS: And this is a very long motion without notice. If the House
gets very cross, please appeal to the hon Pandor. [Laughter.]

Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes that the first phase of the construction of the Gautrain  has
         been completed and on 8 June 2010 the Gautrain will  undertake  its
         maiden voyage between Sandton  and  the  O.R.  Tambo  International
         Airport  with  scheduled  stops  at  Marlboro  and  Rhodesfield  in
         Gauteng;
      2) recognises that the construction  of  this  world  class  transport
         service comprised of both rail and bus services will  revolutionise
         the transport system within the province by providing thousands  of
         commuters with an alternative cost effective and more  eco-friendly
         form of transport to motor  vehicles,  which  will  thus  alleviate
         traffic congestion within the economic hub of South Africa;


      3) further  recognises  that  this  project  will  help  to  stimulate
         economic development without undermining the profitability  of  the
         established taxi industry and will also help to  alleviate  poverty
         by creating at least 2 million further job opportunities for  South
         Africans over the course of the next 15 years;


      4) acknowledges the years of planning and hard work  which  have  been
         invested into this project, which was first conceived in 2002,  and
         also the men and women who have worked tirelessly over the past  45
         months during the construction of phase one of this project;


      5) congratulates all members of the management structure comprised  of
         the provincial Political Steering Committee, the  Gautrain  Project
         Team and the Project Review Committee who, through their hard work,
         have ensured that South African commuters and tourists  alike  will
         have access to a range of services including a world class  Airport
         Service and dedicated Commuter Service before the “kick-off” of the
         Fifa World Cup; and


      6) wishes the management structure  and  all  interested  stakeholders
         everything of the best for the maiden voyage of the Gautrain  on  8
         June 2010.

Agreed to.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you, hon Pandor. Hon Deputy
Speaker, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House notes that after Order No 3 precedence be given to Order
   No 1 under Further Business on today’s Order Paper as reprinted:
   Consideration of Report of Ad Hoc Joint Committee on South Africa’s
   Readiness for Fifa World Cup.

Agreed to.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to bring to the attention of the
House that I have approved a request by the Minister of Correctional
Services to make a statement on issues pertaining to the escape of 42
inmates at the Harrismith correctional facility on 31 May 2010. [Applause.]

              ESCAPE OF AWAITING-TRIAL DETAINEES IN HARRISMITH

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like
to thank hon members for affording us the opportunity to make this
statement this afternoon.

Between 17:00 and 18:00 on Monday, 31 May 2010, a total of 41 awaiting-
trial detainees escaped from section B of the Harrismith correctional
facility during lockdown time.

This escape represents by far the largest group of inmates to escape from
our facilities to date. I felt it important that we should report to the
House and to the South African public the known circumstances surrounding
the escapes, as well as the actions that we have already taken to deal with
the matter.

Upon receiving this report, the National Commissioner and I visited the
centre yesterday to ascertain the facts about the escapes and how they
happened. From the information at our disposal so far, it seems that during
the change of shifts after lockdown on the day in question, the head of the
awaiting trial detention, ATD, section allowed officials to leave early and
undertook that he would conduct the handover to the next shift himself.

Not only was this decision highly irregular, but it also resulted in the
facility operating under capacity, as it left a time gap between the change
of shifts.

Secondly, the same head of section allowed for another irregularity when he
gave permission, against policy, for an advocate to enter the holding cells
to consult with a client after lockdown, without the necessary capacity to
even escort this advocate safely into the holding cells.

It was after this consultation, as they tried to lock the advocate’s client
up in the communal cell, that the head of the section, together with
another official who accompanied the advocate to section B, were accosted
and overpowered by the detainees.

Now in possession of keys, the detainees then proceeded to open the other
cells to release other detainees before advancing towards the
administration block of the centre. The correctional official who guards
the entrance gate at the admin block was then made to open the gate under
the pretence that he was opening for the two officials who initially went
to section B. This was as a result of the detainees knowing the code used
between officials to request the opening of doors and gates.

In addition, it is important to understand that there is a peephole, and
that the correctional officer did not look through the peephole to verify
the identity of the people at the door. The detainees forced this official
to open the gun safe, took two firearms and proceeded to the main gate
where the official on duty opened the gate for them to leave.

I am particularly disturbed by the actions of the head of the awaiting-
trial detention section who disregarded departmental protocol by allowing a
shift to knock off without a handover, and further allowing a consultation
to take place between a detainee and a lawyer after lockdown.

It has also been brought to my attention and that of the National
Commissioner that some of the escaped detainees are charged with serious
crimes.

We have since taken the following action: We have decided that a
multidepartmental investigation should be instituted to investigate the
matter further. This will also include criminal charges to be laid against
those who are found to have been complicit in this incident.

It is also important to mention that by the time that we arrived there, the
South African Police Service, SAPS, had already been seized upon this
matter.

We have decided that the head of the awaiting-trial detention section and
the official, who was at the gate during this incident, should be dismissed
summarily, as of today. We have decided that a risk assessment of all our
centres needs to be conducted urgently, looking at both infrastructural and
human risks that lead to escapes.

I am raising this because, as much as this is a medium facility designed to
accommodate inmates who are categorised as “mediums”, what we have found is
that, in the awaiting-trial detention section, we had inmates who were
charged with violent and serious crimes and who should never have been
placed in that facility in the first place.

By close of day yesterday, eight of the escapees had already been
rearrested and sent back to the centre. I want to reassure you that
everything will be done both to get to the bottom of these recent escapes,
and to deal with the inherent system risks to avoid these levels of escapes
in the future.

We once again call upon the members of the public not to panic. We know
that this is portraying us as the weakest link in the chain of the security
preparations for the World Cup, however, we want to assure you that
everything will be done to apprehend these awaiting trial detainees.

We also appeal to members of the South African public that, should they see
these escapees, they should not approach or attempt to apprehend them, but
should report them to the nearest police station. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J SELFE: Hon Deputy Speaker, we would like to thank the Minister for
taking Parliament into her confidence with her statement; and I would like
to thank her for the courtesy of informing me of this incident on Monday
evening. What happened in Harrismith on Monday is extremely serious and
needs to be seriously interrogated.

Even a single offender who escapes from prison is one too many. In this
case, 41 people escaped and this comes shortly after another incident in
Durban Westville in February, in which nine people escaped, and another in
Newcastle in March in which four inmates escaped.

We note that the Minister is to undertake a risk assessment of all
correctional centres. With respect, this was done a couple of years ago. As
a result, over the last five years, the Department has spent hundreds of
millions of rands on improving security in our prisons. Many are now
surrounded by as many as three fences, some electrified. Movements of
inmates and staff are supposed to be carefully monitored and controlled by
CCTV and access control mechanisms.

We can have as many risk assessments as we want, but these mechanisms will
only improve security and prevent escapes if they work properly, and if we
have trained people to operate them. In many centres, the turnstiles that
should be electronically operated are now only padlocked, either because
they don’t work or they haven’t got staff to operate them. It is scandalous
to have this equipment that is quite simply not operational, but was
acquired at vast costs.

Secondly, there is invariably a link between escapes and human error.
Officials do not always follow procedures; they become lax, are
undisciplined and arrive late or book off sick. And sometimes the so-called
human error is actually caused by corrupt collusion with the inmates.

For that reason, we are pleased that some of those responsible for the
incident at Harrismith have already been dismissed and others face action
following the investigation. It is only when officials know that there will
be definite consequences for an escape in which there is complicity, that
we can stop escapes. And if the investigation finds that there was
corruption involved, the officials concerned must be charged and face the
full might of the law.

We quite simply cannot afford to let this happen. Our country already has
an astronomically high crime rate. When inmates escape, police are then
forced to track them down and arrest them, often at great danger to
themselves. When inmates escape, they reoffend and commit more crimes, with
the result that more South Africans are robbed, raped and murdered.

We hope and trust that those who are still at large will be rearrested
quickly, and we are looking forward to the Minister informing us when the
results of the investigation are known. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms B C BLAAI: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members, I would like to thank the
hon Minister for bringing to Parliament the matter of the 41 escaped
prisoners from the Harrismith Medium Security Prison. What happened at that
prison, as the Minister has outlined, is a matter of grave concern. A
breakout of prisoners of this scale is absolutely alarming. Even more
alarming are the circumstances under which the breakout occurred.

Failure to observe protocols strictly is becoming common. There is a
tendency for officials to act unilaterally as though they constitute the
law. Lawlessness is now becoming rooted in the institutions that are
supposed to be upholding the law.

From what the Minister has reported, it seems very likely that the head of
the awaiting-trial detention section cleared the desk, as it were, to allow
for certain irregular actions to take place, presumably at a price.

What we are witnessing here is what is happening throughout the Public
Service. The system has been totally corrupted. Integrity is lacking and
senior officials are ready to undermine the institutions they are appointed
to.

Dereliction of duty and irregularities are destroying government
institutions. The rot is everywhere. If the Minister does not clean up the
Correctional Services, starting from the top, criminality and corruption
will prevail in the department. Harrismith is only one sore on a sick body.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Hon Deputy Speaker, the IFP wants to thank the Minister for
immediately taking action against the head of the department. All
government employees who disregard instructions from their departments and
who are not observing all the relevant and applicable laws that apply to
government employees, should be dealt with properly.

Why was the advocate allowed to enter the cell without the proper procedure
and enough security? Is the advocate seen as part of the escapees’ plan or
not? If not, why not?

All escapees charged with serious crime should be reported to this House so
that the House can assist the Minister in whatever action she might take.
And we should undertake to help her in making it easy to explain all these
things every now and then. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Deputy Speaker and hon members, the UDM appreciates the hon
Minister’s statement and thanks her for coming before this House to discuss
this matter. What we are concerned about is that there are media reports
indicating that the department possessed information beforehand of a
planned escape, yet did not put into place safety measures.

Thorough reviews of the problems and challenges of Correctional Services
have been conducted previously. The problems that come with overcrowding,
especially with regard to awaiting-trial prisoners, are well known.
Regrettably, the challenges have never been adequately addressed and keep
coming back to haunt us.

As the Jali Commission demonstrated comprehensively, corruption is
widespread in the department. The failure to root it out lies with the
leadership of the department and, as such, despite the circumstances
surrounding this incident, the department is not absolved of its
responsibility.

However, we highly appreciate the swiftness and decisiveness of the hon
Minister and the actions that the hon Minister has taken to address this
matter. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Deputy Speaker, I want to say to the hon Minister that
if one wants to achieve success in life, one has to do the right thing, at
the right time, at the right place. I want to congratulate the Minister.
The action she took was the right thing, at the right time, at the right
place. I think she sets an example for her colleagues on how one should
deal with public servants who do not comply with procedures.

Suid-Afrika gaan gebuk onder misdaad, agb Adjunkminister. Die gevangenis is
deel van daardie ketting om te verseker dat misdadigers agter slot en
grendel bly. Daar moet verdere ondersoek gedoen word.

Ek is oortuig daarvan dat hierdie laksheid en hierdie gebrek aan dissipline
nie net by hierdie een gevangenis is nie, maar dat ons hierdie probleme by
feitlik al die gevangenisse sal kry. Ek vra die agb Minister om so voort te
doen, om ondersoek by die ander gevangenisse in te stel, en te sorg dat die
misdadigers agter slot en grendel bly. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[South Africa is burdened with crime, hon Deputy Minister. Prison forms
part of that process to ensure that criminals stay under lock and key.
Further investigation needs to be done.

I am convinced that this negligence and this lack of discipline are not
unique to this one prison, but that we will encounter these problems at
virtually all prisons. I call on the hon Minister to continue in this
fashion, to investigate the other prisons, and to ensure that criminals
stay under lock and key. I thank you.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP also thanks the Minister for
bringing this important matter before Parliament. It is totally
unacceptable that so many detainees can manage to escape from prison, thus
exposing our people to danger, as we believe some of the escapees have been
arrested for serious crimes.

While we agree that a high-level investigation has to be instituted to
investigate this matter, there is no doubt that the officials who were on
duty when the escapes took place were negligent. We would, therefore, as
the ACDP, support the Minister’s decision to summarily dismiss certain
officials.

The possibility of corruption must also be investigated. The ACDP questions
why a prison official would want to enter a cell with keys if he did not
want the detainees to grab them. We also want to know why the head of the
awaiting-trial detainees section allowed prison officials to leave early so
that he could conduct the handover to the next shift on his own. There must
have been an impure motive, hence our call for the possibility of
corruption to be investigated; and we will appreciate the report back,
Minister, about the results of your investigations. Thank you.

Mr K J DIKOBO: Madam Deputy Speaker, we are shocked and horrified by the
report of the escape of 41 detainees, because this represents a setback in
the good work done by police officers who risked their lives when they
arrested those suspects. It also means that we have potentially dangerous
people on the loose. Therefore, the community is at risk, and police
officers once more have to go and mop up and arrest them again.

We are glad, hon Minister, that eight escapees have already been arrested.
We commend you for your prompt response and urge you to do what you have
undertaken to do. It is safe to say, hon Minister, that I’ll always have a
problem with so-called summary dismissals. Thank you.

Mr V G SMITH: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister, the current strategic plan of
the department lists the vision of the department as follows:

   To be one of the best service providers in the world by delivering
   correctional services with integrity and commitment to excellence.

Minister, it has become very clear that there are employees who do not
belong in this department; neither do these employees identify with the
vision of the department, and it is our contention that the sooner such
employees are identified, the better.

Part of the risk is that we just do not know who we employ in those
departments, and who has the role of the safe custody of inmates. I believe
that the vetting process of the Department of Correctional Services
employees can no longer be delayed, and it must be completed as soon as
possible.

From your statement today, Minister, it appears that collusion between
detainees and department staff cannot be ruled out. I agree with Mr Selfe;
not so long ago, a similar incident occurred in Durban, and there again
collusion is being suspected.

Correctional Services has a pivotal role to play if we are ever to succeed
in reducing crime in South Africa. And therefore, all acts that undermine
the role of the department need to be dealt with speedily and decisively.
We support you, Minister, for doing exactly that: dealing with this matter
decisively and with great speed. However, we believe that the political
authority of the Department, together with senior management, must send out
a clear message that anybody in your department who is found guilty of
unacceptable conduct will not be spared.

We agree with most of the speakers that spoke before us and with you,
Minister, that those who were party to this incident must be criminally
charged with aiding and abetting the escape of awaiting-trail detainees.
Thank you.

                       SMALL CLAIMS COURT IN ALEXANDRA

                            (Members’ Statement)

Mr J B SIBANYONI (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, this statement is about the
opening of the Small Claims Court in Alexandra, as well as the guidelines
for the commissioners and clerks. The ANC welcomes the opening of a Small
Claims Court in Alexandra by the Deputy Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Development, hon Andries Nel, last week.

This court will provide residents of Alexandra with a speedy, simple and
accessible forum to resolve their disputes. Residents no longer have to
travel to Randburg to lodge their complaints. There is a need for such
courts in townships and rural areas.

On the same day, the department launched the guidelines for commissioners
and clerks. Commissioners are appointed from amongst the ranks of
practising attorneys and advocates, retired magistrates, as well as legal
academics.
They are appointed on a voluntary basis and, therefore, do not receive any
remuneration from the department. These legal practitioners are volunteers.


Malibongwe igama lamavolontiya, malibongwe! [Let the name of volunteers be
praised!]

Small Claims Courts are a powerful mechanism to provide access to justice,
especially for the poor. These courts are based on speed, simplicity and
cost-effectiveness. They are created to eliminate time-consuming
adversarial procedures before and during the trial.

These courts deal with civil disputes of up to R7 000, and no legal
representatives are required or allowed to appear on behalf of the
litigants. The recently launched court will play a major role in the lives
of the residents of Alexandra and the department plans to embark ...

The ANC commends the department for its endeavours to improve access to
justice for all our people.  Thank you. [Time expired.]

             OVERSPENDING AND IRREGULARITIES IN HOUSING PROJECTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A C STEYN (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, it shouldn’t come as a shock to
learn that the ANC-run North West Department of Local Government and Human
Settlements spent over R100 million on two housing projects. However, what
should come as a shock to everyone of us here is that only four houses were
completed.

The DA has documents in its possession which were presented to the
Rustenburg Local Municipality in November 2009. These documents reveal a
number of irregularities in the Meriteng Housing Development Project.

The documents show that the contract was awarded to a contractor who is not
registered with the National Home Builders Registration Council. The
contractor was overpaid by R6 million, and the rectification process will
now cost R72 million. The local municipality swept the issue under the
carpet.

When Minister Shiceka came into office last year, this matter was referred
to him. Needless to say, in typical ANC style, nothing has been done to
date. In the case of the Vryburg housing project, 470 houses were meant to
be built. But, thus far, only four have been completed. The amount spent so
far is R114 million, which translates into R28,5 million per completed
house!

The situation in the North West is very serious. The citizens of that
province are already facing long waiting lists, and are being denied an
opportunity to access housing opportunities.

The Public Protector needs to investigate these projects, whilst the
Minister of Human Settlements needs to increase his efforts to root out
corruption and inefficiency in housing projects. The DA will be writing to
the Public Protector to request a full investigation into these projects.
Thank you. [Time expired.]

              FIGHTING CORRUPTION IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P B MNGUNI (Cope): Deputy Speaker, President Zuma, in his state of the
nation address this year, said:

   We will pay particular attention to the combating of corruption and fraud
   in the procurement and tender processes.

We all supported the President’s call. Again, the Minister of Finance
repeated this call, asking Parliament to work together in fighting
corruption in the public as well as private sector. We would like to
receive an update on the progress made on this front, especially in
government departments.

We should remember that recently our newspapers have been reporting on a
range of corrupt practices. The Auditor-General also has a report on this
problem.

Today we wish to ask what progress has been made with regard to a R55
million tender that was awarded to the Minister of Communications’ company.
The manager who manipulated the tender has been fired.

Now when are we going to proceed to recover the R55 million that is due to
government, which was lost through this defective tender that was awarded
to the Minister of Communications? The contract has been declared invalid
and manipulated, therefore we must urgently move to get the money back.

We also want to know what action has been taken as a result of the
malpractices and the corrupt and unacceptable conduct of the Minister for
Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs? We are happy that today,
at least, Cosatu has now come to the fore, and raised this matter of
corruption. We want to know what progress has been made by the President as
well as the Minister on this matter. [Time expired.]

          SAPS OPERATIONS AGAINST UNREGISTERED PRIVATE FET COLLEGES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G T SCHNEEMANN (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the SA Police Service recently
conducted operations in Pretoria and Johannesburg, which targeted
unregistered private Further Education and Training colleges. Out of five
institutions which they visited in Pretoria, only one was properly
registered according to the Department of Higher Education database.

These illegal institutions have a negative impact on South Africa’s
education system. We agree with the Minister of Police when he said that
such acts are unconstitutional and tantamount to thuggery, and law
enforcement agencies will be tough on these scandalous people, who are
driven by greed and therefore rob our children of a bright future.

The directors of the four unregistered institutions, who were arrested, are
expected to appear in court soon. In Johannesburg, police arrested a
director of an unregistered institution and when they questioned him they
discovered that he owns 28 schools around the country.

It was also found that students who had passed their exams were issued with
false certificates that are not recognised by the Department of Higher
Education.

According to the SAPS, they will be visiting all private schools around the
country, in the coming weeks and months, to verify their status. We wish to
congratulate the SAPS on the work well done in ensuring that these illegal
institutions are closed down. We wish them every success as they continue
with this operation.

At the same time, we call on parents to ensure that private institutions
are correctly registered before they enrol their children. Thank you.

                     SABC BOARD AND LEADERSHIP PROBLEMS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P F SMITH (IFP): Deputy Speaker, it is a matter of great concern to the
IFP that the Public Broadcaster is again making news for all the wrong
reasons. Although we were initially optimistic that under the leadership of
a new board, the SABC would be able to address its critical problems and
chart a new way forward, the current shenanigans suggest that our
confidence was premature.

The contempt for the board, which the chair of the board has recently
displayed, is bad enough. But the fact that Mr Solly Mokoetla, the CEO, has
now entered the fray by telling senior staff that Mr Phil Molefe has indeed
been appointed as head of news, beggars belief.

This represents another direct challenge to the board and cannot be
ignored. It is the duty of both Parliament and the shareholder, represented
by the Minister of Communications, to uphold the integrity of the board.

The IFP calls on the Minister to demonstrate leadership on this issue and,
at the very least, to show that he disapproves of and will not tolerate the
antics of the board chair and of the chief executive officer, CEO.

                       LAUNCH OF RETIRED NURSES’ FORUM

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms T E KENYE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, the ANC welcomes the launch of the
Retired Nurses’ Forum to retain the skills of retired nurses within the
health system. At the beginning of 2008, the Department of Health began
returning retired nurses to the profession. The retired nurses are
assisting in maternity wards and clinics.

This forum will be responsible for guiding and mentoring young nurses.
Approximately 480 retired nurses are already working in the provinces’
primary health care clinics and hospitals.

Nurses are the backbone of our health care system. Therefore the ANC-led
government will find new and inventive ways of training more nurses to
support the present workforce, and to prepare for the Fifa World Cup and
beyond. The initiative is part and parcel of the ANC government’s strategy
to improve quality standards for both public and private sectors. This
initiative will include specific targets for the provision of adequate
numbers of workers at all levels of the health care system, including
recruitment, training and filling of vacant posts. Thank you. [Applause.]

                           ISRAEL ATTACKS GAZA AID

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K J DIKOBO (Azapo): Azapo condemns in the strongest possible terms
Israel’s attack on the Turkish ship, which was part of the Free Gaza
convoy. Deputy Speaker, at the moment we have the following information:
The ship carried 10 000 tons of aid. It had on board 700 peace activists,
35 international observers and politicians and 40 journalists. A South
African journalist was also on board. The Free Gaza convoy was sailing in
international waters.

Israel used the army in what could have been a simple police operation,
assuming that they had a right in the first place to do what they did. At
least 19 people on board the Turkish ship died.

Azapo believes that the South African government must do something stronger
than summoning the Israeli Ambassador to the Union Buildings. We call upon
the International Criminal Court to investigate laying charges against both
Prime Ministers Benjamin Netanyahu and President Shimon Peres.

We call upon the United Nations to force Israel to stop the blockade of
Gaza because it has brought untold suffering to the Palestinians living in
the area. The blockade is inhumane and illegal. The UN should not allow
Israel to behave like Somalian pirates. We want to emphasise that we
recognise Israel’s right to exist and to defend their citizens. We equally
recognise Palestine’s right to exist ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                           SAFETY DURING WORLD CUP

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Deputy Speaker, the IFP urges the Minister of Police
to take any potential threats and any activity by any terrorist
organisation regarding the safety of the World Cup very seriously. Even
though both Fifa and Interpol state that there is no credible threat to the
safety of the World Cup, we still need to be extremely vigilant in this
respect.

Newspapers have reported seeing terrorist training camps in Mozambique as
well as a fact that some of these terrorists may already be inside our
borders. With all international terrorists, watching organisations stating
that they believe that there is a very high probability of a terrorist
attack, adding that terror strike, teams are already well established in
South Africa.

We therefore urge both our police and intelligent services to exercise the
utmost vigilant and request the Minister of Police to address this House
urgently if there is that such a threat. Thank you very much.

                          ANC CONDEMNS CHILD LABOUR

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M A RANTSOLASE (ANC): Deputy Speaker, World Day against Child Labour
will be celebrated on 12 June 2010. It comes just one month after a major
global conference on Child Labour that was held in the Netherlands. The
International Labour Organisation, ILO, launched the first World Day
against child labour in 2002 as a way to highlight the plight of these
children.

The day is intended to serve as a catalyst for the growing worldwide
movement against child labour, reflected in the huge number of
ratifications of ILO Convention No 182 on the worst forms of child labour,
and ILO Convention No 138 on the minimum age for admission to employment.

Hundred of millions of girls and boys throughout the world are still
engaged in work that deprives them of adequate education, health, leisure,
basic freedom and which violates their rights. Of these children, more than
half are exposed to the worst forms of child labour such as working in a
hazardous environment; slavery or other forms of forced labour; elicit
activities such as drug-trafficking; and prostitution as well as
involvement in armed conflict.

The ANC-led government ratifies ILO laws against child labour as a way of
stepping up opposition to the practice. The ANC believes that all children
have the right to be protected from child labour and any other form of
economic exploitation which endangers the child’s mental, physical or
psychological health and interferes with ... [Time expired.]

        SABC WASTES MONEY ON TICKETS TO SPORTING AND CULTURAL EVENTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N J van den BERG (DA): Deputy Speaker, today the DA has learnt through
replies given to written questions put to the Minister of Communications
that the SABC and the SA Post Office have spent almost R5,5 million on
tickets to various events.

This expenditure includes more than R5 million for Fifa World Cup tickets;
more than R60 000 for Cape Town International Jazz Festival tickets; R93
000 for tickets to the IPL Cricket Tournament; and R158 000 for tickets to
Tri-Nations Rugby matches.

Although the DA agrees that national and international events should be
supported, we struggle to understand how these entities of the Department
of Communications can justify the purchase of these tickets. How can the
SABC expenditure be justified in the light of the fact that the SABC
received a R1,4 billion guarantee from National Treasury because of their
poor financial management and governance issues.

The SABC is a public broadcaster and its duty is to provide quality and
cost efficient programming for South Africans. Buying tickets for a select
group of officials and their guests does not achieve this goal.

So many entities including the SABC, have publicly committed to cutting
back spending, but surely high spending on tickets suggests their
commitment and honesty cannot be believed. It is irregular and wasteful.
Thank you, Deputy Speaker. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                     INCOME DISPARITIES IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D A KGANARE (Cope): Deputy Speaker, income disparities in South Africa
have continued to widen in the last five years. Private corporations and
the government have continued to concentrate wealth in the hands of the
opulent minority through remuneration packages for CEOs and senior
personnel that are taking off like rockets, while the workforce
remuneration packages remain fairly static.

It is obvious that workers are going to be disgruntled. Loss of jobs adds
to their discontent. As the Gini coefficient shows, income inequality in
our country has now widened to a point where South Africa is the world’s
most unequal society. This has happened under the ANC-led government that
promises a better life for all.

According to Statistics SA, if social grants are excluded, South Africa’s
Gini coefficient would rise to a staggering 0,8. There is no doubt that
social grants are helping, but we would do well to heed the point made by
Dr Martin Luther King Jr who said:

   The difference between social service and social justice is that social
   service works to alleviate hardship while social justice aims to
   eradicate the root causes of that hardship.

Deputy Speaker, something has to be done to contain salary packages in
order to reduce income disparity, increase economic opportunity for all and
to allow social justice to prevail. The population is waiting to see how
the ANC tackles these issues. I thank you.

                   EMERGING PIGGERY IN DOORNSPRUIT VILLAGE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H F MATLANYANE (ANC): An emerging piggery in Doornspruit village near
Polokwane in Limpopo has benefited more than 130 families and now it hopes
to become a commercial giant. The project has prospects of supplying Pick n
Pay stores with pork.

Beneficiaries contributed R10 each to become active members, who receive
dividends after selling the pigs. Each household received a subsidised
amount of R20 000 from the then Department of Land Affairs to plough into
the project.

The project exists because the community wanted to develop a successful
black-owned piggery enterprise in Polokwane Municipality to contribute to
the economic growth of the country. This enterprise can be used as a model
to pave the way for other black emerging farmers to enter the piggery
industry.

This initiative is part of the ANC government strategy to strengthen the
partnership between government and rural communities to focus on rural
development and fight poverty. I thank you. [Applause.]

                    AFRICAN 19TH FIFA WORLD CUP READINESS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R KRUMBOCK (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, our world–class, iconic new
stadiums, spacious new airports and infrastructure all bear testimony to
the fact that, both as a continent and nation, we are ready to deliver a
successful and uniquely African 19th Fifa World Cup.

Every citizen’s constitutional rights are no less important now than at any
other time. To strike and create the worse possible impression of our
country while the gaze of the world is upon us is the same as striking at
the future of our country. We call on all our citizens to exercise their
strength and judgment and put the nation first.

The DA also calls upon the Department of Public Enterprises as well as
several municipalities to use the last week prior to kick-off to resolve
issues that will improve the experience of all visitors to our shores.
There is no reason, for example, why SAA should be charging more than
triple the fare of all other domestic carriers before the World Cup semi-
finals.

Equally, the disgraceful state of the Heroes Acre and Westford monument in
Gauteng must be rectified in the coming eight days, as it will be visited
by a significant number of visitors during the tournament. Further, it is
not too late to fix our broken pavements and cut the waist-high weeds
proliferating along the verges in some of our cities. Therefore, use these
last few days imaginatively and productively; and use all available
resources and the willing hands of our citizens to clean up our cities and
enhance the anticipated success of the 2010 World Cup. Ke nako! Feel it, it
is here! [Applause.]

      INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY, PROGRAMME TO EMPOWER RURAL
                                 COMMUNITIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M L DUNJWA (ANC): The ANC welcomes the implementation of the National
ICT Research, Development and Innovation, RDI, strategy, currently being
implemented by the Department of Science and Technology, which will target
rural and marginalised communities.

The strategy seeks to ensure the development of high-end skills to enable,
build and strengthen the innovation chain and the capacity of South Africa
to perform competitive research in the field of ICT. The programme includes
the Digital Doorway, which is a robust computer facility, designed to
provide access to computing resources to these disadvantaged communities.

Another project from the ICT RDI implementation programme, aimed at
enhancing access to ICT in rural areas, is a large scale technology
demonstrator pilot project, which seeks to deploy affordable broadband
connectivity infrastructure. Currently, the pilot focuses on providing
broadband connectivity to schools and other government and public
facilities in three municipalities, in Limpopo, Mpumalanga and the Northern
Cape, respectively.

The implementation of these projects will usher in a new era where our
historically deprived communities will get the opportunity to participate
in socioeconomic activities using the ICT platform. The roll out of
effective ICT services will ensure that our people know what government
services are available to them, equitably, irrespective of where they are
in the country. I thank you. [Applause.]

          ACHIEVEMENTS OF AFRICAN NATIONAL CONGRESS IN BY-ELECTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A R AINSLIE (ANC): The ANC won nine of the 15 seats in the municipal
ward by-elections which took place on 26 May 2010, in the Eastern Cape,
Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, North West and the Western Cape.

Out of a total of 15 contested wards in 6 provinces, we are encouraged to
have retained eight wards. In addition, in my constituency of Ndwedwe in
KwaZulu-Natal, the ANC convincingly took ward seven from the IFP with a
very large majority.

The ANC congratulates our cadres in KwaZulu-Natal for having worked hard
for this victory. The ANC has committed itself to key priority areas to
improve the lives of our people, which include crime fighting, rural
development, health and education. The ANC will continue to put up a good
performance in all by-elections and we are confident that we are the only
party that can deliver a better life for all South Africans. [Applause.]

                    SAPS OPERATIONS AGAINST FET COLLEGES
                           SAFETY DURING WORLD CUP

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Deputy Speaker and hon member Schneemann from the
ANC, on the issue of unregistered private further education colleges, we
agree with the statement.

We further call on everyone in our communities to be vigilant against these
parasites and these fly-by-night colleges. They are playing with the
genuine feelings of our children to acquire knowledge and skills. People
should be vigilant and be in touch with the Department of Higher Education
to ascertain whether or not these are genuine colleges.

Hon Ndlovu raised a very important point. We take your point, hon member.
Most of these things are set up as a scarecrow. Nevertheless, we are not
lowering our guns. We will ensure that this World Cup is secure and that
there are no incidents. Everyone must feel it; it is here.

The country which was said to be Option B is here with us. It is feeling it
with us here in South Africa and not in Australia. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

              FIGHTING CORRUPTION IN PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS
          SAPS OPERATIONS AGAINST UNREGISTERED PRIVATE FET COLLEGES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Deputy Speaker, I would like
to respond to two issues. The first one is on the number of points which
members raised about the challenges of the scourge of corruption.

This government is very serious about tackling corruption. To that extent,
President Zuma has, amongst other things, appointed an interministerial
committee to deal with the problem of corruption. It is not only the
government, but the ruling party also fully backs this campaign to stamp
out corruption in the whole of society.

I also want to comment on the matter of unregistered private colleges. In
addition to what Minister Mthetwa has said, as the department, we are
working very closely with the police. We have taken further measures which
include a dedicated phone line that we have publicly announced. Parents and
students can phone in to check if colleges to which they are applying are
registered or not.

We are also going to take further measures to ensure that even the
registered colleges do not offer programmes beyond what they are registered
for. This is another problem that we are experiencing.

Beside the courts operated by the police, we as a department are also
considering additional measures, including the possibility of preventing
them from applying for registration for a particular period after that.

We wish to urge all private providers in the area of further education and
training to apply. This government has one of the most advanced, highly
respected and transparent registration regimes for private colleges in the
world. Thank you. [Applause.]

                        ISRAEL ATTACKS GAZA AID SHIP

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION (Ms S C van
der Merwe): Deputy Speaker, I would like to respond to the hon member from
Azapo who raised the question on Israel’s attack on the ship bearing aid to
Gaza Strip.

His information is correct. South Africa called the ambassador of Israel to
our offices yesterday in order to record our strongest objection. We stated
the strongest possible objection in diplomatic terms to the incident that
took place on Monday in international waters.

The hon member’s information that there were hundreds of international
activists and journalists on board is entirely correct. The vessel was in
international waters. We believed Israel has contravened international law
in this regard.

I would like to report that the South African journalist who was on board,
Gadijah Davids, has been released and she is on her way home. This is
something for which we are very grateful. [Applause.]

We would like to say that we totally agree with the hon member that the
blockade of Gaza is inhumane, and we also would like to reinforce the UN’s
statement made at the UN Security Council calling, amongst other things,
for a full inquiry into this incident.

We have joined the entire international community in our condemnation of
this appalling act. I would like to thank the hon member in particular,
because it shows that the entire South African community is behind our move
in this regard. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

             OVERSPENDING AND IRREGULARITIES IN HOUSING PROJECTS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Deputy Speaker, I would like to
respond to hon member Steyn on the issues raised regarding housing in
Rustenburg and Vryburg.

I want to assure the member that the meeting of the Minister and Members of
Executive Councils, Minmec, we held in October last year was in Rustenburg,
and that we were able to visit that project. We agree with you that the
wastage of money is not acceptable. The explanation we got from the
province when we asked questions around that issue was that the
municipality was serving as a developer.

The province has taken upon itself to be the developer of the project. The
province and the municipality are working together at finding ways and
means of recovering the money. We have put the matter under the Special
Investigating Unit, and assure you that the issue of corruption is
receiving high attention as far as our department is concerned.

The North West scenario is part of this package. We hope that you are going
to give us detailed information regarding this project so that we can take
the process forward. I thank you. [Applause.]

                     INCOME DISPARITIES IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Deputy Speaker, an hon member from
Cope raised the important matter of income disparities in South Africa.
This includes the inequalities that exist in our society, particularly the
measure, the Gini co-efficient, which indicates the widest disparities in
earnings of all countries in the world.

I heard the member saying that the ANC has led us to this, which is an
absolute untruth. We do not set salary scales in the private sector, and it
is primarily in this sector where these wide disparities exist.

I would suggest that the hon member would be better served by asking that
the relevant committee of Parliament conduct an investigation into income
levels and disparities in South Africa and then Parliament can examine
whether it could generate legislation which would address this matter. All
of us are concerned about closing these gaps. The ANC has been the first to
alert the world to inequality, no other party. Thank you. [Applause.]

              CRIMINAL LAW (FORENSIC PROCEDURES) AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Deputy
Speaker, the Office for Criminal Justice System Review has, through an
analysis of existing legislation and regulations in South Africa, together
with a comparative overview of recent crime scenes and forensic
developments in other jurisdictions, identified certain major legislative
and technological constraints and deficiencies in respect of at least two
pivotal aspects of our forensic crime-fighting capacity, namely
fingerprinting and DNA evidence.

Despite the fact that a number of government departments administer
fingerprint databases, the South African Police Services, currently due to
legal and information technology reasons, only have access to the
fingerprints stored on the SAPS’s Automated Fingerprinting Identification
System, Afis. As a result the SAPS currently has no direct access to the
Home Affairs National Identification System, Hanis, of the Department of
Home Affairs where the fingerprints of 31 million citizens and about 2,5
million foreigners are kept, or to the National Traffic Information System,
eNatis, of the Department of Transport, where a further six million
thumbprints are kept.

In this regard, it must be noted that the Office for the Criminal Justice
System Review, through an analysis of a compendium of statistics, found
that in the financial year 2006-07, 52,5% or 46,2%  of all crime cases, the
perpetrator remained undetected. A further 11,3%, in 2006-07 and 13% in
2007-08 of cases were withdrawn before reaching court. In other words a
total of 63,8% ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, you have a right to go out if you don’t
want to listen. Please, other people are listening and you are really
distracting them.

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: In other words,
Deputy Speaker, a total of 63,8% in financial years 2006-07 or 59,2% in
financial years 2007-08 of all crimes investigated never reached court. Of
the 6,5 million “most serious crimes” in the criminal justice system, for
the period 2001 to 2006, a total of 4,4 million or 68% of cases were
undetected or withdrawn before reaching court.

In addition, the current legislation scheme as set out in section 37 of the
Criminal Procedure Act of 1977 does not make the taking of fingerprints
compulsory, even in instances where a person has been convicted of an
offence. Therefore, the manner in which fingerprints are currently
collected, loaded onto the SAPS’s fingerprint database and used, means that
a fingerprint lifted at a crime scene will most likely only be checked
against the limited number of fingerprints of  convicted offenders, which
have been included in that database.

The purpose, therefore, of this Bill is to address all these shortcomings
by ensuring that the SAPS will have access to the fingerprint databases of
other government departments for criminal investigations only, and by
expanding police powers to take and retain fingerprints, body prints and
photographic images of persons charged with, or convicted of, offences.

With these objectives in mind, the Bill amends Chapter 3 of the Criminal
Procedures Act as well as the South African Police Services Act of 1995,
the Firearms Control Act of 2000 and the Explosives Act of 2003.

The new provisions contain strict safeguards and penalties to ensure that
fingerprints, body prints and photographic images are collected, stored and
used only for purposes related to the detection of crime, the investigation
of an offence, the identification of missing persons and the identification
of unidentified human remains or conducting a prosecution.

Care has thus been taken to strike an appropriate balance between an
individual’s rights to dignity and privacy as entrenched in sections 10 and
14 of our Constitution, and the legitimate demand by the public that the
police must pursue the objectives of preventing, combating and
investigating crime; maintaining public order; protecting and securing the
inhabitants of the Republic and their property; and also upholding and
enforcing the law as set out in section 205(3) of our Constitution.

Care has also been taken to safeguard the rights of children who are
suspected or accused of having committed an offence by providing that
whenever prints are taken from a child the police officials must have a due
regard for the personal rights relating to privacy, dignity and bodily
integrity of the child; and to do so in private, not in view of the public;
and also ensure the presence of a parent, a guardian, a social worker or an
appropriate person; and treat and address the child in a manner that takes
into account his or her gender and age.

The Bill does not constitute an ad hoc or random measure aimed at enhancing
the SAPS’s capacity to achieve the objectives that I have highlighted. It
forms part of the greater objective of the review of the criminal justice
system which is a work in progress.

Moreover, it is a further manifestation of the government’s commitment to
the combating of crime, a commitment that is reflected in the 2009 Election
Manifesto of the ruling party, the ANC, which under the heading, “Together
intensify the fight against crime and corruption”, amongst other things
stated the following:

  Fighting crime and fighting the causes of crime will be a priority of the
  ANC government in the next five years and there is a need to overhaul the
  criminal justice system to ensure that the levels of crime are
  drastically reduced. Corruption must be stamped out.


The ANC government will:


   Establish a new, modernised, efficient and transformed criminal justice
   system ...


And it will -

   Actively combat serious and violent crime by being tougher on criminals
   and organised syndicates.

I call on all hon members of the House to support us towards achieving
these objectives. I move that we do so. Thank you, Deputy Speaker.

Ms L S CHIKUNGA: Deputy Speaker, Deputy Ministers and Ministers, hon
members and fellow South Africans, when the democratic government came into
power in 1994, it took over an unjust justice system that was never meant
to administer justice but to protect and preserve apartheid; that is why
investigations into the murders of Steve Biko, Samora Machel and other
brutal murders were never finalised. It is therefore correct for me to
start by saying we are correcting deep and entrenched systemic errors.

It was in recognition of these historical realities that the former
President, Thabo Mbeki and the current President, hon Jacob Zuma, called on
us to establish a transformed, integrated, modernised, properly resourced
and well-managed criminal justice system.

The Bill before the House is as such a product of an involved process which
was led by the hon Johny de Lange as the then Deputy Minister of Justice
and Constitutional Development, and now by Minister Jeff Radebe. This Bill
was introduced to Parliament by Minister Jeff Radebe and referred to the
Portfolio Committee on Police for processing. At the time when it was being
referred to the Portfolio Committee on Police, it included parts on
fingerprints, body prints, photographic images and deoxyribonucleic acid,
which is known as DNA.

It must be noted that the Bill had previously been considered in 2008 and
early 2009 by an ad hoc committee which decided that there were a number of
areas that raised the potential for a constitutional challenge. Following
extensive deliberations, the Portfolio Committee on Police agreed on the
fact that the Bill was an important piece of legislation that would bring
some progress in the integration of the criminal justice system as well as
the fight against crime.

Furthermore, the Portfolio Committee on Police noted that to process the
Bill in its then current form was problematic and could take a much longer
time or even have delays. The portfolio committee then resolved to split
the Bill into two phases. In the first phase, the Bill deals with aspects
of the fingerprints, body prints and photographic images.

We believed then, as we believe even more now, that it was possible to
process this aspect as quickly as possible without serious challenges and
pass it into law. Today’s debate indeed marks the culmination of this
resolution.

Whilst not at all abandoning the DNA part, we resolved to process it as a
second phase of the Bill. We resolved that the processing of the second
phase of the Bill, that is the DNA aspect, should be preceded by the
following, which was informed by the many submissions that had been
received: firstly, benchmarking ourselves with other countries that have
the same legislation as well as the Bill of Rights; secondly, a comparative
study to be undertaken by our research unit; and thirdly, a study tour to
countries that have the legislation on DNA together with the Bill of
Rights.

Following our visit to the Forensic Laboratory in Pretoria, early this
year, we are more convinced that our decision was perfectly correct. The
fact that the European Court of Human Rights, in a landmark judgement
delivered in December 2008, decided that the United Kingdom policy of
retaining the DNA samples and profiles of innocent people is indiscriminate
and unlawful, also justified our decision to split the Bill.

Assisted by our research unit, we have since identified two countries that
have the best DNA services in the world, namely Canada and the UK. We hope
to go to these two countries in October, this year, as part of our second
phase of processing the Bill.

Looking at the Bill before us today, I just want to remind members in the
simplest language that, as we speak, today, when a criminal commits a
crime, like breaking into somebody’s house, police may take fingerprints. I
say, “may” because section 37 of the Criminal Procedure Act, Act 51 of
1977, does not make the taking of fingerprints compulsory even in instances
where a person has been convicted of an offence.

But say fingerprints are lifted from the crime scene, they will be checked
against the limited number of fingerprints from convicted offenders that
have been included in the SAPS database. If they match any fingerprint,
well, good luck for SAPS and victims; if they do not match they will be
stored and wait for the arrest of a suspect whose fingerprints will then
match them. If no suspect is arrested, hard luck for the police and the
victims; those fingerprints will remain in the SAPS database and that is
it.

This Bill seeks to make it compulsory for the police officials to take
fingerprints or to cause fingerprints of any arrested person to be taken
upon any charge; any person released on bail; any person upon whom summons
have been served; and any person convicted by a court of law. The Bill also
aims to strengthen the forensic investigative powers and the capacity of
SAPS.

It strengthens the capacity and the powers of SAPS by allowing them to
access fingerprints, as mentioned by the hon Minister, of 31 million
citizens and about 2,5 million foreign nationals kept by the Department of
Home Affairs as well as the Department of Transport’s 60 million
thumbprints for comparative searches only.

In simpler terms, this means that if a criminal breaks into one’s house or
commits any crime, protection of the crime scene by the first police
official to come to the scene is very important. It means that after police
officers take or lift fingerprints at the crime scene they will be able to
immediately compare them with the fingerprints that are kept by the
Department of Home Affairs and the Department of Transport.

This implies that unless the suspect is an illegal immigrant, it must be
possible for the police to quickly link the suspect with fingerprints by
comparing the fingerprints with those lifted from the crime scene and those
stored by the Department of Home Affairs as well as the Department of
Transport.

Furthermore, the Bill makes it compulsory for police officials to take
fingerprints; hon Lekgetho will cover the details of this aspect. I must
mention that the Bill provides for strict safeguards and penalties to
ensure that fingerprints, body prints and photographic images collected and
stored are only used for purposes related to crime detection, investigation
of all offences, identification of missing persons and the identification
of unidentified human remains or conducting of prosecution. Hon Annelize
van Wyk will cover the details of this aspect.

The advantages of a strengthened forensic crime fighting capacity in
respect of fingerprints, body prints, and photographic images can be
summarised as follows: The expansion of the fingerprints capacity, which
this Bill does, can lead to significant increases in matching suspects to
crime scenes; an increase in plea bargaining as suspects are confronted
with real evidence, such as fingerprints, linking them to a crime scene is
also possible; and it should also be noted that fingerprints are used not
only to prove guilt but also to prove innocence.

As I conclude, let me take this opportunity to sincerely thank the state
law advisors who assisted the committee by splitting the Bill. Let me also
thank the lawyers from the Department of Police and the Department of
Justice and Constitutional Development lawyers for walking all the way with
us; and actually including all our demands and inputs in the Bill with the
language of the learned friends. Thank you very much. I also want to thank
our support staff for providing the much needed support during the
processing of this Bill.

Chairperson, let me appreciate and thank the hon Members of Parliament who
serve in the Portfolio Committee on Police across party lines. I thank them
all, including hon Mluleki George of S-Cope - not the T-Cope! - for their
hard work and contributions when we were processing this very important
Bill.

Deputy Speaker, we are presenting the Criminal Law (Forensic Procedure)
Amendment Bill before this House and the ANC supports the Bill. Feel it; it
is here. Africa, Ke nako! I thank you.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Deputy Speaker, studies relating to crime have
found that the probability of an individual committing a crime is inversely
proportional to the probability of getting caught. In other words, the more
likely a person is to get caught committing a crime, the less likely it is
that that person is going to commit the crime.

In South Africa where the conviction rate for murder is less than 13%,
something certainly needs to be done to bolster detective work so that
those who commit the crimes are brought to book.

The Criminal Law (Forensic Procedure) Amendment Bill is an attempt to do
exactly this. However, in its initial form, it had the potential to be
frozen in a quagmire of dissenting voices. In its original format it
included the establishment of a DNA database, and numerous organisations,
from the Cape Bar Council to the Law Society of SA via the Medical Rights
Advocacy Network, had substantial issues which they raised in relation to
the creation of such a database.

I take typed notes of all meetings and on 28 October last year I wrote, in
despair, “This Bill is becoming a disaster!” There seemed to be no inter-
Ministerial co-ordination, budgets were not supplied and sometimes junior
members, who were incapable of answering our questions, were sent to come
before the portfolio committee.

When budgets did arrive, they were in the hundreds of millions of rands;
and rather than simply providing the SAPS with the tools to access
fingerprints from other databases such as those in the Transport or Home
Affairs Ministries, they were grandiose visions of a massive police
database of every fingerprint from any and every person in the country. At
one stage the whole process seemed ready to spin out of control.

The Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Police deliberated on this Bill
for months and finally determined that, in order to achieve proper
outcomes, the Bill needed to be split in two, as the chair has outlined.
This section before you today relates only to the taking of fingerprints,
palm prints, footprints and photographic images, as well as the keeping of
relevant databases.

As for the mooted DNA database, there are certainly over 50 countries
throughout the world that have already passed DNA databases and DNA
database legislation. Each country has had to address similar issues that
arose here. It has been agreed that the committee will travel to
investigate international best practice before considering the possibility
of introducing such legislation here in South Africa.

If there is anyone in this House who believes that the Portfolio Committee
on Police is not unified in its attempts to strengthen the hand of law
enforcers in this land, they are wrong. Our members across the board were
intimately involved in this amendment and certainly, the DA believes
implicitly that granting the SAPS the right to access other databases will
assist in the tracking down of, as yet, unconvicted criminals whose
fingerprints do not yet appear in the police database.

The second issue, the identification of bodies, is an enormous issue that
my colleague, the hon Debbie Schäfer, will address. We must, as a nation,
be highly alert to the integral link between human trafficking, drug
dissemination and money laundering, all under the umbrella of organised
crime, as well as, in certain cases, terrorism. By allowing our SAPS to run
unidentified fingerprints through the other databases in this country, one
will, without a shadow of a doubt, see increased conviction rates.

Certainly, we must all agree that the fight against transnational organised
crime must be strengthened and intensified so as to foster solutions
involving co-operation with sub-Saharan Africa and the Southern African
Developmental Community, SADC. Allowing the SAPS to access other national
fingerprint databases will allow them, in turn, to assist law enforcement
agencies throughout the world to identify South African members of
international syndicates.

As a nation, we have for far too long failed to focus on crime prevention
from a global perspective. We have become bogged down in the incident of
this terrible murder; that rape of a baby; this multi-million rand fraud —
single cases hitting the headlines. Yet where we have failed, is in pulling
together the causal strands in order to understand the drivers behind the
blood-letting.

We are not alone in this lack of vision; indeed the international community
has, as a whole, largely failed to anticipate the evolution of
transnational organised crime into the strategic threat which it now poses
globally. Transnational organised crime is an instrument to generate profit
and it is no longer the sole preserve of specialised criminal
organisations. It is now an essential strategy for armed groups around the
world, and is a source of funding for corrupt politicians as well as
warlords and terrorists.

A global survey from the University of Maryland’s Centre for International
Development and Conflict Management shows that one of the areas at greatest
risk of armed conflict is sub-Saharan Africa. The nature of transnational
organised crime syndicates allows them to be structured horizontally, and
they operate flexibly with a decentralised leadership, while countries such
as ours are limited by the silo mentality with vertical, blinkered
thinking, which results in poor information-sharing and co-operation.

To transnational organised crime syndicates, borders are irrelevant, while
countries are obsessed with formal sovereignty. Transnational organised
crime syndicates are incredibly well funded, while our operations are
underfunded and frequently ill utilised. The transnationals are at the top
when it comes to new technologies, whereas we are slow to adapt, and, in
fact, make little use of new technology.

Once we pass this amendment to the Criminal Procedures Act to allow access
to fingerprint databases, the public will presume that we have the
technology to allow for a quick computer search, but this will not be the
case. The big problem here is that the databases of the SAPS, Home Affairs
and Transport and Correctional Services all use different technologies, so
that these searches will initially be long and laborious. This is something
that needs particular attention.

Certainly, I would wish to see the same determination as has been evident
in the preparations for the 2010 Fifa World Cup to be present in the fight
against these syndicates, which, for example, see this country both
importing and exporting drugs. We have to study this threat to boost our
intelligence across regions and shape up our technical ability. This is
also pertinent to domestic crime, of course, which is linked in many
instances to the transnational organised crime syndicates I have been
referring to.

Perhaps the one crime that makes us all feel under siege is house robbery.
There has been a 100% increase in house robberies over the last five years,
and these crimes are committed by, to quote Professor Rudolph Zinn, “the
most callous of criminals.” Last year there were 18 000 residential
robberies, up from just 9 000 in 2003. In the main, these house robbers are
20 years old and have committed 100 robberies before arrest. They do their
homework and they often prepare for up to four months before they strike.
They also torture their victims as a means of establishing where valuables
are hidden, and they rape and kill without remorse.
Currently, the reality is that only 12,5% of robberies with aggravating
circumstances end up being prosecuted. We have already fallen behind
because of the bad judgement of the previous National Police Commissioner,
and statistics have shown shocking increases in crimes in areas affected by
the closure of our globally admired specialised units. Consider the 87%
increase in drug-related crime since the shutting down of the SA Narcotics
Bureau!

Investing in this technology would ramp up our efficacy in relation to the
drug crisis in South Africa. The year the bureau was disbanded, the SAPS
reported 62 000 drug-related crimes; the figure now stands at 117 000.

Crime must be recognised as the greatest threat to our democracy and to an
open society that can be shared and enjoyed by all. Of course, the state
has a duty to uphold the Constitution and keep its citizens safe.

Approving this Bill today will give the SAPS a tool that, if efficiently
used, will, I have no doubt, assist in pinning down the criminals, not
after they have committed 100 crimes, but after they have committed just
one. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: House Chairperson, it is both appropriate and timely to
amend the Criminal Procedure Act, No 51 of 1977 to allow for the forensic
procedures to be applied at a crime scene. Cope will support this
amendment.

It is our considered view that we must do all in our power to make sure
that we capacitate the police in the fight against and combating of crime.
Therefore, the amendment today is a tool that is appropriate in
capacitating the police in order to make sure that they combat crime and
keep a database of criminals.

We all already heard that the Department of Home Affairs has 31 million
fingerprints in their database. We already heard about 6 million in the
National Traffic Information System, eNatis, which the Department of
Transport has in the database. We already heard that 2,5 million
fingerprints belong to foreigners. But one thing that continues to worry us
is that when we talk about the database and we talk about the fingerprints,
we do not continue to look at an integrated way of dealing with crime and
organised crime.

We continue to be concerned about organised crime, particularly about the
data on organised crime and the information that is not kept. We have in
our country today many experienced and organised syndicates who come from
other countries, but we don’t have a database. So we believe that dealing
with the amendment of this Act will go a long way in addressing that
particular weakness.

Experience has shown all over the world that forensics play a central role
in the combating and investigation of crime, particularly fingerprints and
all other things that go with it. However, we know that in all the attempts
that we need to make, there is always going to be a place where the buck
stops.

We believe that the amendment of this particular Act will also begin to
give the police, including the commissioner, the power to say what will
happen to those who are going to be letting things fall through the cracks.
This is where the buck stops. Now that we have this tool, we must make sure
that it remains a tool to make sure that the police are capacitated.

Cope won’t be found wanting when it comes to the issue of supporting the
work of the police to make sure that the police combat and ...
[Interjections.] We will not be found wanting; we are going to support this
amending Act. We have already indicated that we are supporting it.

Therefore, the only thing that Cope will not associate itself with is the
rhetoric of “shoot to kill”. The shoot-to-kill rhetoric is that one thing
that we say we do not associate ourselves with.

We associate ourselves with the tools that make sure that the police fight
crime and make sure that it is combated. We want to particularly raise the
serious matter of serious organised crime syndicates that are operating. It
is a matter that must be looked at and measures must be found as to how we
can make sure that we keep a database of those particular criminals so that
we are able to make sure that we combat them and nip them in the bud.

Therefore, we know that supporting this Amending Act brings us one step
closer to dealing with organised crime. We know that by supporting this
Act, the police will be one step ahead in making sure that they defeat
corruption and crime. Today, the debate and subsequent approval of this Act
squarely puts the responsibility on you, Minister, to make sure that the
work is done.

We will support this amendment. We are supporting it because we know that
it is a necessary tool to fight crime and make sure that our people feel
safe wherever they are. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: House Chairperson, the main aim of this Bill is to intensify
the criminal justice system by strengthening the SAPS crime-fighting
capacity in respect of fingerprinting and body printing.

It is our view that the correct implementation of this Bill will enhance
the investigation capacity of the SAPS which is bound to assist in the
dramatic reduction of crime. The IFP, therefore, welcomes these changes to
the legislation to bring us into the 21st century. We believe that this
Bill should be implemented as soon as possible in consultation with the
Ministries of Transport, Home Affairs and State Security.

The costing of this Bill will be very high because of the human resources
involved and the upgrading of forensic laboratories. This will shorten the
time waiting for the courts to get results from the laboratories.

The IFP supports this Bill because it will eliminate forgery and tighten up
investigation, thereby finding the criminals guilty beyond reasonable
doubt.

The IFP believes that the laboratories will need to be run professionally
and they must be transformed, so that they are not used by certain elements
with ulterior motives against others as if it is their domain.

The IFP wants to thank all those who were involved in making sure that this
Bill came to fruition; that includes all stakeholders and the Chairperson
who has been chairing this meeting. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Chairperson and hon members, the Bill before us has been
the subject of a long and complex process of evolution. Two years ago,
there was the case of deep constitutional concerns with regard to citizens’
privacy and other rights. After much delay and deliberation, we are today
considering a Bill that will allow the police access to the Home Affairs
database of fingerprints. In principle, we support this concept, since it
should radically improve the odds of the police identifying the
perpetrators of crime.

However, allow me to outline three major concerns which relate to the harsh
reality that exists in our country. Firstly, we are talking about giving
the police access to a database of law-abiding citizens’ most basic
information. It is fine and well to claim that the police will not abuse
this access, but unfortunately the track record of the police is not
spotless.

Secondly, the database that we are talking about is situated within the
Department of Home Affairs, which one can safely describe as one of the
most corruption-riddled departments in government. The Bill seeks to
address this concern, with the inclusion of severe penalties for tampering
with the database. However, we cannot but wonder to what extent crime
syndicates, who have already infiltrated the Department of Home Affairs,
will simply manipulate the database to protect their interests.

Thirdly, and most importantly, access to this database is no guarantee of
improved police arrest rates, when the police’s forensic capacity hardly
exists. Anecdotal evidence of the police failing to take fingerprints at
crime scenes is rife. On top of that, the official statistics for the state
of forensic laboratories indicate that they are on the verge of collapse.

We support the intention of this Bill, but call on the Minister and the
security cluster to begin addressing the well-known underlying issues. The
UDM supports the Bill. Thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, the ACDP will support all legal measures
that are taken by the police to nail criminals and to reduce the
unacceptably high levels of crime in our country. The fact that the current
legislation, as set out in section 37 of the Criminal Procedure Second
Amendment Act, No 85 of 1997, does not make the taking of fingerprints
compulsory, even in instances where a person has been convicted of an
offence, is a serious oversight.

The taking of fingerprints of certain categories of persons must be
compulsory, as we believe it will lead to a significant increase in suspect-
to-crime-scene matches. The ACDP believes the police should not only have
access to the fingerprints stored on their database, but to all fingerprint
databases in the country.

It is unfortunate that even though members of the public have been
complaining about low conviction rates, as suspects could not be linked to
crimes, the SAPS did not have access to the Hanis system of the Department
of Home Affairs, where fingerprints of 31 million citizens and about 2,5
million foreigners are stored, or to the e-Natis system of the Department
of Transport, where a further 6 million thumbprints are located.

What is of concern to the ACDP, however, is the possible misuse of or
tampering with the profiles on the expanded database, even though the
committee reached consensus that such abuses must carry a 15-year sentence
without the option of a fine. The storage and integrity of the fingerprints
database must be tight and unquestionable at all times. The ACDP will
definitely support this Bill, as it will enhance the work of the police.
Thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, in Suid-Afrika het ’n misdadiger ’n 90%
kans om weg te kom met misdaad, want as daar gekyk word na die statistiek
sien ons dat die aantal sake wat aangemeld word en daardie sake wat dan
suksesvol deur ons howe gevoer word en waar ’n vonnisbevinding plaasvind
slegs 10% is. Soos ek reeds genoem het, het ’n misdadiger dus ’n 90% kans
om weg te kom.

Hierdie wysigingswetsonwerp is ’n stap in die regte rigting. Die VF Plus
verwelkom dit dat die regering darem op ’n stadium gekom het waar hulle
besef het dat daar drastiese stappe gedoen moet word. Ek het wel kritiek.
Die vraag is: Hoekom moes ons so lank wag? Ons wag nou al vir, kan ek amper
sê, jare om te sê dat daar indringend na die misdaadsituasie gekyk moet
word.

Dit help nie dat die Minister van Polisie en sy mense hard werk om
misdadigers te vang en aan te keer en dat hul hande dan agter hul rûe
vasgemaak word as hulle sekere ondersoeke moet doen nie. Dit is ook waar.
Dit is gesê dat die publiek dalk nou die indruk mag kry dat, omdat
vingerafdrukke nou ook met Binnelandse Sake en Vervoer gekontroleer kan
word, ’n misdadiger baie vinniger opgespoor gaan word. Ons het nou wel die
wetgewing in plek, maar dit help nie as die rekenaars nie met mekaar
aanpasbaar is nie, want dan sal dit nie vinnig gedoen kan word nie.

Dit sal beteken dat daar kontak gemaak moet word met ’n persoon binne
Binnelandse Sake, maar die VF Plus sou wou sien dat die rekenaarstelsel van
so ’n aard is dat dit onmiddelik opgevolg kan word. Afhangende van ’n
misdaad word daar gepraat van die kritieke 24 uur of die 36 uur of die 48
uur daarna. Hierdie wetgewing is die stap in die regte rigting om dit
vinniger moontlik te maak om misdadigers te identifiseer, te ondersoek, en
te arresteer. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, in South Africa a criminal has a 90%
chance of getting away with crime, because when statistics are viewed, we
notice that the number of reported cases that is successfully brought to
court and where a sentence is passed only makes up for 10% of these cases.
As I mentioned before, a criminal has a 90% chance of getting away with
crime.

This amending Bill is a step in the right direction. The FF Plus welcomes
the fact that the government at least reached a stage where it realised
that drastic steps need to be taken. I certainly have some criticism. The
question is: Why did we have to wait so long? We have been waiting for
years, so to speak, to say that the incidence of crime should be looked at
urgently.

It does not help for the Minister of Police and his personnel to work hard
to catch criminals and then their hands are tied when they need to carry
out certain investigations. That is also true. It is said that the public
may now perhaps get the impression that, since fingerprints could now also
be checked with the Departments of Home Affairs and Transport, a criminal
would be traced much quicker. Indeed, we may have the legislation in place,
but it does not help if the computers are not compatible because then it
cannot be done quickly.

It would imply that contact have to be made with a person within Home
Affairs, but the FF Plus would like to see that the computer system is of
such a nature that it would be possible to follow up immediately. Depending
on the crime, reference is made to the critical 24 or 36 or 48 hours
thereafter. This legislation is a step in the right direction for making it
possible more quickly to identify, investigate, and arrest criminals. I
thank you.]

Mr G LEKGETHO: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, Members of
Parliament ... maloko a mantle a ANC, [... hon members of the ANC] ... SA
Communist Party, Cosatu and Sanco ... [Laughter.] ... baagi naga ka
bophara, ke a lo dumedisa. [citizens from the length and breadth of our
country, I greet you all.]

The Policing the Transition document of the ANC recommended that the SAPS’
capacity be strengthened through training to ensure more effective,
investigative and technical skills so that our police would effectively
perform their duties in the fight against crime and corruption. This
position was later reaffirmed at the 2002 Stellenbosch National Conference.

In 2009, the ANC manifesto proposed that the forensic capacity of the SAPS
be strengthened in order to help combat organised crime. The manifesto
argues that in order to combat crime there is a need to establish a
modernised, efficient and transformed criminal justice system.

This is to ensure increased capacity for fighting and combating crime, thus
promoting a co-ordinated and an integrated approach to crime. In this
regard, the manifesto prioritised the fight against crime and corruption.
It articulates for the enhancement of police capacity through vigorous
training on forensics, in particular, to capacitating detective services
and crime investigation.

Similarly, the review of the criminal justice system has revealed the need
to strengthen the forensic investigative powers and capacity of the police
as a priority. South Africa has no specific legislation regulating the
collection of fingerprints and similar evidence. There is a need to improve
all the laws governing fingerprints and other pieces of law.

The Bill contributes to law enforcement policing through detections and
making use of forensic evidence collected from crime scenes. This Bill is
at the centre of the philosophy of partnership between the police and the
community in the fight against different categories of crime.

In terms of the Bill, an expanded fingerprint capacity is an intelligence
tool, particularly in crimes where detection is generally low, such as
property crimes, and can lead to a significant increase in suspect-to-crime-
scene matches. The Bill emphasises that fingerprints are used not only to
prove guilt, but also to prove innocence.

The Bill relates directly to constitutional rights such as equality before
the law; human dignity; freedom and security of persons; privacy; children;
and arrested, detained and accused persons.

This Bill extends the police’s powers not just by strengthening their own
database collection and extending the capacity to store fingerprints of
more than a limited number of convicted persons; it also enables the
Criminal Record and Forensic Science Services of the police to have access
to the databases of the Departments of Home Affairs and Transport.

Clause 1 amends the heading of Chapter 3 of the Criminal Procedure Act to
ensure that the provisions thereto are not limited to accused persons only.
The new section provides for the definitions of “authorised persons”, “body
prints”, “child” and “comparative search”.

The new section 36(B) provides for police powers in respect of the taking
of fingerprints of accused and convicted persons. It provides for the
compulsory taking of fingerprints from certain categories of accused
persons and for the retention of such prints. Members are advised to read
these amendments because of time constraints.

The Bill has a strong constitutional and political undertone. Politically
it appears to strengthen forensic investigatory methods in order to promote
the state’s capacity to fight crime. There is a need to strengthen economic
and political capacity of the developmental state in order to implement the
current Bill appropriately in line with the national democratic revolution.

The state’s capacity to collect and store fingerprints, body prints and
photographic images is of vital importance to ensure accountability, the
rule of law and social cohesion. The state’s forensic power to fight crime
should not suddenly be subjugated to a facilitating role, which would
elevate the role of private forensics, as this often presents a risk to
state power and national security due to the lack of accountability of such
companies.

New scientific methods for crime fighting, information technology and
confidential databases should be in the hands of the state as an
institution which is accountable to its citizens. Our police must be
equipped through training in forensic matters relating to the crime scene,
as prescribed in the Bill, for public confidence in them to be
strengthened.

In this regard, the police’s existing forensic laboratories need to be
strengthened and rolled out for all local police stations to have easy
access to them so as to ensure that forensic services are consistently
deployed at crime scenes.

This calls for community education on the forensic role after a crime has
been committed to ensure that victims and witnesses of crimes do not
unknowingly temper with the fingerprints, body prints and other evidential
information at the crime scene.

In conclusion, this Bill is long overdue to strengthen our fight against
crime. We believe that through this Bill we will be able to arrest criminal
suspects, reduce court backlogs, improve conviction rates and combat crime.
The ANC supports this Bill. Thank you.

Ms D A SCHÄFER: Mr Chair, it is very encouraging to note that, in approving
this Bill, we are united across political lines in our desire to improve
the tools that the police have to detect crime. Given the appalling
detection rates such as a mere 15% for property-related crime, they can
certainly use all the help they can get.

By providing the extension and enhancement of police databases of prints
and photographic images, and for the compulsory taking of these in certain
cases, this Bill will ensure that police have access to the biggest
possible base for comparative purposes.

By enabling the police to have access to the fingerprints of 31 million
citizens and 2,5 million foreigners, which are retained by the Department
of Home Affairs, as well as the 6 million thumbprints in possession of the
Department of Transport, the ability to improve the detection rates of all
crimes will be substantially increased. This, of course, is based on an
assumption that the fingerprint evidence was correctly collected in the
first place. However, as this is a definite step in the right direction,
let us be positive today and not go down that road.

Whenever police have access to personal information, there is always the
very real fear that the potential for abuse exists. The portfolio committee
has been very mindful of this fear and we have imposed strict mechanisms
for the retention, storage and control of these prints and images.

Firstly, the obligation is imposed on the national commissioner to take all
reasonable steps to secure the integrity of the database. In addition, he
and the committee of the directors-general of the Departments of Home
Affairs, Transport and Correctional Services must, within six months of the
commencement of this section, ensure that standard operating procedures
regarding access to the databases of the respective departments and
implementation of safety measures are developed. This is a very serious
obligation, which we believe the commissioner will treat as such.

In addition, the seriousness with which the committee regards any abuse of
prints or images stored in any of the databases is reflected in the fact
that the penalty we have imposed for any contravention of this legislation,
is a maximum of 15 years’ imprisonment without the option of a fine.

We trust that this will serve as a sufficient deterrent to prevent people
from testing just how long the period of imprisonment will be if a court
were to take into account the seriousness of our intention in this matter.

The retention of prints on the police database is also strictly regulated
so that people who have not been convicted of a crime will not have their
details retained on a criminal database. The prints of adults who are
convicted of a crime will be retained indefinitely. Children who are
convicted will have their prints retained indefinitely, but subject to the
provisions relating to the erasure provided for in the Child Justice Act.

With the assistance of the Justice Department’s legal advisers, we believe
that this Bill is fully in line with the provisions of the Child Justice
Act, and that children’s rights are adequately protected. In the event that
people are found not guilty, their convictions are set aside, or there is a
failure to prosecute for any reason, the police are obliged to destroy the
prints within 30 days after the officer commanding the division responsible
for criminal records has been notified thereof.

An important new development in this Bill, as my colleague the hon Kohler-
Barnard has referred to, is that the comparison of prints may now also be
used for the identification of missing persons and unidentified human
remains. This can be an extremely valuable tool in a number of respects.
Firstly, by being able to take the fingerprints of people who have lost
their memory and comparing them with such a huge database, the police
should be able to quickly reunite them with their families.

Secondly, being in a position to quickly identify bodies has two important
advantages. If bodies can be identified more quickly, the chances that the
perpetrator, in the case of criminal activity, will be more easily and
quickly apprehended are significantly increased.

The inability to identify bodies can also have serious implications for the
families of the deceased, as they cannot be declared dead. This then means
that benefits payable to families, such as insurance policies, cannot be
paid out, and estates cannot be wound up. Making it easier for the police
to identify these bodies, therefore not only assists in solving possible
crimes, but also has very real, practical benefits for the family members.

It is unlikely that we will see an immediate surge in the detection rates
as this will be phased in, as my colleague has said. However, if we do not
start somewhere, we will never get anywhere. The DA, therefore, is happy
today to support this Bill. Thank you.

Ms A VAN WYK: Chair, to those who are looking for a catfight, I’d like to
say that it’s not going to happen today!

Hon Ministers and members, there can be no doubt in the minds of any of us
that we need to use whatever technological advantages and developments that
science brings to us in the fight against crime.

Law enforcement agencies should beat the technological advances that
criminals are using in the commission of their crimes. That means that the
criminal justice system should be on top of scientific developments in the
field of forensics, whatever the crime. Technology changes the way crimes
are committed and, as a result, should change the way in which crime is
combated.

Today, in this House, as we debate a Bill that would give the SAPS access
to the databases of other government departments that store fingerprints,
scientific developments are already talking about “bacterial
fingerprinting” and “brain fingerprinting” crime as the next advances in
forensic science’s contribution to the fight against crime.

A crime can occur anywhere, at any time, night or day. It can happen in a
place and at a time where there are no witnesses present. Sometimes, the
only witnesses present are the clues that are left behind at the scene.

It is the crime scene investigator who collects these clues, which are
sometimes things that cannot be seen with the naked eye. It is forensic
science that converts these clues into evidence that allows the detective
to track the perpetrator, and it is the prosecutors that will use this
evidence in the courts of law to ensure that criminals are taken off our
streets and that our communities become safer places.

Chair, the Bill is a further step in the ANC’s resolution and commitment to
the people of the country to create an environment in which people are, and
indeed feel, safe. As indicated by others in the debate, this Bill gives
the SAPS access to run comparative searches against the databases of the
Departments of Home Affairs, Transport and Correctional Services.

This will immediately improve the possibility of the police identifying a
suspect if they can retrieve fingerprints from the scene of a crime. This
brings us to one of the first requirements for the successful
implementation of the legislation: In order for the legislation to make an
impact on apprehending and convicting perpetrators of crime, the SAPS will
have to ensure that our crime scene investigators are properly trained and
that those who are the first on the scene understand and know fully how to
preserve a crime scene. Without these supportive actions, the Bill becomes
paper filled with good intentions.

I will be dealing with the storage of prints; the comparative searches
against other databases; the national instructions relating to the
collection, storage, maintenance, administration and use of prints and
photographic images; as well as the security measures on the integrity of
information on the database.

Clause 15 of the Bill obliges the National Commissioner to ensure that any
fingerprints, body prints or photographic images are stored, maintained,
administered and are readily available, whether in electronic or other
form. This clause of the Bill prescribes that the fingerprint database must
be located within the division of the service that is responsible for
criminal records. It is important that our fingerprint laboratories have
proper protocols and effective and efficient training programmes in place,
which would put the work conducted in them, above any dispute.

The Bill also gives effect to the Sex Offenders Register. Clause 15(2)
directs the National Commissioner, or his delegate, to ensure that the
fingerprints and photographic images of perpetrators whose names must be
included in the National Register for Sex Offenders, are taken and dealt
with according to the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters)
Amendment Act, No 32 of 2007. This clause will thus ensure that the Sex
Offenders Register is populated.

The clause further makes it a crime for any person to use or allow the use
of fingerprints, body prints or photographic images for anything other than
the detection of a crime, investigation of an offence, the identification
of missing persons, the identification of unidentified human remains or the
conducting of a prosecution. Any person who is found to be tampering with
or manipulating the process, or falsely claiming that prints are from one
person while knowing they are not, will be guilty of an offence and can be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 15 years.

The Bill, under clause 15(b), gives the SAPS the right to run a comparative
search – and I think the fact that it is a comparative search is an
important point - against the databases of the Departments of Home Affairs
or Transport, or any other department within the national sphere of
government. So should other departments have databases, those are covered
as well.

This simply means that, while the SAPS can currently compare a fingerprint
found at a crime scene only with those on their own database, the Bill now
allows them to run the print against other existing databases, thereby
increasing the chances of identifying the person.

These comparative searches can only be done for the purpose of a crime
investigation, for the identification of a missing person or for the
identification of unidentified human remains. Doing so for any other
reason, or manipulating or tampering with the fingerprint, is declared an
offence punishable by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15 years.

The committee felt that a strong message must go out that the abuse of
these prints will not be tolerated and that the integrity of fingerprints
as evidence must be protected. We believe that this message is clearly
conveyed through the harsh sentences proposed.

The commissioner, in consultation with the Minister, must, within six
months after the commencement of the Act, issue national instructions. The
instructions can address all aspects that are necessary for the
implementation of the Act, but must include the following: How to deal with
the collection of prints and photographic images; instructions that deal
with the storage, maintenance and the administration thereof; how the
information collected must be handled; and the manner in which all
statistics in this division must be kept concerning all information
collected, stored and analysed, including the recording and storage of all
exhibits collected from a crime scene.

Furthermore, the national commissioner must develop training courses on the
national instructions and ensure that adequate training takes place within
the police.

Chair, this is of the utmost importance. We need to establish a uniform way
to deal with these prints at every one of our stations. A minimum
operational standard needs to exist in order to ensure that evidence used
in our courts cannot be challenged or rejected because of the way it was
collected, stored or analysed.
We want to make sure that this Bill improves our crime-fighting capability
by convicting the guilty and ensuring that the innocent remain exactly
that.

The integrity of the information on the database is paramount. In clause
15(d), the Bill provides for the necessary measures that must be taken on a
technical and organisational level to ensure the protection of the
integrity of the database. This will ensure the prevention of the loss,
damage or unauthorised destruction of the information on the database. It
also ensures that only authorised access to the database takes place and
that data are used only for the legitimate purposes set out in the
legislation.

It further places a responsibility on the national commissioner or his
delegate to ensure that they identify all reasonable internal and external
risks to the information on the database. Appropriate safeguards must be
put in place against those risks identified, and they must regularly ensure
that those safeguards are effectively implemented and updated in response
to new risks identified or deficiencies identified in safeguards already
implemented.

Due regard must be given to the general information security practises and
procedures of the department. The importance of this aspect cannot be
overemphasised. Backlogs and systems that are down create a serious threat
to the integrity and efficiency of this tool in the fight against crime.
This means that everything humanly and technically possible must be done in
order to limit and eliminate such problems. It would be good, in
preparation for the full implementation of the Act, to do a process
analysis and determine where processes can be improved. Downtime, for
instance, can be limited by ensuring that automatically scheduled updates
and backups of the system take place. This can be done after hours, over
weekends, without human intervention and, though the system might be slower
at the time, it will prevent downtime or system crashes. We can ill afford
that to happen.

The last part of the Bill deals with the standing operating procedures that
must be agreed upon between the SAPS, the Departments of Home Affairs,
Correctional Services and the national Department of Transport. The Bill
instructs the directors-general of these departments, under the
chairpersonship of the National Commissioner, to agree on the standing
operating procedures within six months after the commencement of the Act.
The standing operating procedures should address access by the SAPS to
these departments’ databases for the purpose of comparative searches and
the implementation of safety measures to protect the integrity of the
information contained on the relevant databases.

Again, this is of the utmost importance since information on the databases
of the other departments includes information of innocent people and
information on individuals not relevant to the purpose of this Bill. This,
hon Groenewald, is why they cannot have free access to other departments’
databases. If you had bothered to attend the meeting, you would have known
that. That is why it is not relevant for the purpose of this Bill. They
don’t need free access to those databases. The SAPS’s interaction with
these databases should be limited to establishing a hit and identifying the
person the prints represent. Any further access would be unnecessary and
unlawful.

This Bill – which is supported by the ANC – is a further step, as promised
in our 2009 Manifesto, toward establishing a modern, efficient and
transformed criminal justice system. It further gives life to our contract
that we will increase the capacity of the detective services and forensics.
It illustrates the ANC government’s commitment to fighting crime with
everything available to it.

While I have a few minutes left, just allow me to deal with a few issues.
Mr Ramatlakane shouted a lot. That’s what happens when you’ve got too much
time and you have only prepared for and are used to two minutes. Now,
suddenly, you have more. Mr Ramatlakane said that they will not support the
“shoot-to-kill” policy. There is no such policy, so I am actually glad to
hear that. Unlike Cope, the ANC also does not have a policy that says,
“Bash-a-head-to-lead”. [Laughter.]

I would like to say to the UDM: If you had actually read the Bill, you
would have seen that there are checks and balances in it to address exactly
the concerns that you have raised. It is incredible how people cannot
attend one single meeting on a Bill that has been in process for more that
two years, and then stand up here in this House and try to make a speech as
if they are the people who actually know what is in the Bill!

Agb Groenewald, as jy, soos die res van ons, so bekommerd oor misdaad in
hierdie land is – wat ek glo jy is – wil ek jou graag uitnooi om die daad
by die woord te voeg, en om ’n slag of wat die komitee te kom bywoon, en om
daar te probeer om ’n verskil te maak. Dit sal waardeer word. Dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Hon Groenewald, if you, like the rest of us, are so concerned about crime
in this country – which I believe you are – I would like to invite you to
suit the action to the word, and to attend the committee on some occasions
and try to make a difference there. It will be appreciated. Thank you.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, die agb lid het al klaar weggestap. Ek wou
vir haar ’n vraag gevra het, maar siende dat sy klaar weg is, sal ...
[Chairperson, the hon member has already walked away. I wanted to pose a
question to her, but since she has already left, I will ...]
Chair, I want to raise a point of order: I have listened to
hon Diane Kohler-Barnard and hon Annalize van Wyk. The manner in which they
delivered their speeches was so calm that I think they must have taken some
or other drug, and I want to know whether that is parliamentary.
[Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, that is not a point of
order.

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I
would like to thank all political parties for supporting this Bill and also
the House for its enthusiastic support of the Bill. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

                      Social Assistance Amendment Bill

                          (Consideration of Report)

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.
Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

                      Social Assistance Amendment Bill

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Members of
Parliament and guests, I want to thank you for this opportunity to speak at
the second reading of the Social Assistance Amendment Bill.

The mission of the Department of Social Development is to enable the poor,
the vulnerable and the excluded within the South African society to secure
a better life, and to do so in partnership with them, as well as those who
are committed to building a caring society.

To give effect to this mission statement, the Department of Social
Development provides a range of welfare services, developmental services
and social security programmes. We can say without equivocation that these
programmes have had a significant impact on the lives of the poor,
destitute and vulnerable. Our programme on social assistance continues to
improve the consumption capacity of the poor and contributes positively to
their wellbeing.
The cash transfer system has enabled millions of our people to meet their
basic needs, and has empowered all these millions to invest in the future
of their children through education. Whilst continuing to expand the reach
of our programmes, we continually work towards improving the management and
administration of social assistance to ensure that we pay the right person
the right grant amount at the right time.

It is in pursuance of this objective that we reviewed the reliability and
validity of the instruments used for the assessment of disability. We are
also determined to ensure that all our administrative systems are geared
towards treating the beneficiaries of our services with dignity and with
due consideration for administrative justice. We, therefore, also carefully
considered whether the application to the approval process within the SA
Social Security Agency, Sassa, was just and fair.

It is in the light of these assessments that we sought to make changes to
the administration of certain aspects of our social assistance programmes
through the Social Assistance Amendment Bill. We sought to amend the
definition of “disability”, so that we are better placed to identify people
who are permanently disabled, those who are temporarily disabled and those
who suffer from chronic illnesses.

The current definition leaves too much discretion to individual medical
practitioners and Sassa officials, resulting in significant variations in
the way people are assessed for the purpose of receiving disability grants.
This has resulted in people who are chronically ill qualifying for
permanent and temporary disability grants. In some cases, people who are,
indeed, permanently disabled were not able to receive support from the
state based on the outcome of a medical assessment.

We have, therefore, introduced to Parliament the Social Assistance
Amendment Bill with a view to redefining “disability” and implementing the
Harmonised Assessment Tool, Hat. The intention behind these amendments was
to provide a more rational and less arbitrary means of assessing disability
through limiting the discretion of individual doctors and our officials.

With respect to enhancing administrative justice within our administration,
we proposed the amendment of section 18 in the original Act as amended, or
the Social Assistance Act of 2004 with a view to improving the review
process by having more senior officials in Sassa reassessing the decision
made by junior officials who have declined an application for a grant.

These proposed amendments were approved by Cabinet and duly submitted to
Parliament for further deliberations and public participation. Let me state
that when Cabinet approved the amendments as discussed, we also approved a
process wherein the Department of Health would develop a strategy to manage
the chronic illnesses.

I must admit that the Parliamentary process was very robust, and
significant submissions were made by civil society organisations on their
concerns and wishes about the proposed changes to the Social Assistance
Act.

We are satisfied that the Portfolio Committee on Social Development
approached this matter carefully and holistically, reflecting on the impact
of such policy amendments and, therefore, proposed that those policy areas
that have not been addressed by the Department of Health should first be
dealt with before we pass this amendment.

The portfolio committee also called on the Department of Health to present
the case regarding readiness from the perspective of the department. I
should say at this point that it is possible that we did not fully
appreciate the scale of work that needed to be done by the Department of
Health to develop a detailed response to dealing with chronic illnesses.

In this instance, the changes that we proposed would have had the effect of
removing from the grant system significant numbers of people who, due to
their being chronically ill, were accessing the disability grants without
the Department of Health’s response to those who would fall out, through
combating chronic illnesses and also through primary health care which will
ensure access to heath services, amongst other things.

The Minister of Health emphasised that managing chronic illness effectively
cannot be separated from improving the primary health care system. Given
the level of work needed by Health to develop its capabilities to manage
chronic illnesses, we accept the portfolio committee’s recommendations that
they refer the sections of proposed amendments pertaining to the definition
of disability and related matters back to Cabinet.

Indeed, as a department deeply concerned with the wellbeing of South
Africa’s most vulnerable groups, we welcome this development. If the
amendments went through without the appropriate response from the health
system, many people might have been left without any form of support from
the state.

I am thankful that the checks and balances imposed by robust committee
debates have made us aware that even the most noble intentions could have
negative, albeit unintended outcomes. We are, however, pleased that
Parliament has decided to adopt some sections of the Bill which will make
the administrative process fairer and more responsive to our clients.

The amendments will enable Sassa to reduce the backlog in the appeals
system and expedite the process of reconsideration of a decision to decline
an application for a social assistance grant.

The Ministers of Social Development and Health will revert to Cabinet to
discuss how we aim to proceed with the management of disabilities and
chronic illnesses. I trust that civil society organisations that engaged us
on this matter will also use their similar legislative advocacy skills and
resources to assist in the passing of good policies and laws, such as the
proposed National Health Insurance, NHI, and other comprehensive social
security measure.

In conclusion, I want to thank the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee
on Social Development and all the committee members for processing this
Bill through the public hearings in Parliament. We accept the deferring of
clauses dealing with the definition of “disability” and related matters and
also the passing of the remaining two clauses of this Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms Y R BOTHA: Hon Chairperson,  hon  Ministers  and  Deputy  Ministers,  hon
members, comrades and friends, the purpose of the Bill, when it  was  tabled
by the Minister of Social Development, was to amend  the  Social  Assistance
Act of 2004, so as to have a definition for “disability”,  and  to  regulate
the application process for the grant.

Furthermore, it aimed to regulate the work of the agency to  reconsider  the
decisions it took with regards to grants; to clarify the process of  appeals
against the decisions of the agency, and  also  to  effect  certain  textual
corrections, and to provide for matters connected therewith.

Now, as we all know, one of our key  and  effective  antipoverty  programmes
implemented since the establishment of democracy,  is  the  Expanded  Social
Assistance Programme. Since then,  the  number  of  beneficiaries  receiving
social grants has increased from fewer than 1 million in 1994 to 14  million
today. This is indeed a monumental achievement, given that the programme  is
focusing on the  most  vulnerable  members  of  our  society,  who  are  the
children, women, the disabled, orphans and older people.

The committee had public  hearings  in  Parliament  that  were  attended  by
various stakeholders. Most of the stakeholders  raised  concerns  about  the
state of readiness of our health system  to  assess  disabilities,  and  the
fact that the definition, as it stands in clause 1  of  the  Bill,  excluded
people with chronic illnesses. They also lobbied us for  a  chronic  illness
grant of R1 000 a month.

Now, chairperson, there are currently 1,4  million  South  Africans  on  the
disability grant programme.  Disability  is  determined  through  a  medical
process which is done by doctors in the public sector  and  in  the  private
sector.  About  230  000  beneficiaries  are  in  receipt  of  a   temporary
disability grant. This grant is defined as a grant  that  will  last  for  a
period of more than 6 months but less than 12 months.

The grant processes have been complicated for a  very  long  time  now,  and
that needs to be addressed. One of the  contributing  factors  lies  in  the
lack of uniformity  of  assessment  methods,  which  results  in  errors  of
inclusion or exclusion. By this  I  mean  that  there  are  people  who  are
receiving the disability grant, but who are not eligible for or entitled  to
such a grant, because they are simply not disabled.

We  are  further  well  aware  that  many  of  these  people  are  poor  and
unemployed, and as a result are manipulating  the  system  by  collaborating
with the doctors in their area, because of lack of income support  to  these
unemployed people.

Let me give you an example, let us take a Dr Van Wyk who knows a Mr  Khumalo
very well, and this Mr Khumalo has a condition  called  asthma.  His  asthma
can be managed through appropriate medication and he  can  still  enter  the
labour market. Now, in  medical  terms  asthma  is  regarded  as  a  chronic
illness and not a disability.

A chronic illness can be defined as an illness that is prolonged, and  would
not be resolved spontaneously, but can be cured completely. A person with  a
purely chronic illness alone cannot be deemed to have a disability.  Yet  Dr
Van Wyk would classify Mr  Khumalo  as  disabled  for  the  purpose  of  the
opportunity to receive the disability grant, because he  is  sympathetic  to
him, as Mr Khumalo is unemployed and lives in poverty.

Hon Chairperson, the opposite can also be true. There are instances where  a
person who has asthma goes to the same doctor,  but  that  doctor  does  not
classify that particular person as disabled despite the  person  being  poor
and unemployed. I am sure that you will agree that  such  a  practice  opens
the social grant system  to  fraud  and  abuse,  and  in  the  long  run  it
undermines the integrity of the system.

Now, in view of this challenge, some time ago Cabinet approved a  definition
of disability for a disability grant and free health care  to  address  this
challenge.  The  Bill  as  tabled  sought  to   activate   that   particular
definition. During the public hearing, as I said earlier,  the  stakeholders
consistently raised the issue of exclusion rather than inclusion.

As the Portfolio Committee  on  Social  Development,  we  also  invited  the
national Department of Health to explain to us  the  sector’s  readiness  to
implement  the  Bill  since  its   medical   officers   and   other   health
professionals have a responsibility to use the health assessment  tool  when
they assess disability; and we wanted  also  to  ascertain  their  state  of
readiness to dispense chronic medicine, as the Minister said.

I want to commend the department for their open and frank  approach  to  the
matter.  They,  together  with  the  provinces,  are  in  the   process   of
strengthening their primary healthcare  facilities  in  order  to  timeously
dispense medicine, although the  shortage  of  healthcare  professionals  is
also one of their challenges. The committee report,  if  one  looks  at  it,
actually elaborates on this matter in detail.

Now, since we are the Parliament of the people, and especially  an  activist
Parliament, we have listened to the  people.  We  have,  therefore,  decided
that only the clauses that have unintended consequences  be  considered,  as
well as the clause that deals with the appeals process of the agency.

The committee has rejected the clauses that define  “disability”  and  other
clauses that are related to it, and have referred them back to  Cabinet  for
reconsideration.  Both  the  Department  of  Social  Development   and   the
Department of Health must keep the committee abreast on their progress  with
regard to the state of readiness of the said  clauses.  The  committee  will
obviously monitor their progress in this regard.

So, the long title of the Bill will now read:

   To amend the Social Assistance  Amendment  Act  2004,  so  as  to  enable
   applicants and beneficiaries to apply to the  agency  to  reconsider  its
   decision; to further regulate appeals against decisions  of  the  agency;
   and to effect certain textual corrections  and  to  provide  for  matters
   connected therewith.

There should  be  a  distinction  in  the  definition  of  “disability”  for
children and adults. Also, there should be an assessment tool for  the  care
dependency grant. The department has assured that there is a draft  that  is
ready, but it has  not  yet  been  approved  by  the  executive.  The  draft
assessment tool for the care dependency grant determines disability and  the
extent to which a child requires care and support.

Let me comment on the issue around corruption, because as far as the  social
assistance grant is concerned, the definition of “fraud” is  thrown  loosely
around, and there are  also  some  allegations.  I  now  want  to  use  this
opportunity to commend the Minister and the South  African  Social  Security
Agency for the fact that 13 000 public  servants  and  civilians  have  been
convicted of swindling  the  state  out  of  about  R191,3  million  through
fraudulent welfare grant claims.

I want to laud them for their action of actually tracking those people  down
and having them prosecuted so that they  can  pay  back  the  money  to  the
state. [Applause.]

Sometimes I get the  impression  that  members  ...  verlang  terug  na  die
vleispotte van Egipto. [... are longing for the flesh-pots of Egypt].

There was no such thing, and no issue around  fraudulent  grants.  Those  of
us, who lived in communities where people got grants - if they were lucky  -
know about the schemes that were there. So far the department has  recovered
R56 million, and the committee will monitor Sassa  closely  to  see  whether
they are recovering the rest of the money.

Most of the public servants supplied false  information  when  they  applied
for social grants, so now that Sassa has access to  the  Government  Pension
Fund they can do runs with other government agencies. I  am  sure  they  can
clean up the system thoroughly.

Obviously, when you have 14 million beneficiaries on  the  system  you  will
have grantees that fall through the cracks and that come on  to  the  system
fraudulently, but when you do your checks and  balances  that  is  when  you
track them down. So the will to prosecute is commendable.  It  is  obviously
the right thing to do, and we hope that  government  will  recover  all  its
money.

In conclusion, the ANC  supports  the  Bill  as  amended  by  the  Portfolio
Committee on Social Development. I thank you. [Applause.]
Ms S P KOPANE: Chairperson, the level of unemployment is rising on a daily
basis in our country. Women bear almost all the responsibility for meeting
the basic needs of the families, yet they are systematically denied the
resources and freedom to play such a role.

HIV and Aids are rapidly destroying our country. The current food price
crisis has a severe impact on our nation. The level of desperation of our
people also rises every minute. As we are seated here today, maybe we need
to ask ourselves the question: What have we done to change the lives of our
people, especially when there are those who go to bed with an empty
stomach? For how long do we expect these people to be patient while this
government is failing to create employment, and while this government is
also wasting millions of rands?

Let me take this opportunity to advise this august House that each and
every government deserves the number of criminals it has. The power is in
our hands to eradicate the number of social ills in our country.

Because of the level of desperation our people tend to manipulate or abuse
the present systems to survive. During the public hearings, many of the
organisations alleged that doctors solicited bribes.

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Is that a point of order, hon
member?

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Chairperson, I don’t know whether I’m sleeping or not
because the noise reminds me of a visit to a beer hall in Munich.
[Laughter.] I don’t know whether we are still in the House.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon members, please let’s lower our
conversation levels so that other members are able to hear the speakers.
Continue, hon member.

Ms S P KOPANE: This implies that people were forging cases to get grants
and some HIV/Aids patients and chronic illness patients were deliberately
not taking their medication as prescribed by the doctors so that their
conditions could deteriorate, and as a result their grants would not be
terminated.

Presently there are 13 million people receiving grants in our country.
About 1,4 million receive disability grants that cost about R16,9 billion.
If all the departments within the social cluster, including the Department
of Health, could take their responsibility seriously it would reduce the
burden facing the Department of Social Development.

This picture clearly shows how many people are solely depending on social
grants as a source of income, but it is not a sustainable solution at all.

Setjhaba se hloka mosebetsi e seng diphuthelwana tsa dijo. Batho ba rona ha
ba rate ho ba mekopakopa. Mosotho wa kgale o re “mphemphe e a lapisa, motho
o kgonwa ke sa hae.” [The community needs jobs and not food parcels. Our
people do not like to be beggars. A Mosotho man once said, “begging will
make you go hungry, one should be satisfied with what one has.”]

However, the Social Assistance Amendment Bill was an attempt to deal with
the definition of “disability”, which is a very complex matter. There was a
need to decide to review the existing legislation after noticing a
significant increase in the uptake of applications for disability and care
dependency grants.

Upon closer scrutiny it was discovered that the current definition of
“disability” as defined by the law, included many people, who should be
excluded, and vice versa, because there was a lack of uniformity in
assessment methods. The Social Assistance Amendment Bill aims to define
what exactly constituted disability and who should and who should not
benefit from a disability grant.

One of the criteria used in terms of the new Bill is to determine whether a
person has a disability or whether a person is able to enter into the
labour market. The underlying principle of the Bill was that it will bring
about the correct selection and targeting for eligibility for disability
grants and a free health care. The harmonised assessment tool will
facilitate the uniform assessment and will significantly reduce disability
grant fraud.

Section 18 as it stood, only permitted applicants or a person acting on
their behalf to appeal against the decision of the agency relating to any
matter regulated by the Act. This section did not permit beneficiaries
whose grants had been terminated or suspended to appeal against any
decision of the agency. According to the agency, relating to any matter
regulated by the Act, a beneficiary thus had no choice but to approach the
courts for a review.

The amendment to this section will allow a beneficiary to appeal against a
decision by Sassa. The amendment also allows Sassa to reconsider the
decision by means of an internal review process.

The constitutional implication is that people with chronic conditions, once
this tool has been implemented, will no longer qualify for the disability
grant as is currently the case. The exclusion is not intentional, but is a
means to address the effective identification of disability.

On 18 May 2010, the Department of Health made a presentation before the
committee on the state of readiness to implement the Harmonised Assessment
Tool, but to our surprise the department reported that they were not ready
to implement the tool to assess patient eligibility for disability grants
due to a shortage of trained health professionals who could use the tool.
They further acknowledged that the Primary Health Care System needs to be
strengthened.

According to Chapter 2 of the Constitution, the Bill of Rights, the
Department of Health must ensure that everyone has a right to have access
to sufficient food, water and social security, including - if they are
unable to support themselves and their dependants - appropriate social
assistance. Furthermore, the state must take reasonable legislative and
other measures within available resources to achieve the progressive
realisation of each of these services.

The current state of the primary health care has deteriorated a
hundredfold. Therefore, the shortage of staff, equipment and other sources
has posed a high risk and many challenges to primary health care. Given the
abovementioned concerns, the committee, therefore agrees not to approve the
clause defining “disability” and the related clauses.

In conclusion, the DA demands that the Department of Health must come up
with a clear time frame to state exactly when they are going to be ready,
so that the Department of Social Development can approve the amendments of
the Bill. Thank you.
Ms N P GCUME: Chairperson, all Acts of Parliament have unintended
consequences and therefore schedules have to be regularly amended. This
amending Bill became necessary because of inadequacies in the definition of
disability. This led to a lack of uniformity in assessments methods, which
in turn led to budgeted amounts for disability grants being exceeded.

Cope believes that the definition of disability in the Amending Bill will
work better, but a question remains: Will the 400 trained officials, whom
the department trained at a cost of R462 683, be able to uniformly
determine whether an applicant has a moderate to severe limitation to his
or her ability to function as a result of physical, sensory communication,
intellectual and mental disability making it impossible for such a person
to obtain the means for maintenance or employment?

Government will have to institute some kind of peer review to ascertain
whether provinces were assessing disability uniformly. Presently, the
corrupt practices of South Africa also need to be taken into account. Each
of the 400 health facilities that will be set up across the country in
support of this Act will have to be regularly audited in order to contain
irregularities and corruption.

Officials who have been trained to assess disability should be routinely
transferred to other centres so that corrupt practices do not become
rooted. We also want to urge the hon Minister to present the portfolio
committee with a review of this amendment 12 months after it has been
enacted. We need to gauge whether the amendments we are making have, in
fact, been effective.

As we are now operating on the basis of a fiscal deficit it is imperative
that we keep government expenditure in check. In two years time, the cost
of servicing government debt will have risen to over R100 billion. As with
Greece, the deficit is going to have serious consequences for our economy.

Furthermore, as the present government is using debt to pay for
consumption, not infrastructure development, we can expect resources to
become very constrained in the months and years ahead.

The amendment of section 18 of the principal Act is a great improvement as
it allows for self-correction through an appeal of the agency itself. It is
very important that the agency fully comprehends the nature of due process
and will be able to handle appeals with juridical capability and medical
competence.

To obviate litigation is always a preferred way of settling disputes. The
courts must always be the final recourse. Litigation is horrendously
expensive.

It will be of great importance to Parliament if appeals are analysed to get
to the bottom of the problem. If the same problem is continually surfacing
from a certain office, area or individual, the department can deal with the
root cause quickly and effectively. As a member of the portfolio committee,
I urge the hon Minister to ensure that an analysis of appeals takes place
routinely and that we are kept in the loop.

Finally, I come to the question of the appointment of a tribunal. In Japan
there is an agreement that it is better to take 90 days to plan and 10 days
to execute the plan. In the West, planning takes 10 days and the execution
takes 90 days. I am making this point that if officials in the provinces do
their job well and thoroughly and provide the applicant, who has been
turned down, with a detailed explanation it will help to ease up the appeal
process and save the Minister from having to appoint an independent
tribunal.

In our view the agency itself should never disqualify any applicant without
a second opinion and some kind of peer review. Every disqualification
should be made as watertight as possible. If an appeal succeeds it will
simply mean that someone has not done his or her work properly.

While we support the Bill, we trust that the Minister will keep us in the
loop as we have requested. It is very important for us to know whether the
amended Act is moderately or substantially better than the principal Act.
Thank you.

Ms H N MAKHUBA: Chairperson, in South Africa we have a situation in which
82% of the population is classified as being poor, with poverty levels
ranging between 50% and 80%. Unemployment is the root cause of poverty in
our country. Inequality is another issue driven more by wage disparity than
unemployment.

By 2010, over 13 million people would have received social aid assistance.
The question of sustainability is of concern, with some economists saying
that South Africa is already the largest welfare state in the world. The
problem that we are currently vexed with from a social assistance point of
view is how to create a situation in which self-reliance will be promoted
and not sole dependency upon state social aid relief.

However, social security is a socioeconomic right that is underwritten by
our Constitution. Therefore, we are duty bound to ensure that it fulfils
its purpose of financially assisting our most vulnerable and poverty
stricken. The Department of Social Development is at the forefront of
poverty alleviation and must have the correct legal instruments with which
to fulfil its mandate, both effectively and efficiently to the poor and
poverty-stricken of our country.

The current amending Bill seeks to provide the applicant with greater
powers in terms of the appeals procedure, as well as empowering the
beneficiaries of social aid grants with the right of appeal to the agency
for reconsideration of its decision in respect of a grant, before appealing
to an independent tribunal.

The addition of the beneficiaries to the appeal procedure is most welcome
because it enables beneficiaries to institute appeal proceedings
independently or on behalf of the applicant, thus, once again ensuring a
“cover-all” clause for social aid relief.

When people living below the poverty line apply for social aid, they are
already in a desperate state. These amendments allow for the expediting of
appeals in such matters, thus enabling the government to provide real-time
assistance to people in need.

Enjoyment of the right to an adequate standard of living and social
protection is of critical importance to the people of South Africa.
Regulating the appeals to independent tribunal will also greatly assist in
streamlining the procedure, thus providing more effective delivery of aid
by the department.

The above is in line with the international norms and conventions, such as
the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and certain
constitutional imperatives of our own Constitution, such as section 33,
which ensures just administrative action. This accordingly makes the
amendment of this Act a very necessary one.

The IFP supports the amendment to the Social Assistance Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, the need for the amendment to the Social
Assistance Bill was realised when the 2003-04 uptake of disability grants,
spiked at more than three times the projected figure for that period.

An investigation was done to establish the cause of this sudden increase.
The core findings were that there was no common definition for what
constituted a disability, and that there was no uniform assessment, method
or tool to determine whether a person had a disability. This situation
resulted in errors of both inclusion and exclusion.

The Social Assistance Amendment Bill was an attempt to deal with the
definition of “disability”, which is an extremely complex matter. One of
the criteria used in terms of the proposed Bill to determine whether a
person has a disability, was whether he or she was able or not able to
enter the labour market.

It seems as if that contentious issue was not going to be decided for now.
Very real concerns were raised regarding current recipients of disability
grants being disqualified from receiving a disability grant in terms of the
proposed definition and that it could have led to more litigation against
Sassa and the Department of Social Development.

The ACDP is of the opinion that the definition of “disability” should be
exclusively in relation to social grants and not a broad definition. In
discussing social assistance in the context of disability, the ACDP would
like to draw attention to the present situation where children with
disabilities are excluded from receiving social grants until they turn 18
years.

This is because their caregivers receive R280 per month. It is clearly an
impossible situation as no one in their wildest dreams would think that a
child with a disability could be cared for on that amount. The ACDP will be
supporting this Bill as amended. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, before I call the next
speaker, some members were assisting me. I heard some members saying, “Shh!
Shh!”. Hon Ellis, this reminded me of primary school, where you had a
monitor or prefect.

Every time when the teacher left the class, he would appoint a monitor or
prefect. Some people loved the job of being a prefect or monitor. When the
monitor or prefect was sitting there and someone spoke, he would look at
the person and they kept quiet. The monitor used to look to the side and
then quickly look at one again. Then they would write your name down.
[Laughter.] The Chairperson is not like that. Therefore, I am not going to
do it. [Interjections.]

Ms H LAMOELA: Chairperson, the aim of the Social Assistance Amendment Bill
is to, and I quote:

   Amend the Social Assistance Act of 2004, so as to insert a definition to
   further regulate the eligibility for a disability grant; to enable
   applicants and beneficiaries to apply to the agency to reconsider its
   decisions; to further regulate appeals against decisions of the agency;
   to effect certain textual corrections; and to provide for matters
   connected therewith.

Die hantering van so ’n belangrike stuk wetgewing wat die lewens van so
veel arme mense diep raak, was betreurenswaardig en uiters swak.
Advertensies rakende hierdie stuk wetgewing, wat veral die armes in
verafgeleë plattelandse gebiede raak, was geadverteer in koerante soos die
Mail & Guardian en Sunday Times, om slegs twee koerante te noem, teen ’n
koste van ongeveer R94 000.

Hierdie belangrike advertensie het toe, nogal, ook oor die Paasnaweek
geskied.

Slegs ongeveer ses instansies het voorleggings vir bykans 1,4 miljoen
begunstigdes gemaak.
Onnodige ritte na Kaapstad deur die Departement van Maatskaplike
Ontwikkeling was onderneem om voorleggings aan ons komitee te doen, wetende
dat die afwesige Departement van Gesondheid ’n leidende rol in die
implementering van hierdie stuk wetgewing sou speel.

Na bykans vier sulke ontmoetings, het die Departement van Gesondheid
uiteindelik hul opwagting gemaak. Die departement se situasie was baie
duidelik uitgespel. Ek haal dr Pillay aan toe hy baie eerlik en opreg die
volgende gesê het: (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[The handling of such an important piece of legislation, which profoundly
affects the lives of so many poor people, has been deplorable and
exceedingly poor. Advertisements regarding this piece of legislation, which
mainly affects the poor in remote rural areas, were placed in newspapers
such as the Mail & Guardian and Sunday Times, to mention just two of the
newspapers, at a cost of approximately R94 000. This important
advertisement was then, unbelievably, published over the Easter Weekend.

Only about six institutions made submissions on behalf of almost 1,4
million beneficiaries. Unnecessary trips to Cape Town were undertaken by
the Department of Social Development to make submissions to our committee,
with the knowledge that the absent Department of Health would be playing a
leading role in the implementation of this piece of legislation.
After about four such meetings, the Department of Health eventually made
their appearance. The Department of Health’s situation was clearly spelled
out. I quote Dr Pillay, when he very honestly and sincerely stated the
following:]

   We are not in any way close to rendering quality health care.


Thanks to Dr Pillay for the honesty shown rather than his pretending that
everything was in order and that we could proceed. We do want to proceed,
but under better conditions.

Implementation of legislation plays a pivotal role in getting systems up
and running. The Department of Health can in no way implement what is
expected of them in the Bill, bearing in mind the tremendous shortages of
health professionals and resources, especially in primary health care.

Voorsitter, die Wet op Maatskaplike Bystand, Wet No 13 van 2004, wat net
voor die verkiesing geteken was, nogal, het duidelike oogmerke uitgespel.
Ek herinner graag die departement daaraan: eerstens, om vir die
administrasie van maatskaplike bystand en betaling van maatskaplike toelaes
voorsiening te maak; tweedens, vir maatskaplike bystand voorsiening te maak
en die vereistes om daarvoor te kwalifiseer te bepaal; derdens, om te
verseker dat minimum norme en standaarde vir die lewering van maatskaplike
bystand voorgeskryf word; en laastens, baie belangrik, om vir die
instelling van ’n inspektoraat vir maatskaplike bystand voorsiening te
maak.

Die vraag is dus nou as volg: Is hierdie inspektoraat ooit geïmplementeer?
As dit nie geïmplementeer is nie, waarom nie? Wie was die uitvoerende
direkteur van hierdie inspektoraat? Mag ons miskien nou weet of iemand ooit
in die pos aangestel was? Sou dit, soos saamgevat en uiteengesit in hierdie
wetgewing, plaasgevind het, kon deeglike monitering, wat onafhanklikheid
teweeg sou bring, plaasgevind het.

Sodoende, kon die volgende probleemareas betyds identifiseer word:
eerstens, die misbruik van maatskaplike toelaes wat op ’n grootmaat
plaasgevind het en baie ekstra administratiewe tyd en geld van die
departement geëis het; tweedens, kon korrupsie in die departemente wat
selfs deur hul eie personeel gepleeg is, bekamp word, soos daarna verwys
word deur die voorsitter van ons komitee. Miljoene rande het in die proses
verlore gegaan.

Derdens, die agterstand van die aangestelde tribunaal, wat gruwelik misluk
het, sou betyds aangespreek en reggestel kon word, en hofsake sou vermy kon
word.

Laastens, heel moontlik sou hierdie wysiging van wetgewing nie eers nodig
gewees het nie.

Voorsitter, ek weet dat niks vir altyd dieselfde kan bly nie, en dat
aanpassings van tyd tot tyd gemaak moet word om stelsels te laat werk. Maar
om wetgewing te onderteken en dan in argiewe te bêre – en hier verwys ek
veral na die 2004 stuk – bring geensins voorspoed of hoop vir veral die
armes wat so swaar op ons steun nie. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Chairperson, the Social Assistance Act, No 13 of 2004, which was, in fact,
signed just before the elections, at that, outlines clear objectives. I
would like to remind the Department of Health thereof: firstly, to provide
for the administration of social assistance and the payment of social
grants; secondly, to provide for social assistance and to determine the
qualification requirements thereof; thirdly, to ensure that minimum norms
and standards are prescribed for the delivery of social assistance; and,
lastly, very important, to provide for the establishment of an inspectorate
for social assistance.

The questions are, therefore, as follows: Was this inspectorate ever
established? If it wasn’t, why wasn’t it established? Who was the executive
director of this inspectorate? May we now, perhaps, be informed as to
whether anyone had ever been appointed in this position?

Had this transpired as embodied and explained in this piece of legislation,
proper monitoring could have taken place, which would have brought about
independence.

By so doing, the following problem areas could have been identified in
time: firstly, the misappropriation of social grants, which took place
quite extensively and required a great deal of additional administrative
time and money; secondly, corruption in the departments, which was
perpetrated even by their own staff, could have been controlled, as has
been referred to by the chairperson of our committee. Millions of rands
have been lost in the process.

Thirdly, the backlog by the appointed tribunal, which failed dismally,
would have been addressed in time and could have been rectified, and
lawsuits would have been avoided.

Finally, most likely this amendment to the Act would not even have been
necessary.

Chairperson, I know that nothing can stay the same forever, and that
adjustments have to be made from time to time to allow systems to function.
But to ratify legislation and then to store it in the archives- and here I
am referring to the 2004 document, in particular- doesn’t in any way bring
prosperity or hope for, particularly, the poor, who rely so heavily on our
support. Thank you.]
Ms H H MALGAS: Chairperson, I would like to greet the Ministers and all
members of the House.

I don’t think my speech is going to be very long because, at the moment all
the parties that have spoken – the DA, Cope, the IFP and the ACDP – have
supported the Bill.

I would like to thank this House for giving us the opportunity to present
issues and concerns relating to the Social Assistance Amendment Bill which
is before Parliament. As the chairperson said before, I would like to say
that we are all aware of the fact that the grant system is not perfect and
will require continual changes, from time to time, to adequately respond to
the needs of our people.

To improve the provision of social assistance, Cabinet has approved the
Social Assistance Amendment Bill, which is before Parliament today.

We know what the Bill seeks to attain by allowing applicants and
beneficiaries an opportunity to request the South African Social Security
Agency, Sassa, to reconsider decisions, before they appeal to the
independent tribunal. It is in order to expedite the resolution of
agreements between applicants, beneficiaries and the agency.

It also allows beneficiaries an opportunity to appeal a decision of the
agency. It makes provision for the appointment of an independent tribunal
in a manner prescribed by the legislation. Lastly, as the chairperson and
other speakers have said, the Bill seeks to reflect a definition of
“disability”.

As the ANC and the ANC-led government, we are aware that we have made it
clear that it is important to provide income support to all those who are
disabled and who, as a result of their disability, are unable to enter the
job market.

The chairperson and other people present here spoke about the public
hearings, so I won’t speak about them or the state of readiness of the
Department of Health to implement their assessment team. Chairperson, in
conclusion I would rather speak about the desirability of the Bill before I
pass a few remarks.

Concerning the desirability of the Bill, we, the committee, would like to
request the House to reconsider some clauses of the Bill, in order to
address unintended consequences. Our proposal, as the Social Development
Portfolio Committee, is, firstly, that the definition in the disability
clause be completely withdrawn from the Amendment Bill before this House.

Secondly, seeing that there were no objections to the other clauses, our
proposal is that the generic correction in section 5 of the Principal Act
and the request on the reconsideration for the right to appeal, as well as
the consideration of the decision by the agency for appeal in sections 14
and 18 of the principal Act, be adopted.

As I put it in my speech, we therefore would like Parliament to consider
our view and to process these clauses for the acceptance of the Amendment
Bill.

Then there are few housekeeping issues that I would like to address. When
it comes to the time frame, we do agree that there should be a time frame
in place, but we know that there are still challenges when it comes to the
Department of Health. So when we get together for our first meeting, we
have to look at what we would like to achieve. In this meeting we should
discuss the way forward on the milestones concerning the implementation of
the Department of Health’s strategic plan to manage chronic illnesses.

We also have to look at the care dependency grant because, according to the
amendment, there was no assessment tool. We would like the department to
brief us on that assessment tool, but after the care dependency grant
assessment tool has been approved by Cabinet.

Our social development chairperson gave the long title of the Bill. I
therefore would like to place the short title of the Bill before this
august House. This Bill is called, “The Social Assistance Amendment Bill of
2010”. The ANC supports this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, I would like to express
our appreciation for the inputs that have been made by the hon members, who
also happen to come from the portfolio committee - all of them. I’m saying
so because they have been engaged and they were quite helpful in getting us
to the point where we are, in particular the chairperson who has led this
process quite well.

I also note that all the hon members, who stood here at this podium,
expressed support for the adoption of this Bill, the sections that have
been referred to. Having said so, I would just like to respond to some of
the issues – quite a few of them – and will be very brief.

The issues that relate to the need for the creation of jobs has been
discussed in our portfolio committee on several occasions. We have all
acknowledged that it is necessary that government creates jobs so that we
are able to ensure that we reduce the burden on the state, in terms of
giving grants. That is an issue we have long accepted. We even went to the
extent of indicating what measures are in place in moving towards that.

However, it is important to recognise that whilst our people are still
suffering, we do have to continue to support them in alleviating poverty;
so there is really no debate. We shouldn’t stand at this podium and make
this issue quite a big issue. There has been this agreement and
acknowledgement.

The issue of corruption is not a new thing. It is this particular
department, working together with government, which has actually discovered
these fraudulent activities in the department. We have been dealing with
these activities within the system, so, hon Lamoela, I want to reiterate
that it’s not a new discovery by any member, particularly from the
opposition. It’s we people in the department who have found these things
and we are dealing with them on a continuous basis, as we are reporting to
the portfolio committee.

With regard to the issue of time frames, I want to indicate that indeed we
agree that we will come back to the portfolio committee. We’ll keep you in
the loop, but we will come back with a plan once we note that Health has
developed a plan. I did indicate that, as the two Ministers, we will go
back to Cabinet to report and to develop mechanisms as to how we are going
to take it further. Definitely, we are not going to wait for the time when
Health is fully ready because that time will be very far. We would like to
have the deferred sections also adopted at some stage.

I would like to thank all hon members and, indeed, agree also that this
Bill be passed. Thank you very much.
Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, kindly note that while
the committee report is before the House for consideration, there will not
be a debate on it today. Members may, however, use the information in the
report for the joint debate tomorrow on the Fifa World Cup. I’m sure you
will love that. It will be a full House tomorrow. I now recognise the Chief
Whip of the Majority Party.

     Consideration of Report of Ad Hoc Joint Committee on South Africa’s
                        Readiness for Fifa World Cup

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson I move:

    That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

     YOUTH DEVELOPMENT IN THE CONTEXT OF THE 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP LEGACY

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Ms L S MAKHUBELA-MASHELE: House Chairperson, hon members, guests in the
gallery, let me greet you by saying, “Feel it; it is here! Bafana kaofela.”
[Bafana, we are all with you.]

I would like to begin from the premise that comprehensive social
transformation not only entails changing the material conditions of all our
people, including the youth, for the better, but it is also ensuring that
we build a nation on values of Ubuntu and true human solidarity.

It is the combination of these factors that give form and character to the
national democratic society that we seek to build through the national
democratic revolution. It is still our resolution to build a society based
on the will of the people without regard for race, gender, belief,
language, ethnicity or geographical location.

During this period of Youth Month, we must reaffirm our commitment to
redressing poverty and inequality. The challenge faced by young people in
the country is enormous. According to Statistics SA, the unemployment rate
for the first quarter of 2010 increased by 0,9% to 25,2%. The youth
unemployment rate is higher than the national average. The Ford Foundation
has shown that approximately 2,8 million of people aged between 18 and 24
are unemployed.

We know that many young people do not complete high school, and those who
do battle to get access to postmatric education. We need not forget the
unemployment situation due to lack of skills. This shows that our country’s
socioeconomic problems are essentially centred on youth development.

Therefore, this calls for concerted actions aimed at youth development if,
indeed, the future of our country is to be put on a sustainable and vibrant
developmental trajectory. The historical role of the youth movement at the
forefront of the liberation struggle has elevated the youth as a motive
force for socioeconomic transformation.

Throughout different stages of our history, young people were at the
forefront of the struggle against apartheid and socioeconomic exclusion.
Issues of youth development were neither prioritised nor institutionalised
during the pre-1994 period.

During that period, issues of youth development were left mainly to civil
society and youth organisations, and never found expression within
apartheid government structures or legislation policies and their
programmes. The challenges of youth development over the last decade have
resembled the extent to which the apartheid legacy sought to entrench
itself in the socioeconomic and sociopolitical life of South Africans.

Resolving the challenges of youth development requires an approach anchored
on integration, sustainability, responsiveness, and the demand and
aspirations of the country’s youth. The approach in this regard must not
only be to confront current challenges of the national economy, but to
confront the internal issues that hinder growth and development in a way
that would meet the developmental needs of our people in general, and young
people in particular.

We need to strengthen the National Youth Development Agency, NYDA, in its
work to promote participation of young people in the economy through
targeted and integrated programmes. We acknowledge that the NYDA is
committed in promoting access to quality education and skills to both youth
in school and out of school through work and life skills programmes.

This has made significant progress in promoting entrepreneurship among
people, targeting youth aged between 18 and 35 in helping them start new
businesses or growing existing ones. Social transformation must also mean
that young people drive activities to build their social capital, networks
and strengthen the relationship that bind people and communities together.

These activities will propel young people to reach their full personal
goals and develop their full capacity. This will ensure that young people
are aware of themselves, their rights and their responsibilities. The youth
are undoubtedly the custodians of the future of South Africa. Therefore,
they have a responsibility to ensure that they are comprehensively prepared
for the future and leadership roles.

It is noticeable that, through social transformation, youth development has
assumed centre stage in our country since democracy began. However, there
is an acknowledgement that, despite such general commitment towards youth
development, the absence of institutional and programmatic capacity to
address youth development has meant that the historic backlogs created by
apartheid persist.

The strategic objective of the ANC continues to be the liberation of the
majority of our people: working people; the urban and rural poor; youth;
women; and people with physical challenges. The ANC is committed to
developing ways that seek to better the lives of all, especially the rural
youth through the elimination of hunger; illiteracy; improving the quality
and access to education; health services; and the creation of jobs.

In doing so, we must ensure that ANC’s young cadres must support government
by aligning ANC efforts with the objectives of government for our common
benefit. In all these things, we must highlight the role played by the ANC
youth cadres as agencies and drivers of transformation.

Our attack on poverty must seek to empower young people to take themselves
out of poverty while creating adequate social security nets to protect the
most vulnerable of our youth.

We must commend the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, Lindiwe
Sisulu, for her ground-breaking proposal that the country should create a
national service where young people would gradually be absorbed into the
training facilities and gain more skills in order to get opportunities for
decent work. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order, order!

Ms L S MAKHUBELA-MASHELE: The ANC recognises the importance of the family
as an institution. Steps must be taken to ensure that its centrality in
advancing and preserving human solidarity must be promoted at all costs.
The institution of the family is a unit of mutual support towards raising
principled individuals of high moral standards and values; for therein lies
a virtuous social transformation.

As a young woman, I re-emphasise the need to ensure that young women also
obtain technical and scientific skills in the study of science and
technology. South African women face specific challenges and, in
particular, difficulties in society today.

The youth constitute a large portion of the South African population. We
are a resourceful sector of society with diverse needs. Our government has
to meet the consistent challenging needs of young people - the rural youth,
urban youth, and youth with physical and other disabilities.

In conclusion, we as youth must be the centre of social transformation as
one of the motive forces to ensure that, together, we build a national
democratic and caring society. The Youth Month debate affords us the
opportunity to reflect on the historical role of the youth within the
social transformation discourse, its challenges and achievements.

Once social change begins, it cannot be reversed. You cannot “uneducate” a
person who has learnt to read; you cannot humiliate a person who feels
proud; and you cannot oppress people who are not afraid anymore.

As young people, at all times and under all circumstances, we have the
power to transform the quality of our lives. For social transformation
creates space for effective social change. We are the future, and the
future is ours. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S MOKGALAPA: Hon Chairperson, it is quite an honour and privilege to
speak on this important topic. In nine days time, Africa and the world will
be celebrating one of the most historic events in the form of the 2010 Fifa
Soccer World Cup. We never in our wildest dreams thought that it would
happen in Africa, and in South Africa.

This means that the 2010 Fifa World Cup is relevant in addressing the needs
of the youth. However, let us focus on the reality on the ground. For a
nation such as ours that has a rich diversity, the 2010 Fifa World Cup
should be used to empower this generation. The youth should have been
involved in all phases of the World Cup processes, from the decision-
making, infrastructure development, skills development, and, most
importantly, employment opportunities.

Let us frankly assess how the 2010 Fifa World Cup should have been used to
create opportunities and address the needs of young people. Firstly, with
regard to unemployment the shocking statistics reveal that South African
youth contribute to 72% of unemployed people in this country. About 3,1
million youth are unemployed, 35% of the South African population is the
youth and this translates to about 16,3 million people of whom 36% are
jobless.

This is due to a lack of skills and poor education, and the question is:
What has the Local Organising Committee, LOC, done to assist young people
with learnerships or in-service training to empower young people in
information technology, infrastructure and engineering? If the answer is
no, then the World Cup means nothing to the South African youth.

Secondly, this concerns education whereby only 15% of the Grade 12 learners
who pass are able to enter university; only 5% of them graduate from
tertiary education; and most of them drop out. What has been done by the
Fifa World Cup organisers to ensure that the education level of our people
is improved and that they invest in our youth by offering them bursaries?

The World Cup has taken much of the time of learners and they will be two
months behind schedule at school while busy focusing on the World Cup.

The third issue is that of crime. South Africa’s youth experience violent
crime on a daily basis. Murder and residential robberies have increased,
which shows that there is a lot of antisocial behaviour among our youth.
The youth incarceration levels have increased yearly. The World Cup should
have been used to address these issues by giving the young people hope and
skills to sustain themselves.

Fourthly, with regard to the issue of health, most of the young people have
no access to health care. The growing number of teenage pregnancies, high
levels of HIV/Aids and drug and alcohol abuse among our youth is a source
of concern.

Most young people in South Africa experience physical and psychological
trauma due to gender-based violence and sexual abuse. Awareness campaigns
are urgently needed and the World Cup should have been used as the platform
to communicate with the youth about these issues.

Lastly, rural youth development is another issue which the World Cup should
be addressing in order to breach the growing gap between the urban and
rural youth. This event is inaccessible to the rural youth with most of
them having no means to enjoy the World Cup. The tickets are too expensive
and even the Bafana Bafana T-shirts are too costly; they cannot afford
them.

They still hope that one day they might be rescued from their plight and do
not even have a sense of feeling that the World Cup is here in their
country. The National Youth Development Agency is inaccessible to the rural
youth. While on a mobilisation visit of the World Cup in Lichtenburg in the
North West, last week ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, order!

Mr S MOKGALAPA: ... we found that the World Cup is even unknown to them,
with community members saying, “We hope that after the World Cup maybe
there will be improvements in our small village; maybe the eyes of our
officials will now be opened to poverty in the rural South Africa.”

This means that the people in rural areas don’t feel it; they feel left
out. One youth member even said, “I do not know anything about the World
Cup; I don’t even know the players. It is not often that anything happens.
It only happens in town. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, can you take your seat
for a moment. Hon members, please, you might not like what the hon member
is saying, but you can be orderly, please. Let other members hear what the
hon member is saying.

Mr S MOKGALAPA: The LOC of the South African Football Association, Safa,
together with the government should ensure that this World Cup leaves
behind a lasting legacy for young South Africans by developing soccer
academies in every rural area and maintaining the existing urban
structures. This is possible for the youth through the proceeds from this
World Cup, rather than sharing the proceeds amongst themselves.

In conclusion, we welcome this 2010 Fifa World Cup and we are 100% behind
Bafana Bafana. We wish them well and the sky is the limit for them. If they
put everything into it, they can make it. Feel it, it’s here! Ke nako!
Let’s celebrate African humanity. I thank you.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: I rise on a point of order, Chair, if I may. There are
members there, who are gesticulating, pulling faces and acting like three-
year-olds. This is the National Assembly, I would ask you to please attempt
to instruct the ANC members on how to behave in the House.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): I think this is what I’ve been
trying to say, hon member, that we can dislike things that other members
are saying, but we can be orderly. Please, let us be orderly.

Ms A MDA: House Chairperson and hon members. Let me start by saying, “Feel
it, it is here, South Africa!”

This debate takes place 34 years after the 1976 Soweto Uprisings, which was
one of the most political activities that had been seen in this country.
These uprisings were led by young people who proved beyond doubt that the
young person can be a dedicated builder of a society, can achieve that and
can give all his life to achieve the needs of the society.

We depart from this debate today by saying that the announcement of the
hosting for the 2010 Fifa World Cup, which took place in Zurich in May
2004, was awaited with bated bread breath by all South Africans. When Fifa
President Sepp Blatter finally announced that for the first time in history
this event will be held on African soil, in South Africa to be exact, we
all ululated in joy as we were predicting that it was a rare opportunity
that would bring about change in many ways to South Africans than ever
expected.
Every young person in this country across the urban and rural divide
started to pent their respective goals to be achieved taking advantage of
this big event ever to come to their land. There were dreams for some to do
unique artwork which would get tourists to empty their pockets; others were
banking on exposure for their poorly marketed tourist attractions which
would make better profits if tourists visited them.

Amongst those who had hopes and wishes were the unemployed young graduates
ranging from engineers, architects, artisans and many more, who were
counting on this event to create sustainable jobs.

On 10 May 2004, the Deputy President of South Africa, hon Jacob Zuma,
addressing a 2010 World Cup bid farewell banquet, said:

   The benefits of this project to our nation to be so enormous that would
   take the whole evening outlining what contribution does hosting the World
   Cup mean and what would it make of our programme to alleviate poverty,
   creating jobs and generally in social upliftment.


He further said:


   The economic spin-offs of this tournament for Southern African
   Development Community, region are enormous as well; and it will fit in
   with our objectives of working for a sustainable development, not only of
   our country but for our continent as well. Our victory is, therefore, a
   victory of our sister countries in this region as well.


Indeed, Africa is celebrating this big event taking place in its shores but
the critical question that must be asked first is, “are young people in
this country having anything to celebrate or to show for South Africa
hosting this event? This event, through its own legacy, must be able to
respond to this critical question confronting the young people of this
country.

In our attempt to respond to this question, we must be able to understand
that the legacy of this event cannot just be limited to infrastructural
development. When bidding for this event, however, the creation of jobs,
alleviation of poverty, etc, were the anticipated benefits.

We believe that the conditions of young people in this country in just nine
days before the kick-off are as they were six years ago when we were still
bidding to host this event. This clearly demonstrates how we treat matters
concerning young people’s interest as secondary and this is a serious
indictment to all of us in this august House.

This World Cup event was an amazing opportunity to expose our young
people’s talent, skills and uniqueness but, again, little has been done in
this regard. Our young people remain at the periphery in as far as
benefiting from this event is concerned.

The fanfare that characterised the hosting of this event by South Africa
has been short-lived for our young people. Many of our youth in rural
areas, when on 11 June match starts between South Africa and Mexico, will
not have anything to show for it because no mechanisms will have been
devised to ensure that this event is enjoyed by all South African young
people from host cities and non-hosting cities across the country.

This is despite the fact that sport and recreation offer a sense of hope
and can make dreams a reality in many instances. Our rural youth continue
to yearn for sporting facilities in order to fulfil their dreams of playing
at the professional level, but their last hope that having the 2010 Fifa
World Cup hosted in South Africa would change the situation for the better
has, yet, to yield results as awaited.

It is our view that sport has deep roots within South Africa, especially
within disadvantaged communities where violence and crime are most evident.
It is therefore essential for South Africa to wake up and see this critical
link and indeed make use of it. Sport has the ability to join the separate
parts of this nation and get rid of social evils that are destroying our
young people and the legacy that we have inherited. It is in this regard
that we must remember how the 1996 World Cup united South African people
beyond party and racial lines.

Sport possesses a special power and the capacity to change a person’s life
by improving psychological and physical wellbeing. It offers a sense of
belonging and connectedness to orphans, street children; it teaches
teamwork, sharing, discipline and respect for playing by the rules. Sport
is, indeed, a universal language that can help bridge the divides and
promote core values necessary for lasting peace in our society.

On the playing field, cultural differences and political agendas dissolve
and melt away. This is the most magical thing that sport can do in our
society. Sport is therefore a tool with which we can create unity and
transcend racial barriers, as was beautifully depicted on last Saturday
when the Blue Bulls were playing at Orlando Stadium in Soweto. It was
something that was making history for the first time in this country.

Through hosting this World Cup, our government should adopt a new strategy
to advance youth development through sport as this will deal with a lot of
the socioeconomic conditions that are faced by young people in this
country. At the centre of this agenda should be the National Youth
Development Agency, which has a duty to advocate this.

We wish all South African players in the Bafana Bafana team good luck and
we are fully behind them.

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI: Chairperson, the World Cup soccer tournament is an
opportunity for successful teams of various nations of the world to display
the talent of their youth. The tournament has undoubtedly become one of the
premier opportunities for various nations of the world to display their
national unity, cohesion and pride.

The 2010 World Cup takes place in our country, and is the first of its kind
on the continent of Africa. This is a moment of great significance and,
indeed, it instils in all of us a great sense of pride and contentment to
be able to host the world-renowned tournament.

Successful nations invest a lot in their youth because they realise that
the youth are the future of every nation. They not only do so in the area
of sport, but they do so holistically in the overall development of their
youth; be it in education, skills development and training or health.
Therefore it is important to contextualise the standard of performance of
our national team, Bafana Bafana, as it somehow truly reflects our nation’s
contribution to the development of our youth.

Naheng ena re theile National Youth Development Agency ho etella pele
matsete a naha ya rona ntshetsopeleng e phethahetseng ya batjha Afrika
Borwa. Se re ngongorehisang haholo ke hore ha re eso utlwe kaa ho bona
mananeo afe kapa afe a thakgotsweng ke National Youth Development Agency a
reretsweng ho sebetsa le Fifa ho thakgola mananeo a ntshetsopele ya batjha.
(Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[In this country we established the National Youth Development Agency to
spearhead our country’s efforts in the total development of the youth of
South Africa. What is of concern to us is the fact that we have not heard
or seen any programmes started by the National Youth Development Agency
earmarked to be used by Fifa in order to develop the youth.]

This Parliament appropriates huge chunks of money for education and the
majority of the beneficiaries in this regard are the youth. Apart from
this, there are other programmes across government from which the youth
benefit.

While we recognise this reality, the fact is that there is still a lot to
do to enable our youth, who for no fault of their own, were bypassed by
development and now need to catch up. We need to be mindful of the
statistical reality that the majority of the citizens of this country are
both women and young people. These two segments of our society are the most
marginalised.
Statistics that have been recently quoted in the Business Day are
frightening. These statistics reflect that about 2,5 million youth aged 18
to 24 are neither working nor in any kind of education and training - most
have dropped out of school early; only 46% of them remained in school long
enough to write matric; and only 60% passed. South Africa’s rate of
unemployment is estimated at 26%, and the youth make up 70% of this figure.

The IFP feels that it is, therefore, important to look at what impact the
2010 World Cup will have on youth development, and whether it will deliver
on the hopes and dreams of the millions of unemployed young people of this
country.

Youth development remains one of the complex challenges facing democratic
South Africa. Sixteen years after the transition to democracy, it is young
people who are most severely affected by negative socioeconomic factors
such as HIV and Aids, the high level of unemployment, poverty, unplanned
pregnancies and a lack of participation in political and economic
development processes.

Mothating ona, ka Mohope wa Lefatshe le kamora wona, mekga ya bohanyetsi le
mekgatlo ya batjha e na le monyetla o fetang yohle e kileng ya ba teng, wa
ho sebetsa mmoho ho rarolla diphephetso tseo batjha ba tobaneng le tsona
naheng ya rona. Ho hlokeha sebete le boitshepo ho ntshetsa pele sepheo sa
ho netefatsa hore batjha ba naha ena ba nka seabo ka ho lekana moruong le
dipolotiking. (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[At this juncture, during and after the World Cup, the opposition and youth
organisations have an opportunity more than ever before to work together to
bring solutions to the challenges facing the youth in our country. It
requires courage and confidence to carry out the purpose of ensuring that
the youth of this country take part on equal terms in the economy and in
politics.]

Therefore let us recognise that even though there will be some benefit for
our youth through the hosting of this soccer extravaganza, we must use this
opportunity to utilise the power of football to build a brighter future for
our youth beyond the 2010 World Cup.

Ha ke diela dikgala, IFP e lakaletsa Bafana Bafana katleho. Re kgothalletsa
batjha ho tswa ka makgalo ho ya tshehetsa dipapadi tsena tsa bolo tsa pele
tsa mofuta wa tsona. Dikgomo! (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[As I conclude, the IFP wishes Bafana Bafana good luck. We encourage the
youth to go out in their numbers to support this soccer tournament which is
the first World Cup in Africa. Thank you.]

Mr M C MANANA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon Deputy Ministers, hon
Members of the NA and distinguished guests, the pleasure will be mine to
take this House through the legacy of the youth in bringing about a
democratic South Africa.

I would firstly mention that 66 years ago, Anton Lembede, Nelson Mandela,
Walter Sisulu, Oliver Tambo, A P Mda, Mxolisi Majombozi, and many others
were profoundly aware of the challenges facing the youth of their
generation. They then agreed to form the African National Congress Youth
League, because they were a generation that was cognisant of the
interconnectedness between the liberation and development of South Africa
and that of the African continent.

They believed that Africans would be freed only by their own efforts, and
they aimed to involve the masses of our people in militant struggles. There
was the assurance that the African youth would not allow the struggles and
sacrifices of their forefathers to perish. They said it then and we are
saying it now that we will continue from where they left off in bringing
about a thorough emancipation of our people.

The year 1976 was even more historic, as the youth of our country correctly
identified the challenges and tasks they had to confront. Today, 34 years
later, our youth are once again faced with the obligation of identifying
the challenges and tasks they confront. As much as it was a reality that
the youth of 1976 had to go into exile to train as soldiers of liberation,
it should then dawn on us today to use our talents to mobilise and campaign
for the advancement and development of our country and the African
continent as a whole.

The nation expects the youth of today to follow in the footsteps of the
1976 youth and become agents of change in the continuing struggle to
achieve the goal of a better life for all our people.

We have the common responsibility to always recall the events of 1976, so
that the bravery and sacrifices of that generation of young people should
serve as an inspiration to the present day youth to work hard in
contributing to the solution of the challenges they and our nation
confront.

Today we are hosting the Fifa World Cup because of great sacrifices. We are
free today because of the blood that had to be spilled in our black
townships. This freedom did not come cheap and there was no room for
amagwala [cowards]. It is on these grounds that I make this clarion call to
all young people to defend and guard this freedom, which has, in turn,
brought about many opportunities for them in the democratic order. Had it
not been for the efforts of our movement, the ANC, hosting the Fifa World
Cup would be a phantom, a dream.

The youth of 1944 helped to mobilise and unite the young people of our
country, behind the perspective that the goal of national unity must be the
guiding ideal of every young African’s life. And our youth must rally
behind the ANC, which is destined for a great purpose and mission.

The youth of 1976 helped to mobilise and unite the youth of our country to
become part of the disciplined vanguard forces of our revolution, under the
leadership of the ANC. They were serving as dedicated and gallant fighters
in the forward ranks of our revolutionary struggle. This happened while
continuously improving their level of competence in all fields in which
they were involved, whether politically, militarily, academically or
administratively.

The legacy of freedom bestowed on our people by the sacrifices of the youth
of 1944 and 1976, has placed additional responsibility on the youth of
today. This was to defend and help entrench the value system that inspired
the earlier generations of our youth. That value system was based on a set
of moral injunctions that prescribed that the revolutionary youth must be
inspired by one objective and one objective only. The objective was to
serve the people of South Africa, with no expectation in terms of personal
wealth, power, position or prestige.

The achievement of political democracy in 1984 was the nexus for the
militant youth of the predemocratic era. The adoption of the democratic
dispensation in 1994 brought to the fore a different set of new challenges
for the youth in general. The challenge, from a political perspective, was
to actively participate in the newly established political and economic
structures and to make a meaningful contribution towards the future of the
country.

It is now 16 years into our democracy and the youth continue to face
challenges. Participation in national debates, policy formulation and
political structures brings with it the need to sharpen skills and capacity
on a continuous basis. The dialectics that need to be understood is that
state power, as an instrument for effecting change, has huge potential for
the youth, whilst at the same time it has limitations.

It is therefore an undisputed truth that the youth of South Africa
contributed in liberating the people of South Africa from the system of
colonialism and apartheid. Given this contribution in deepening and
advancing constitutional democracy in our country, youth development has to
be central in the developmental agenda of the state. The impact of this
should, in effect, generate the South African youth to participate in
deepening democracy and shaping the direction of our country.

The youth must invigorate their interaction to build a strong political
consciousness grounded on the principles of our democracy. They should
always be willing to shoulder more responsibilities in dealing with the
complexities of practical political problems. These responsibilities
require the kind of youth who are definitive and who understand that the
future lies in their hands. This requires new thinking, perspectives and
strategic ways to be formulated and carried out with skill and dexterity.

The ANCYL made its mark at the 2003 Growth and Development Summit through
its submission that the different social partners, that is, government,
business and labour, are acutely aware that the problem of unemployment is
essentially a youth problem. Like their forebears, the youth of today take
seriously the words of Moses Kotane, when he said, and I quote:

   The future will be what you make of it.

The youth of South Africa are born against a background whereby the
previous generation was instrumental in shaping the political landscape of
this country. Previous generations were the foot soldiers of the armed
struggle. Our youth, therefore, have a primary obligation to defend our
democracy that brought about this World Cup. As this manifests itself, the
youth must set the agenda in the national public discourse, as they remain
the opinion-makers who must influence the direction of our national
development and growth.

The design of democracy is, however, not enough if citizens only engage
periodically with the diverse processes of democracy. If young people feel
that politicians do not engage with them on challenges that they face, they
will not participate actively in the democratic process.

We must, therefore, in this national youth month, pledge that we will
mobilise the youth of our country to focus on the task of developing and
building the nation. Also, we must prepare the conditions for our youth to
participate enthusiastically in democratic processes, informed by the
knowledge that their hopes rest in the democratic order.

This call was endorsed by President Zuma, when he said at the launch of the
National Youth development Agency, a year ago, that he expects the NYDA to,
amongst other things, assist in promoting the youth with participating in
democratic processes, community and civic decision-making and development
at all levels.

The youth are well positioned to play a significant role in further
consolidating democratic gains associated with nation-building. We know, as
a matter of fact, that only 60% of the South African population ranges
between the ages of 14 and 35 years, which in itself clearly explains why
the youth in this country should remain central in the national efforts to
consolidate democratic gains and advance the developmental agenda of our
state.

In an article published in Inkundla ya Bantu, the first President of the
ANCYL, Anton Lembede, said, and I quote:
   We need young men and women of high moral stamina and integrity, of
   courage and vision. In short, we need warriors. This means that we have
   to develop a new type of youth, the type of youth that will achieve the
   national liberation of the African people.

The ANC’s policy position is buttressed by the notion of ensuring a better
life for all, even when it comes to youth development, as it tends to be
more sympathetic towards the marginalised youth.

The ANC policy regarding youth and youth development is the one based on
basic values of democracy, nonracialism, respect for human dignity,
nonsexism and tolerance.

Young people by their very nature are part of the society that absorbs and
transforms cultural values from one generation to another. The youth of
1976 earned the honoured title of the “Young Lions” because of what they
did to contribute to the liberation of the nation from apartheid and white
minority rule.

The youth of 2010 must again earn this honoured title “Young Lions” because
of what they are doing to rid the nation of the legacy of apartheid. This
is also to end the scourge of poverty and underdevelopment, which continue
to imprison many of our fellow citizens, both young and old.

We remain resolute, determined and committed, like the youth that came
before us, to do everything possible to advance the struggle to achieve a
better life for all.

We must look to the visionary youth of 1994 and those of successive
generations for inspiration and guidance, as we ready ourselves to host our
visitors during the Fifa World Cup. We may not need to employ the same
methods as those of previous generations of youth, but we can draw on the
rich tradition of activism, innovation, organisation and intellectual
engagement that they embodied.

His Excellency, Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe said, and I quote:

   We should seek to emulate in our actions their determination, steadfast
   commitment, selflessness, humility and readiness to sacrifice.

As we recall the momentous achievements of the youth of this country, we
are challenged to define the contribution that this generation of youth
will make to advance the cause of our people towards a better life for all.
We are challenged to examine what it is that history asks of this
generation of young people and to demonstrate how this generation will
respond.

We salute those among the youth, who have played a leading role over the
decades. Underneath this land lie their bones, their blood still smells
fresh and their spirits live with us forever. They have made it possible
for us to host the 2010 Fifa World Cup. Good luck, Bafana Bafana! I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Chairperson and hon members, as I said in this House
yesterday, the surest measure of a successful state are the health and
happiness of its children. As we celebrate Youth Month, it is most
appropriate that we will also be showcasing our country to the world in a
month-long festival of soccer. The skill and youthful exuberance of soccer
is a demonstration of the energy and vibrancy of the youth.

We need to ask ourselves deep and far-reaching questions about how we
approach the question of the youth in all policy matters. The suggestion,
for instance, that national service might be helpful to the youth has
merit. However it is incorrect to claim that national service would give
the youth the discipline to refrain from participating and leading
community protests over service delivery.

We need to recognise that the youth have a legitimate claim to challenging
the status quo, and that vast numbers of them are loitering in the streets
in search of meaningful employment. We also need to understand that the
entire democratic project loses its legitimacy if it does not provide the
next generation with hope.
The South African youth are coming into their adulthood at a time of
freedom. They are born at a time when they can look upon the moral victory
of democracy over tyranny. They are on the cusp of taking custody of the
legacy of such giants as Nelson Mandela and Desmond Tutu. Few generations
can claim to have been born into a time of such opportunity. It is our
duty, as the previous generation, to help them nurture and grow this
country.

The youth grasp their place in history much better than many of us realise.
Their frustration at being locked out of the economic and social life of
society stems from the realisation that there is much they can and must
achieve.

During this Youth Month we should collectively focus our attention on
unlocking and throwing wide open the doors of opportunity so that the
energy of the youth can carry our nation to a better and more prosperous
future. Ke a leboga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Mr M I MALALE: Chairperson, hon members of the House, I think today, 2
June, is a wonderful day. In fact, it is the day on which young students in
China protested for the emergence of democracy in their land. Ordinary
people in that land, about a hundred thousands ordinary inhabitants of
China, felt it was important to rally behind the cause of democracy, and
they stood at Tiananmen Square on that day, resolutely blocking a force of
ten thousand men carrying guns, some driving tanks.

Those people were inspired by the spirit of freedom and democracy. As I
speak today, the young workers of China are beginning, under the nose of
unions that are sponsored by the state, to galvanise themselves to stand up
for human rights for the workers, and that is the hope we must talk about
as young people.

Manana spoke so well and mentioned great luminaries of our own struggle,
people who believed in inspiration, who did not become pessimistic because
at that point it seemed so impossible that we could have freedom. They
formed the ANC; they radicalised the ANC in 1949. Who are we then today,
that when our role is so small — just to deepen democracy, just to defend
democracy — to say the World Cup does not bring us anything? In fact,
Bafana Bafana is a team of young people; we are the beneficiaries.

The roads that have been constructed are going to be enjoyed by our nation.
The stadia will never go with the World Cup; they will remain with our
people. Any enlightened inhabitant of our society must come to a level of
recognising that. I think I would agree with hon Mda. She spoke so well
about the World Cup today, and I think she must advise hon Mokgalapa, who
is utilising just a single media snippet to suggest that South Africans are
not familiar with the great political, economic and social significance of
this World Cup.

I think that is the misrepresentation of the reality in which we live. We
hope that we will cultivate positive thinking amongst particularly
Parliamentarians, because we are gradually turning this House into a
platform to peddle newspaper articles. We are not elevating our engagement
to speak about strategic issues of our society.

I think we have that duty; we must break out of the mould of artificial,
oppositional politics where if an ANC member speaks, you must howl, or if
an ANC member sees a DA speaker, he must howl. That is not how we must
cultivate democracy, we must go beyond that now. We must try to show that
we, as the youth of this country, have a duty to advance towards a
nonracial society; a society in which we believe in the sanctity of the
idea that whether one is in the ANC or in Cope, one must be able to engage
and that this is the platform for doing so. That is very important.

With regard to Aids, statistics all over are creating a certain impression
about our situation. It is suggested that every day about 1 600 people die
of Aids and 1 500 become infected. Someone who spoke here said that South
Africans are not aware of the scourge of Aids; that is not true. In the
1980s, yes, it might have been true, but not now. Where we live, in our
families, in our communities, people are dying. We are well aware of that
reality. We are making things very difficult in this democracy.

When I am a patient going to hospital now, I don’t know what my ailment is.
When I arrive in hospital, if a medical practitioner, who has been trained
to examine my disease, enters the office, examines me and says, “Ishmael,
you are HIV positive,” would that infringe on my human right to privacy?
Would that infringe on my human right to physical integrity? I don’t think
so. It will advance my health situation so that I am able to contribute to
a better life in our land.

I think those are the issues that this society must tackle. That is a
society of young people regardless of political affiliation and age. In
fact, the young people of progressive youth formations are saying that
these great revolutionaries in the ANC, who fought for freedom, began
showing obvious political sympathies at the age of 14. Now, however, in
terms of universal adult suffrage, there are people who are 16 years of
age, who really have clear ideas about democracy, yet they do not have
access to that political right.

The youth in the Youth League are saying, “Let’s expand the frontiers of
involvement of youth in politics.” That is what this Parliament must
debate. We are challenging our colleagues to engage in that debate so that
we can get into a lot of engagement. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, South Africa is a democracy, and we thank God
that now our youth’s focus does not have to be on tearing down the system,
but on building it up. While political parties choose to regard youth as
people under the age of 35, they are nevertheless from the age of 18 years,
men and women of responsibility and we should expect respect and nurture
such a mindset.

The challenges the youth of today face are as important as the challenges
youth had faced at any time in history. These challenges will require of
them a determination and bravery, second to none. The youth of today should
not be expected to walk in the shadow of a past generation. They should be
valued for who they are and what they bring to this moment in time.

This year, as we commemorate Youth Day, we turn our focus to youth
development in the context of the 2010 Fifa World Cup legacy. Part of the
legacy of the Soccer World Cup is to extend the benefits to the whole
continent. It should not only be experienced by ourselves as the host
nation.

Imperative in carrying this legacy forward is the upright stature of
Africa’s youth; they will set the tone for the future of the African
continent.

Fifa’s Football for Hope movement, which uses the game for social change
will involve youth from 50 organisations in 35 countries, chosen not for
their skill on the pitch, but for their contribution to social change in
disadvantaged communities. They will be playing football, but without a
referee. Any disagreements between the teams will be resolved through, I am
told, dialogue.
They will tackle issues of ethnic violence in Israel and Palestine,
environmental pollution in the slums of Kenya, HIV/aids education in South
Africa, landmine education in Cambodia and a gang culture in Ecuadore - off
the pitch, we imagine!

The ACDP wishes this ground-breaking event taking place in Alexandria
during the final week of the 2010 Fifa World Cup every success. We,
however, as footballers and as those who have participated in this game of
life, have found through experience that referees can be very useful in
minimising potential damage.

In everyday life, a “referee” can be a policeman, a judge or even one’s own
self-discipline and conscience; and these qualities are best nurtured
within a family environment.

The ACDP wholly agrees with the Youth Development Month message, and calls
on society to strengthen relationships within families to create a safe and
caring setting that enables young people to have more positive and
healthier lifestyles.

Youth development in South Africa is everyone’s responsibility, including
young people themselves and no amount of rhetoric can replace hard work and
integrity. Young people, who have broken free from poverty and distress,
have done so with the help of an attitude and determination to succeed.

These are the moral values which will ensure that the youth of today are
best placed to build a caring society and extend the legacy of the Fifa
World Cup to benefit our neighbours and the whole of the African continent.
Feel it, it is here, South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs N W A MICHAEL: Chairperson and hon members, it gives me great pleasure
to stand here today on behalf of the DA and address this House during this
celebration debate on Youth Day.

In 1976, we saw the greatest acts of bravery shown by any generation for
the liberation of our country. Young people stood up, united and said,
“This far, but no further”. Although I was not born in 1976, it is thanks
to the bravery of those young men and women that I enjoyed the education
that I did and that I stand before you here today in a democratic and free
Parliament.

One of the messages that I would like to bring to this debate today is the
importance of the youth vote. Too many people died to give us the right to
vote for us not to exercise this right. Our debt of gratitude for the
bravery and self-sacrifice can only be repaid by us, the youth of South
Africa, by being responsible democrats and voting in our country’s
election. Your vote does count, your voice is strong, and your country does
need you.

The youth of our country face many problems and many dangers. Unemployment
and crime are but two of the dangerous problems we face on a daily basis.
However, the biggest scourge facing our youth today is human trafficking.

When I was asked to explain to a group of young teenagers what human
trafficking is, my description was this: It is modern-day slavery, be it
for sexual purposes, forced labour, to repay debt, or in some cases, for
the harvesting of human organs. Human trafficking is the sickest that our
society can be. It is the absolute worst form of human behaviour. How do we
stop it? By standing up and repeating the words of 1976, “This far, but no
further”.

Many South Africans have questioned our lack of law regarding human
trafficking. I am relieved that Parliament has tabled the human trafficking
law. Although it is disappointing that this law took so long to be drafted
and tabled, we cannot, as responsible legislators, rush through this law.

It is of paramount importance that the law is clear, concise and
implementable. Although the worry exists that human trafficking will occur
during the Fifa World Cup, the reality is that human trafficking occurs on
a daily basis. We, as Members of Parliament, have to draft legislation to
protect our people every day, not just during the World Cup.

We do, however, take comfort in the fact that existing legislation,
including the Sexual Offences Act and the Children’s Act, will assist
officers of the law to take action against those taking part in human
trafficking. We thank organisations including the International
Organisation for Migration and other safe houses for assisting the victims
of human trafficking.

It does, however, remain our responsibility to keep our youth safe.
Although it can be an uncomfortable topic, speak to children about the
dangers of human trafficking. Let them know what lies can be told to lure
them away from areas of safety.

Encourage outings in groups, as opposed to boys or girls walking around
alone. Ensure that young boys and young men understand that human
trafficking does not only affect girls and women - all young people are
vulnerable.

Human trafficking does not only occur when people are smuggled in or out of
our country. It happens within our borders. For example, a person could be
kidnapped in Limpopo and human trafficked to KwaZulu-Natal or to Gauteng;
we must be aware and ready to take action.

The government must make sure that information is distributed widely,
indicating who to contact if you suspect human trafficking is happening or
become a victim yourself.
Let us live by the mantra, “Your sister is my sister, your brother is my
brother and your child is my child”. Together, as South Africans, let’s
look after each other. Let us protect each other and safely grow our youth
into tomorrow’s future, today. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M N MATLADI: We commemorate Youth Month and Youth Day as the direct
result of the events of 16 June 1976. As we do so, I would like us to
remember and give thought to the words uttered by Mrs Nombulelo Makhubu,
mother to Mbuyisa Makhubu, the 18-year-old boy who carried a dying Hector
Peterson.

Mma Makhubu said that Mbuyisa is or was her son -

   ... but he is not a hero. In my culture picking up Hector wasn’t an act
   of heroism, it was his job as a brother. If he would have left Hector on
   the ground and someone saw him jumping over him, he would have never been
   able to live here.

I stated Mma Makhubu’s words because we need more Mbuyisas in the youth of
our country - more than we ever did before. Picking Hector up was not an
act of heroism, but an act of brotherhood that characterised the youth of
that era. The challenges that the youth fought against then still persist
today, probably in a different form and manner.

Our youth face unemployment and poverty, but instead of seeing the legacy
of brotherhood left by Mbuyisa and his likes, we see youth leaders who are
so self-absorbed, greedy and corrupt that they cannot pause for a moment
and pay attention to the plight of their brothers and sisters. They enrich
themselves with corrupt gains from tenders and cannot see the poverty that
is killing their counterparts.

This month, we pray for a consciousness that would recall the sacrifices of
the youth of yesteryear and the richness that comes from laying your life
down for your fellow. We pray for youth leaders that do not claim to be
heroes and leaders when they could not pick up a dying Hector. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms S T NDABENI: Chairperson, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon members,
guests and the secretary of the ANC from the Eastern Cape Province, Comrade
Mabuyana, feel it, it is here!

   In the life of a nation, there arise men who leave an indelible and
   eternal stamp on the history of their peoples, men who are both products
   and makers of history. And when they pass they leave a vision of a new
   and better life and the tools with which to win and build it.

These are not just ordinary words; they are words that were used by Dr
Dadoo when describing Moses Kotane. Are we then that youth today, given the
current challenges of the century? An honest response coupled with serious
introspection will make future generations really proud of us.

The challenges facing young people within the economic realm are
multifaceted. For instance, the majority of unemployed young people
experience long-term unemployment. Even those who are employed are
concentrated in the service sector and tend to work in temporary positions.
Racial and gender contradictions manifest themselves as Africans experience
higher rates of unemployment compared to their counterparts in other race
groups, and women relative to men.

It has also been suggested that youth self-employment could help to achieve
youth development, employment creation and poverty reduction. For the
majority of those who cannot access wage employment, the alternative to
unemployment is self-employment. However, this appears to be an option
chosen only by a small proportion of young people, despite the high
unemployment rate among them.

As we are in the month of the official start of the 2010 Soccer World Cup,
it is in order to remember what was said by one of the African
revolutionaries in an economic summit of his country, the late Moses Samora
Machel:


   In reality a country that does not ensure the involvement of all its
   population at all levels of economic activity is certainly going to
   perform well below its actual potential.


[Applause.]

I am deliberately quoting him as we are to witness the first Fifa Soccer
World Cup on our beloved continent, Africa.

A thriving economy should reflect the natural endowments of the country and
the creativity that a skilled population can offer. It should be an economy
in which cutting edge technology, labour-absorbing industrial development,
a thriving small and co-operative sector, utilisation of information and
communication technologies and different forms of production and management
are combined to ensure national prosperity.

This is conditional on ensuring that the brains and brawn of all society
are brought to bear on all economic activities. It requires deracialising
ownership and control of wealth, management and professions.

From the fundamental principles of building an economy utilising all the
available factors of production, the youth is an integral component of
ensuring that attainment of transformation, which is being sought in the
national democratic revolution. The South African nation is called to
encourage, harness and incorporate the creativity, daring and energy of the
youth into its endeavours. This relates to such issues as access to social
and economic opportunities, engendering activism around development and
values of community solidarity as well as creating the space for youth
activity to thrive.

While the national democratic revolution creates an environment for
discharging potential capabilities, it also recognises the youth as one of
the motive forces of production in line with the character of a national
democratic society. Such a character includes local economic development,
research and development, job creation and skills development.

In the quest to realise these objectives and in pursuit of its major task
of a better life for the youth, the ANC Youth League has placed itself at
the centre of the broadest spectrum of youth organisations for the
advancement of a youth agenda in areas of social and economic
transformation.

The manifesto of the ANC at its last congress correctly noted the
challenges and the way forward. It is against this background that the
government has to ensure that the agency is at the centre of the
developmental programme of the government, and that this agency is
capacitated and resourced to provide leadership in encouraging youth
participation in production and developmental activities.
While the economic development of young people remains critically important
because it is a matter of economic survival and advancement, the government
would have to promote issues relating to social elements of youth
development. These are issues of spiritual and cultural development, which
are vital for societal development.

The right of the youth to be involved and contribute to their development
finds credence in a statement by the former President of the ANC Youth
League. Responding to a question about the growing unemployment of young
people in the country, Comrade Malusi Gigaba said:

   There are specific interventions that we want our government to do on our
   behalf, supported by us and in partnership with us – the youth. You must
   also know that we are attending to the matter of self-employment because
   we would like the youth to become entrepreneurs. We would like to see a
   national consensus emerging on a national youth entrepreneurship
   strategy, with targets and clear time frames and support mechanisms. In
   this is also incorporated the idea of youth co-operatives.


[Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: [Inaudible.]

Ms S T NDABENI: You wish, my darling! [Applause.]

The emphasis of the above response underscores the importance of economic
participation as a critical national process for growth. The National Youth
Development Agency, in partnership with government departments, has
initiated and implemented programmes that are targeting the youth. Some of
the programmes are earmarked for this year.

The programmes that I am talking about are as follows: The National Youth
Service and volunteer programmes, which are aimed at young people for
community development. In collaboration with 19 departments, it is
encouraging to note that this programme has benefited more than 15 000
young people and the volunteer programme is in excess of 20 000.

The Expanded Public Works Programme has created more than 1,5 million work
opportunities since its inception, of which 30% has benefited the youth
mainly in infrastructure; the social environment and economic sectors; and
youth advisory centres for career development and improving access to
employment opportunities.

Over 1,1 million youth have benefited since the inception of this
programme. The Targeted Skills Development Programme, is focusing on
training interventions for young graduates. The projects are implemented
through the FET colleges and NGOs.

With regard to economic participation for 2010 to 2011, the NYDA will focus
on intensifying the National Youth Service Programme, the creation of
business opportunities for young entrepreneurs, mentorship programmes,
business consultancy vouchers and entrepreneurship education.

Various surveys and economic experts agree that unemployment mostly affects
young persons in the age group of 17 to 24 years, in excess of 50%; and the
age groups of 25 to 34 years, above 30%. Those who are employed are mainly
in short-term, contractual jobs that do not offer job security or a skills
transfer; and they do not belong to the trade unions.

Youth in rural areas face additional constraints, such as accessibility to
services and facilities compared to their urban counterparts. These
constraints result in the increasing migration of rural youth to urban
areas and reproduce the cycle of rural poverty, hence the government has
prioritised rural development.

To improve the economic circumstances of the youth requires the
acknowledgement of the fact that various forms of employment are central to
finding lasting solutions. Government has created several initiatives that
are geared towards the participation of young persons in the mainstream
economy.

Some of these initiatives have had a very limited impact as their
implementation has not been aligned with similar programmes of other
government agencies.

According to the National Youth Policy Framework, the absorption capacity
of learnerships is insufficient to meet the demand from industry or to
absorb the supply of young people requiring training.

Self-employed youth or aspiring young entrepreneurs face a variety of
barriers to entry to trading if they are already in business. These include
lack of appropriate business education, limited access to capital, lack of
social or business networks or access to markets for their products and
services as well as the availability of basic service facilities,
especially for rural youth.

The lack of access to capital is one of the key barriers to youth
participation in the economy. It is in that context that we are urging
Members of Parliament to make sure that the newly enacted Money Bill is
really put into practice to push for an effective National Youth
Development Agency budget, in order to push away the frontiers of poverty
facing young people.

It would be advisable that the national youth fund, under the national
youth development agency, should create funding models that absorb high-
risk premiums to make the cost of capital cheaper for potential youth
entrepreneurs with sustainable business plans, compared to private sector
financial institutions that do not, in most cases, fund high-risk projects.


I hope hon members will really understand the critical challenge faced by
the NYDA. It is not an issue that can be debated, but it must be realised.

It is essential that the NYDA must be a catalyst for diverse and creative
ideas that include other progressive stakeholders, in support of the
overall objectives of the ANC-led government for advancing the development
and empowerment of young people.

Oversight and other mechanisms created in the National Youth Development
Agency Act should be used to ensure accountability of the agency to young
people.

Needless to mention it, young people need to directly influence the process
of appointing the people to govern the agency and operations of the board
to deal with the challenges of education and agriculture. Indeed, an NYDA
that is efficient is critical.

The role of the fourth democratic, activist Parliament is a must in
advancing the national democratic revolution. For the benefit of the
opposition, the National Democratic Revolution is a process of the struggle
that seeks to transfer power to the people, and transform society into a
nonracial, nonsexist, united and democratic one; that changes the manner in
which wealth is shared, in order to benefit all the people. [Applause.]

In conclusion, today we are proud of the role played by the past
generations and we want future generations to be proud of us. Hence I leave
you to be always conscious of the seven things that will destroy us if we
are not careful, as mentioned by Gandhi.

These are: politics without principles, science without humanity, religion
without sacrifice, commerce without morality, pleasure without conscience,
knowledge without character and wealth without work. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr I M OLLIS: Chairperson, hon colleagues, my name is Ian Ollis and I am
here to recruit you! [Laughter.] The youth of South Africa need you, they
need us, often in ways that we do not really expect or anticipate. They
need role models to follow in order to understand their place in the world
and, boy, do we often disappoint them!

The hon Malale did not like the fact that my colleague used one newspaper
reference. Well, let me give him another one. This weekend the hon Deputy
Minister of Transport, who has not bothered to stay for this debate on the
youth, in exasperation at the landslide defeat of the ANC in by-elections
in the Western Cape, said:

   The (by-election) results are another warning to us. I think there have
   been very serious mistakes from the side of a certain organisation that
   is a league of the ANC ... or certain personalities in there.

Of course, the leaders of the ANC Youth League have been calling for the
destruction of property in the Western Cape, which is appalling.

Maar dit is net een voorbeeld van die manier waarop die jeug deesdae
teleurgestel word. Die VF Plus, wat ook nie hier is nie, sowel as sy
bedmaat, die ANC, trek die jeug agteruit deur hul herhaaldelike verwysings
na die verlede se probleme. Hulle het albei ’n patologiese verslawing aan
die pyn en swaarkry van apartheid.

Daar is net drie woorde wat oorbly in die ANC se woordeskat – apartheid,
Polokwane en rassisme. En hulle herhaal dit oor en oor en oor in hierdie
Huis totdat die jeug die televisie se afstandbeheer gryp en die kanaal
verander!

Die VF Plus is in dieselfde posisie. Hulle gee die jeug niks om na uit te
sien nie, want hulle hak vas in die verlede. Dit is eintlik geen verassing
dat die VF Plus en die ANC so heerlik saamwerk in die regering nie. Hulle
leef die rasse-nasionalisme van die verlede uit – presies wat ons jeug nie
nodig het nie.

Wat ons wel benodig is leierskap wat die jeug ’n droom gee van ’n toekoms
waarin hulle kan glo. Sal dit nie wonderlik wees as ouers in hierdie land
ons kinders hoop gee vir die toekoms nie?

In November verlede jaar het ’n vriendin van my, wat in ’n township
grootgeword het, my in ’n restaurant vertel sy staan op die punt om na
Londen te vertrek. Haar redes was nie wat ek verwag het nie. Sy het gesê
dat sy baie na aan haar ouers is, maar hulle leef in die verlede, en hulle
kan nie aan die rassisme van die apartheidstyd ontkom nie. Sy kan dit nie
meer vat nie, daarom verlaat sy die land. Sy het in Londen nou werk gekry.
So verloor Suid-Afrika nog ’n belowende, jong, swart uitblinker wat hierdie
land kon maak werk. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[This is only one example of the disappointments the youth have to suffer
these days. The FF Plus, who is also not here, as well as its sleeping
partner the ANC, is pulling the youth down with their repeated references
to the problems of the past. They both have a pathological addiction to the
pain and suffering of apartheid.

There are only three words remaining in the vocabulary of the ANC –
apartheid, Polokwane and racism. They are repeating those words over and
over again in this House, until the youth grab the remote control of the
television in order to change the channel!

The FF Plus is in the same position. They are giving the youth nothing to
look forward to, because they are still stuck in the past. It comes as no
surprise that the FF Plus and the ANC are working so well together in
government. They are reliving the racist nationalism of the past – exactly
what our youth do not need.

What we do need is leadership that can give the youth a dream of a future
in which they can believe. Would it not be wonderful if parents in this
country could still give our children hope for the future?

In November last year a girl friend of mine, who grew up in a township,
told me in a restaurant that she was on her way to London. Her reasons were
not what I expected. She said that she was very close to her parents, but
they were living in the past, and they could not steer away from the racism
of the apartheid era. She cannot stand it anymore and that is why she is
leaving the country. She got a job in London. Hence South Africa loses
another promising, young, outstanding black person who could have helped to
improve this country.]

Chairperson, parents and grandparents who are still holding onto the pain
of the past do not have a free and open hand to grasp the opportunities of
the future.

Another friend of mine told me last week that his grandmother has just
declared that when the 2010 Fifa World Cup is over she intends burning down
the house and the spaza shop of the illegal immigrant family that live at
the end of the street! She feels that these illegal immigrants are taking
job opportunities and housing space away from true South African families.

This kind of behaviour does not set a good example to our youth and it is,
then, not surprising when we get the behaviour that the hon Deputy Minister
of Transport, who is not here, was referring to this week. Shame!

So, I am here to recruit you to rise above the suffering of the past, to
tell our young people about the extensive goodwill in this country, and to
tell them that there are opportunities out there waiting for them so that
they can excel. They can start new businesses, like Mark Shuttleworth did,
and make it big in the international arena. They can succeed, like the 1995
South African rugby team did. They can build South Africa’s first satellite
and launch it into space, as they did at Stellenbosh University with the
Sunsat project.

I am here to recruit you to set an example by telling our youth that they
can and that they will succeed, and that their generation will rise above
what we have done and break those racial chains of the past. They will
inherit a truly equal-opportunity society. Now, let us go out there and
build it! I thank you.

Mr K B MANAMELA: Hon Chairperson of the House, hon members, while I was
sitting here I was planning to stick to what I was going to say, but I was
distracted by the hon Ollis who has just spoken. I don’t know where he came
from; he just popped up at this podium and said things with which I suppose
the majority of young South Africans would definitely never ever agree.
This is precisely because if they did, they would have queued to vote for
the DA in the last elections. And that is why they didn’t do that!
[Interjections.]

This year we are commemorating the 34th anniversary of June 16, which saw
the revolt of young people against the oppressive system of apartheid. When
they marched out of school on that day, they chanted slogans for democracy
and immediately pushed South Africa’s brutal regime back onto the
international agenda. They had teargas, rubber bullets and live ammunition
fired at them and, on the spot, Hector Peterson became the first victim of
the brutal force unleashed by the regime on that day, June 16.

The scores of young and innocent bodies recorded on that day were meant to
intimidate any form of uprising anywhere in the country. That failed, as
the youth went all out to depose the apartheid regime and ultimately did so
28 years later.

As we commemorate this day today, I am reminded of what popular jazz artist
Wynton Massalis said in his eulogy to Duke Ellington:

  If you give me a fair chance, I will show you the true meaning of
  democracy.

That is the fair chance, hon Ollis, that the majority of young South
Africans are still lacking.

These words are what have inspired different generations of young people
since colonisation, oppression and exploitation. From the youth rebellions
led by Shaka – Ufasimba - to those led by Bambatha against the tax laws; to
those who were forced to work underground in the mines for the gold and
diamonds they would never own while they were dispossessed of their land
and cattle; to those who fought against the Land Act of 1913, were all
pushed by these words: If you give me a fair chance, I will help you
understand the true meaning of democracy.

From the youth, who protested against the terrible working conditions in
the economically booming Johannesburg; to those who felt the harsh and
brutal realities of apartheid capitalism as they were forcibly removed from
Sophiatown to Soweto; to those who formed the ANC Youth League, the SA
Student Organisation and the Congress of South African Students; to those
who revolted on the cold morning of June 16, beginning their action in
Morris Isaacson, they shared that sentiment. [Interjections.]

If you give me a fair chance, hon Barnard, I will make you better
understand the true meaning of democracy. [Applause.]

These words pushed into action those young people who skipped the country
to train as soldiers of uMkhonto weSizwe and the Azanian People’s
Liberation Army; those who were incarcerated on Robben Island; and those
who today are afforded an opportunity to vote. Yet the brutal force of the
capitalist system, defended by the DA on a daily basis, prevents them from
truly enjoying the true fruits of democracy. These words echo: If you give
me a fair chance, I will help you understand the true meaning of democracy.

As a free, democratic country we have made significant strides towards a
better life for all South African citizens, black or white. However, we
constantly remind ourselves that much more needs to be done if we are to
speak of a truly free, democratic and just society. This is all that our
youth of today are fighting for: a fair chance.

Of course they know that the blood of Kalushi Mahlangu did nourish the tree
of democracy and freedom. They know that had it not been for our democratic
system ushered in in 1994, they would still be required to carry pass
books, be forced to learn in the language of the oppressor, see their
parents being humiliated for opposing the system of apartheid and hear that
their brothers and sisters were harassed and detained without trial.
They also know that they would never have been allowed to vote for the
government of their choice and see the ANC-led alliance being the majority
party. Instead they would not have had any hope and have been full of
despair at the prospect of there being a black president of this country.

Yet they still say, “Nay, these are the only political gains from the sweat
that Nelson Mandela, Govan Mbeki and Robert Sobukwe shed as they languished
in jail. What about the economy? What about the land?” they ask.

“What about the ownership of the factories and the mines? What about the
banks and the monopolies; were these not the same fair chances that Ruth
First and Chris Hani fought for? These are the same institutions that
formed part of the exploitation of our parents and our parents’ parents. If
we are given a fair chance in the ownership of these institutions, then we
will help you understand the true meaning of democracy.”  [Applause.]

The youth declare that our country is the most unequal society in the
world, surpassing Brazil in terms of the Gini coefficient measure of income
inequality.

They come out onto the streets in true June 16 protest style and bemoan
poor service delivery by municipalities, but yet the main precursors of
these protests remain unemployment. They come out onto the streets in true
June 16 style and blame people from neighbouring countries for their
economic miseries; and yet the true precursors of their unemployment is the
continued skewed racial ownership patterns of our economy.

They come out onto the streets in true June 16 style and demand to be taken
to Gauteng or Mpumalanga, and, yet, the real precursors are the actual
demands for land and bread in our country.

If you listen to them carefully, they ask, this youth: “Is this what
Mandela fought for? Did he fight only to have our government being held
solely accountable for our misery? Did he struggle only to have us pushing
each other to be first in the queue for social grants?”

What about the accountability of the private sector? Are they not the ones
who are looting us – our sweat and blood – and then rewarding themselves
with huge bonuses? Are they not the ones who are pushing our government
away when it seeks to transform the ownership patterns of our economy?

Many in the private sector celebrate the fact that they have reached their
26% black economic empowerment and 40% black management targets of their
companies, as per the Employment Equity Act. But is that a fair chance,
especially when 74% of the economy is still in white hands – and the DA, on
a daily basis, is here to defend that? [Applause.] Look at the racial
profiles of the owners and managers of the companies listed on the stock
exchange. Is that a fair chance? That’s what we ask. [Interjections.]

For them – and listen to them closely – true and total transformation and a
fair chance mean that the ownership of wealth should be in the hands of the
majority in pursuit of a humane society.

For the youth of our country, June 16 means that we should pursue the
values of a caring, loving and secure society. For them, June 16 should be
about education and skills for those who are illiterate and unskilled so
that they are able to get jobs or create jobs.

June 16 for the youth of our country means access to health care for those
who are sick. It means housing for those who have no shelter. It means an
end to exploitative practices, especially in the private sector.
[Interjections.]

If you look at the inequalities in our society, in which CEOs of banks are
paid millions of rand on the basis of how much debt they are able to sell
to our communities, there is no accountability. If you look at the CEOs of
bread companies who are paid millions of rand on the basis of how much
price-fixing they are able to do, that is what we call a lack of
accountability in the private sector.

If I start with you, hon Kohler-Barnard, you would not even be able to
finish saying “BBC”. [Interjections.] [Applause.] Others will proclaim and
say: “But it is our constitutional right to accumulate as much as possible
and then the government should take care of the rest. You cannot take away
our factories and our land because they are protected by the Constitution.”
[Interjections.]

But is it not the same Constitution in which the right to work, the right
to life, the right to speak in Parliament ... [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairman, I rise on a point of order. It would appear that
the hon speaker at the podium is now talking in some kind of code. I
believe it is important that he explain to us what “BBC” actually means.
[Interjections.] Because, quite frankly, Mr Chairman, if he is making some
kind of crude joke, it is important that we understand it. [Interjections.]
It’s not possible that he could stand up there and speak in a kind of ...
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order, hon members!

Mr M J ELLIS: It’s not possible that he could stand up there and speak in a
kind of code that is not understood by all Members of Parliament. I suspect
it is unparliamentary. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Manamela, could you explain what
“BBC” is, if you can. [Interjections.]

Mr S L TSENOLI: Point of order, point of order, Chairperson!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): What is your point of order? I
didn’t say it is unparliamentary; I just said he should explain. That’s all
I am asking.

Mr S L TSENOLI: Chairperson, I believe the hon Ellis is playing games and
interrupting the speaker. There is no reason for him to explain that, in
our opinion.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I will leave it to Mr Manamela to
explain, if he so wishes. When he continues with his speech he will
probably give us an opportunity to learn what BBC is.

Mr K B MANAMELA: Thank you very much. With the 2010 Fifa World Cup around
the corner, researchers in the field of ...

Mr M J ELLIS: On a point of order again, Mr Chairman. I thought that you
had ruled that he had to tell us what BBC stands for. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I said ... [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: But, Mr Chairman ... [Interjections.] Mr Chairman ...
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I said he could continue with his
speech. At the end, he can explain what it is.

Mr M J ELLIS: But, Mr Chairman, what he actually said now might be
incredibly pertinent to what he says in the future. [Interjections.] He
can’t tell us at the end, sir. He has to tell us now. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): The difficulty here is that we don’t
know what BBC stands for.

Mr M J ELLIS: But, Mr Chairman, he knows ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): We can’t say it is unparliamentary
at the same time, right?

Mr M J ELLIS: I agree with you fully, sir. But the trouble is that he needs
to tell us what it means, because he is the only one, as far as I know, who
knows what it is. [Interjections.] He needs to tell us now, sir.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Ellis, thank you very much. Hon
Manamela, I said you could explain it to the House, but continue and then,
before you leave the podium, if you could just explain it. [Interjections.]

Mr K B MANAMELA: “BBC” is a public broadcaster in Britain, so there is
nothing unparliamentary about saying “BBC”. [Laughter.] [Interjections.]

Let me just deal with you very briefly. I searched very hard in the
manifesto of the DA for values that would build a nonracist, nonsexist and
democratic society. I must tell you that it was a fruitless exercise. I
also hoped to come across a clause in that manifesto speaking to an open-
toilet society for the residents of Guguletu. [Interjections.] And I still
did not find that particular clause in the manifesto.

Whatever opportunities there are in open toilets, I can only leave to the
imagination of the Premier of the Western Cape and the mayor of Cape Town.
I wonder if their houses have the same toilets as those in Guguletu. But
how ironic that a struggle for better toilets has sparked the downward
spiral of the DA government in the Western Cape. The people of this city
will flush you down the same toilet.

I also came across a statement by the same DA about why there is a need to
implement a youth employment subsidy, because they insist that this is
their idea. There is nothing whatsoever.

What the ANC government will implement is a youth employment subsidy to the
benefit of the youth of our country and not in the way in which you are
trying to present it, which is to the benefit of the company bosses and all
of those things. That is not going to happen.

Thirty-four years after June 16, the objectives of building a nonracist,
nonsexist and democratic society still remain. The goal of liberating
blacks and Africans from economic and political bondage still remains. In
doing this, we have to understand that there is growing anger and
frustration among the black youth who are yet to share the collective
fruits of our democracy.

This leads them to violent protest, usage and trafficking of drugs,
prostitution, co-option by crime cartels, desire for the life of “bling” as
most of the opportunities are closed by the unaccountable - in particular,
the private sector.

Equally, in doing so, we have to address the fears and suspicions of young,
white South Africans – and not in a political way because we know that if
we begin to engage with these issues, in particular with political parties,
all they are interested in is perpetuating the racial profiling of our
political parties. Therefore, it should be engagement with the majority of
our people in building a collective society.

We, equally, have to ensure that a nonracist society can only be attained
if it is an equal society. We have to contribute equally to ensuring that
white is not generally identified with wealth, whilst black is identified
with poverty. It is in the interests of all South Africans, especially us
as the youth, that we pursue the goals of an equal, nonracist and
democratic society based on social justice. In that way, in our striving
for social justice, the other accompanying ills of crime, HIV and Aids, and
so forth, will come to an end.

I think it should be very embarrassing that you compare a young person,
whose opportunities are closed completely, to Mark Shuttleworth, who had
abundant opportunities provided to him by a long-standing, oppressive
apartheid regime. [Applause.]

I think that you should be very embarrassed to begin to compare the
opportunities of young people in Alexandria to those of young people in
Sandton. [Interjections.] You should be very ashamed of yourself to
actually come here and do that. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

In closing, I think the only thing that will keep the DA alive is to speak
as long as possible about the president of the ANC Youth League. I think he
will continue to disappoint you, because his role is not to build the DA. I
think if your policies are based on that, you must be careful of what the
ANCYL and the Young Communists League are doing - flushing out the DA!
[Interjections.]

To conclude, to borrow from Don Mattera’s lovely poem “Sea and sand”. He
writes:


  Sea and sand
  My love My land,
  God bless Africa.


  But more the South of Africa where we live ...


  Bless the angry mountains
  And the smiling hills
  Where the cool water spills
  To heal the earth’s brow


  Bless the children of South Africa
  The white children
  And the black children
  But more the black children
  Who lost the sea and sand
  That they may not lose love
  For white children
  Whose fathers raped the land ...


  ... But when,
  Oh when will I see that day
  When love will walk the common way
  To heal my wounded people
  And break the shackles around their hearts?

[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Order, order, hon members! Order!

Debate concluded.

     CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL OF CANDIDATES RECOMMENDED FOR
   APPOINTMENT TO COUNCIL OF INDEPENDENT COMMUNICATIONS AUTHORITY OF SOUTH
                                   AFRICA

Mr I VADI: House Chairperson, I am not here to recruit anybody, and I hope
I will be given a fair chance. My report will be less poetic, less
emotional and more sedate.

Last week I reported to the House that the Portfolio Committee on
Communications had completed the process of interviewing candidates for
four vacancies on the Council of Independent Communications of SA, Icasa.

The committee, and subsequently this House, recommended to the Minister
seven candidates for appointment. They were: Mr John Matisonn, Ms
Ntombizodwa Ndhlovu, Mr Joseph Lebooa, Ms Mankakane Violet Magagane, Mr
William Currie, Adv Luthando Mkumatela and Dr Stephen Mncube.

The Minister had to consider these recommendations and had to recommend
four candidates to the House for a final decision. The Minister has now
done so. He recommended that Ms Ntombizodwa Ndhlovu, Mr Joseph Lebooa, Mr
William Currie and Dr Stephen Mncube be appointed to the Icasa Council. The
Portfolio Committee on Communications met yesterday and unanimously agreed
to support the Minister’s decision. That includes all parties in the
committee.

The Minister has considered the matter very carefully and has heeded the
advice of the committee. He has taken into account the many challenges that
beset Icasa. The recommended candidates possess skills relating to
electronic engineering, broadcasting, electronic communications and postal
policy, as well as public policy development. The recommended list also
goes some way to meet the requirements of representivity.

Should the House approve these candidates this evening, the Minister will
have to indicate the respective appointment dates as the vacancies come
into effect in June, September and October this year. As I pointed out last
week, he must also ensure that there are no conflicts of interest and that
each candidate has disposed of any financial interests in terms of section
6 of the Icasa Act before the actual appointment is made.

The committee therefore recommends that the House approve the appointments
of Ms Ntombizodwa Ndhlovu, Mr Joseph Lebooa, Mr William Currie and Dr
Stephen Mncube to serve on the Council of Icasa. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Question put: That the House approve the Minister’s recommendation for the
appointment of the following four candidates as councillors to fill the
vacancies on the Council of the Independent Communications Authority of
South Africa, Icasa:

Mr William Hamilton Currie;
Mr Joseph Morakile Lebooa;
Dr Stephen Sipho Mncube; and
Ms Ntombizodwa (Miki) Ndhlovu.

Question agreed to.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND
   LAND REFORM - OVERSIGHT VISIT UNDERTAKEN ON 19-22 APRIL 2010 TO EASTERN
                           CAPE AND KWAZULU-NATAL

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION - BUDGET
                         VOTE NO 14: BASIC EDUCATION

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WOMEN, CHILDREN, AND
    PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES - VOTE NO 1: THE PRESIDENCY [NATIONAL YOUTH
                             DEVELOPMENT AGENCY]
There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

    That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE - VOTE NO 9:
                              NATIONAL TREASURY


There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL
 AFFAIRS - WITHDRAWAL OF DECLARATION OF LAND FROM LOWVELD NATIONAL BOTANICAL
                              GARDEN, NELSPRUIT

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report adopted and the exclusion of a portion of state land from the
Lowveld National Botanical Garden accordingly approved.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INDUSTRY -
   ANNUAL REPORTS OF DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY AND ITS ENTITIES FOR
                           2008-09 FINANCIAL YEAR


There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON THE PUBLIC SERVICE AND
     ADMINISTRATION - PSC REPORT: EVALUATION OF SUPPLY-CHAIN MANAGEMENT
                   PRACTICES WITHIN THE R200 000 THRESHOLD

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY -
  VISIT TO PLANTBIO NATIONAL INNOVATION CENTRE FOR PLANT BIOTECHNOLOGY AND
     PEBBLE BED MODULAR REACTOR (PBMR) IN PIETERMARITZBURG AND PRETORIA
                       RESPECTIVELY, 1-3 FEBRUARY 2010

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): The motion is that the Report be
adopted. Are there any objections?

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I simply stand to say that there is no objection
from the DA. [Laughter.]

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON LABOUR - PUBLIC HEARINGS
                              ON LABOUR BROKING

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON LABOUR - OVERSIGHT VISIT
                             TO DE DOORNS FARMS


There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:


   That the Reports be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report on Public hearings on Labour Broking accordingly adopted.

Report on Oversight Visit to De Doorns Farms accordingly adopted.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon members, you are reminded to put
on your Bafana Bafana gear again tomorrow, but to bear in mind the decorum
of the House; no takkies and no jeans.

The House adjourned at 19:00.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Submission of Private Member’s Legislative Proposal
    (1)    The following private member's legislative proposal was
        submitted to the Speaker on 1 June 2010 in accordance with Rule
        234:

        a) Legislative proposal to regulate private funding of political
           parties (Mr L W Greyling).


    Referred to the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative Proposals and
    Special Petitions for consideration and report.

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
        Effectiveness of Public Service Leadership in the Promotion of
        Intergovernmental Relations [RP 30-2010].


