---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 19 November 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-11-19
---

FRIDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at the Charles Mopeli Stadium in the Maluti-A-Phofung Local
Municipality at 10:25.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

MODULASETULO WA NCOP: Tšielala! Tšielala! Maloko ao a hlomphegago, a re
homoleng mošomo wa rena o a thoma bjalo! A re homoleng! Re tla ba le
nakonyana ya setu ya thapelo le go ikgopola. Dulang fase ka kgopelo. Ke
kgopela gore le homole, lehono ke tulo ya Ntlo ya NCOP. Ga re dumelele
batho gore ba bake lešata. Ge le ka baka lešata re tla kgopela maphodisa ba
le ntšhe le tšwele ka ntle. Ke kgopela gore le theetše, go tla ba le
dipoledišano, Mopresidente wa naga o tlo bolela le rena le Ntlo ya NCOP le
Maloko a Palamente ba tla bolela. Sa mathomo a ke tšeye sebaka se ke
kgopele tshwarelo go setšhaba sa Phuthaditjhaba le Qwaqwa ka moka le
Freistata ka moka, le Maloko ao Hlomphegilego a Palamente gore re thome
lenaneo la rena ka morago ga nako.
Ke ka lebaka la gore dipula di ana lefase le kamoka, hlogo ya naga ye
Mopresidente wa rena Mohlomphegi Zuma ga se a kgona go tloga ka nako ka
lebaka la boso. Ke ka lebaka leo re šilwego ke nako ya go thoma ka mošomo
wa rena. Fela kre tla fetša ke kgopela gore le iketle le seke la kitima ka
lebelo. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Order! Hon members, let us keep quiet
because we are now starting with our programme! Let us observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation. You may all take your seats. People are
not allowed to make a noise during the NCOP sitting. Should anyone make a
noise, we are going to ask the security people to take that person out.
Please listen attentively as the President of the country is going to
deliver his annual address to the sitting of the NCOP. The Members of
Parliament are also going to debate.

I would first like to apologise to the hon Members of Parliament, the
people from Phuthaditjhaba, Qwaqwa and the Free State province as a whole
for not starting with our programme on time. The President of the country
could not leave in time due to the unfavourable weather conditions. It is
raining all over the world. Even though we are starting late with our
programme, I urge you to take your time and not rush.]

Hon members, I would now like to take this opportunity to welcome the
President of the Republic of South Africa to the sitting of the National
Council of Provinces, and call upon the President to deliver his annual
address. [Applause.]

A re tšeeng madulo a rena, re homole gomme re theeletše Mopresidente wa
naga. [Let us all take our seats and listen to the President of the
country.]

   ALL SPHERES OF GOVERNMENT WORKING TOGETHER TO SPEED UP THE DELIVERY OF
                                  SERVICES

                            (President’s Address)

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, Mr Mahlangu;
hon Premier of the Free State, Mr Ace Magashule, and other premiers who are
present here from other provinces; hon Speaker and members of the
provincial executive; executive mayor of the Thabo Mofutsanyana District
Municipality, Councillor Mopeli; mayor of Maluti-A-Phofung Local
Municipality, Dr B E Mzangwa; provincial chairperson of Salga, hon
Councillor Mr J Ramokhoase; hon Adv M Mopeli, Chairperson of the Provincial
House of Traditional Leaders, and esteemed traditional leaders among us
here today, esteemed councillors, distinguished invited guests, ladies and
gentlemen, dumelang, molweni!

Let me begin by expressing my gratitude to the people of Maluti-A-Phofung
Local Municipality, Thabo Mofutsanyana District Municipality and the people
of the Free State province, as a whole, for the warm welcome you have
extended to us. I am particularly pleased that the National Council of
Provinces has decided to hold this important meeting in this region.

We are standing in the shadows of the majestic Maluti mountains. In this
region is some of the most beautiful natural scenery in the whole of South
Africa. Bushman paintings on some of the rocks here bear testimony to the
creativity and ingenuity of our people. The Free State province is also
known for more than the beauty of its valleys and the majesty of its
mountains. This province has witnessed some of the major events in the
history of our nation.

Almost a hundred years ago, a few dozen black South Africans from all
corners of this land, and beyond, answered the call of freedom and came to
this province to reaffirm a simple principle: that this country belongs to
all who live in it. Therefore, whenever I come here, I am always reminded
of the historical fact that Africa’s oldest liberation movement, the ANC,
was born here. [Applause.]

This birthplace of our movement, a movement that was established by all the
people of this country, also reminds us of our continuing responsibility to
improve the lives of our people, a task which this historic movement was
established to achieve. Like the parable of the mustard seed told by Jesus
Christ, the seed of freedom planted in Bloemfontein in January 1912 has
grown into the biggest tree of freedom that we all enjoy today, regardless
of political affiliation, colour or creed.

The National Council of Provinces has called us here today to reaffirm
another fundamental principle that lies at the heart of our democratic
republic. That principle is that institutions of governance and authority
should derive their legitimacy from the will of the people. The essence of
this principle is reflected in the wisdom of our people when they say,
“Inkosi Inkosi ngabantu”, and “Morena ke Morena ka batho” [A king is king
because of people].

This programme of Taking Parliament to the People is a living example of
public representatives who know that their power comes from the people.
That means that they should be in constant touch with the people, visit
them where they live, and interact with them, so that they can know what
their concerns and aspirations are. Interaction with the people will enable
public representatives to better understand and better conduct oversight
over government as it carries out its duties.

We are pleased to visit this region during this phase of the
administration, when we have completed the planning and reconfiguration,
and have shaped government in a manner that we think can make it best
deliver services. In the past year and a half, we have taken important
steps in changing the way government works. Initially, at the beginning of
this administration, we reorganised government departments in order to
facilitate the speedy delivery of services to the people. We created some
new departments and split up others to enable them to focus on the
priorities of government.

I have completed the process of signing performance agreements with
Ministers, who, in turn, have signed delivery agreements with their
counterparts in the provinces and municipalities. The reason we have taken
this approach is to ensure that everybody, from the highest levels of
government to the lowest, should be accountable for the work they are
responsible for.

Last month, we made changes to the national executive. We created four new
Deputy Ministries in portfolios that we felt needed more pronounced
attention, such as Higher Education and Training, Energy, Mineral
Resources, and Monitoring and Evaluation. Having completed the technical
reshaping of government, we now have to emphasise service delivery and also
the manner in which those services are delivered.

We have said government should work with speed to address the needs of the
people. We have said that government officials should treat citizens with
respect. We have said it should not take a long time to get an ID document
when you apply for it.
Changing the way government works also means that public servants should
not abuse the power that has been entrusted to them. A grandmother should
not have to bribe a government official in order to get her old age
pension. A young man who wants to get a driving licence should not have to
pay somebody in order to get a driving licence.

Those who are employed and get paid to do a job must do it. Teachers must
be in class, on time, teaching for seven hours a day. Police officers
should respond with speed when citizens call for them. Nurses should treat
patients with the compassion that our common decency and humanity demand
should be extended to the sick and the vulnerable. These are simple values
that we are seeking to entrench in government. Fortunately, some government
departments are responding speedily to this new ethos. However, many still
lag behind, making the experience of government not a pleasant one for most
people.

Some people’s experience of government is that of an institution far
removed from them. They think government officials do not care about their
concerns. They think government takes far too long to solve simple
problems. They think government officials spend public resources on things
they should not spend them on. This is how some people look at us, as
government. What an unfortunate situation!

We have to change these perceptions through changing the way we work as
government. That is why I have ongoing discussions with directors-general
in the Public Service, nationally and provincially, so that they can ensure
that they build the type of Public Service we envisage.

Most of the problems that confront our people exist at a local level. The
challenges that exist in this region mirror those experienced in many
different parts of the country. As we are all aware, the Thabo Mofutsanyana
District Municipality is under a section 139 intervention. This means that
provincial and national government departments are making interventions to
alleviate the grave challenges faced by the people here. Maluti-A-Phofung
was also chosen as one of the presidential nodal points because of the
scale of the challenges and backlogs prevailing here, particularly with
regard to unemployment and poor service delivery.

On this note, I commend the provincial leadership for the interventions
made through the premier’s Operation Hlasela programme, which gave momentum
to various projects. [Applause.] We acknowledge the work of the local
municipality here for developments which the mayor indicated this week,
particularly regarding basic services such as potable water, sanitation,
houses, access roads, clinics and sporting facilities. I also understand
that a significant number of jobs were created through the Expanded Public
Works Programme and the incentive grant, but these are not enough.
I learnt, among other things, that some agricultural projects related to
the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme, ISRDP, here have
faltered. These must receive attention and be revived. In the same manner,
the considerable backlogs regarding human settlements in Maluti-A-Phofung
should also receive attention. I would like to emphasise that all deserving
people should receive these houses, particularly our senior citizens.

Everybody who qualifies should get a house when these become available, not
only ANC members, as some residents have alleged. [Applause.] There has
been an allegation that these houses are received by ANC members only,
which is why I am emphasising the point. Government is for the citizens of
this country – all of them. We all know that we should not go against the
grain of our Constitution. It is not how government works.

Social facilities and amenities which are not working should be made fully
functional. The challenges encountered in the schools regarding nutrition,
water and clean facilities, among others, should also be addressed. So
should the necessary infrastructure, such as roads and bridges, which
enable children to have access to schools, even during rainy weather.

Primary health care should be provided with all the infrastructure and
communication. These include vehicles for mobile services, telephones, and
the proper supply of medication and relevant health personnel.

That Member of Parliament is complaining! [Laughter.] [Applause.] Please
attend to the member! But it also indicates that this is the Parliament of
the people.

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Absolutely. [Applause.]

As critical facilities, health centres should also enjoy a reliable supply
of electricity. Waste management services should also be improved. I am
just counting what should be standard services in any municipality, the
standards we should aspire to for our people throughout the country.

It is clear that while a lot of work has been done by the province and
municipalities, much more still needs to be done in this area, hence our
theme, “All spheres of government working together to speed up the delivery
of services”.

Concern was raised this week about the poor relationship between the
communities and some of the councillors in this area. [Applause.] I must
hasten to add that we need to be careful about blaming all councillors for
any wrong that is done by just a few. The majority of councillors and
officials around the country work diligently. Where this is lacking, let
the provincial authorities address the matter to improve service delivery.

And I want to stress this point: There is a tendency to generalise about
the corruption of councillors. [Applause.] I think it is unfair to the many
councillors who are working, who are honest, and who are serving the
people, if we tend towards making generalised statements. Let us deal with
the councillors who are corrupt, and not generalise. Let us be very
specific, so that we can address the question. [Applause.] A perception is
being created that once you are in government, you are just corrupt. It is
wrong and it is unfair.

The scale of some challenges experienced here is local, provincial and also
national, which means that intervention should be collective and should cut
across those three spheres. It has been raised that there is no proper
collaboration of the three spheres of government in some of the projects
implemented in this area. This must be attended to. We cannot underestimate
the need for collaboration amongst the three spheres of government. I
emphasise that point whenever I meet the premiers in the President’s Co-
ordinating Council every quarter.

We are one country; we are not a federal country. [Applause.] All the
arrangements that have been made have been made for easy administration.
You see, that is part of the problem: People fight about boundaries as if
they are the borders of a country, when we are in one country. And indeed,
the way people act it is as if we are in different countries. When an
ambulance is close by, because it belongs to another province, it cannot
take a patient. It is a misunderstanding of how these things are arranged
and for what reason. They are not different countries. We will end up
asking for a passport if some people drive into a province – it is really
ridiculous. We are sitting with border disputes. I do not know what border
it is, in one country. We, as politicians, might have created this
misconception.

We are scheduled to meet again on 26 November as the PCC, the Provincial Co-
ordinating Council. You know, these acronyms are, at times, a problem to us
...

... kithina bantu la eMzansi. Umuntu akuxoxele indaba ngamagama afingqiwe
[acronyms]. [... the people of South Africa. A person will tell you a story
in parables.]

PCC means Provincial Co-ordinating Council.

The NCOP represents the voice and interests of our people in the provinces
at the highest levels of our democratic republic. The fact that it also
sits outside of Parliament in Cape Town is a very important and unique
development. Most of the issues that have come out this week have enabled
members of the National Council of Provinces to obtain a first-hand account
of the challenges in this area and region. When you discuss legislation
relating to how poverty affects our people, you will do so informed by the
conditions on the ground. The lessons that we have learned here should be
instructive for other areas, both here in the Free State and in other parts
of the country.

Therefore, as we meet here in the Free State today, we should make sure
that the National Council of Provinces’ programme of Taking Parliament to
the People continues to form a critical part of what it means to be an
elected representative. It should not just be seen as a deviation from your
normal schedule as MPs, as this is a valuable interaction that helps our
Members of Parliament to keep in touch with the people they represent.

We truly appreciate being here with you, as we will be able to experience
whether we are truly changing the way government works. We thank you for
your kind attention.

Siyabonga kakhulu ukusamukela kwena kule ndawo. [Thank you very much for
welcoming us to this place.]

Re leboha haholo hore le re amohele kajeno baheso. [Thank you very much for
welcoming us today.]

Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Our Excellency has
given us words of wisdom.

Usikhuthazile ukuthi masivuselele isithembiso esasenza uma sithunywa ukuthi
sizosebenzela isizwe. [He encouraged us to revive the promises we made when
we were asked to serve the nation.]

Thank you very much, our President.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, His
Excellency the President of the Republic, hon Jacob Zuma, all the premiers
present here today, hon speakers who are present here today, hon Councillor
Ramokhoase who is the Deputy President of the SA Local Government
Association, Salga, hon members of provincial legislatures and hon Members
of Parliament, traditional leaders, citizens of the Free State and other
provinces who have visited here today, I greet you all.

Ke rata go tšea sebaka se mohlomphegi modulasetulo, ke leboge Mopresidente
wa naga ge a iphile sebaka se gore a tle a bolele le rena mo Ntlo ng ye ya
go hlomphega ya National Council of Provinces. Tla re mo tieleng matsogo go
tšeye gabotse!! Ye taba e re laetša gore ke Mopresidente wa batho. Ye taba
e re laetša gore ke Mopresidente yo a ratago go re, re tsebe gore mmušo wa
gagwe o šoma eng. Ka lebaka leo re leboga ge a šiile mešomo ye mentši go
tla mo go thušana le rena.

Mopresidente o ile a bolela, ge a namela setulo se sa bo presidente, o tla
lokiša dilo tše go swanetšwego go thongwe ka tšona tše mmalwa tše e lego
gore mmušo o tlamegile go di dira. Nka se di bale ka moka, fela ke tšona
tše re tlilego ka tšona fa lehono re tlo di lebelela gore a di a phethagala
na. Sa mathomo, Mopresidente le khabinete ya gagwe ba ile ba bolela tšeo di
latelago ... (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, I would like to thank the President of the Republic for
spending time with us in the National Council of Provinces. Let us applaud
him. This shows that he is the people’s President. He is the type of
President who updates the people about what is taking place in the
government. We appreciate the fact that he left his many other commitments
to come and work with us.

The President indicated during his inauguration that he will make sure that
the government starts working on a few things that need urgent attention. I
cannot mention them but we are here today to check if those promises are
being fulfilled. The President, together with his Cabinet, said ...]

... there will be a speeding up of economic growth and transformation of
the economy to create decent work and sustainable livelihoods; development
and implementation of a comprehensive rural development strategy linked to
land and agrarian reform and food security; improvement of the health
profile of all South Africans; intensification of the fight against crime
and corruption; and building of cohesive, caring and sustainable
communities. The hosting of the Taking Parliament to the People programme
in the Free State has helped us deal with some of these important aspects
in relation to government priorities. These include the provision of
electricity.

Mohlagase wo le wboletšego ka wona beke ka ka moka ge re be re le fa. Ke
rata go leboga mmušo wa Free State, ke leboge le mebušo ka moka: wa
mmasepala, wa selete le wa selegae ka gore ba šetše ba thomile. Fela tema
le swanetše go e lema ka gore ga se la fetša metse ka moka go tsenya
mohlagase. Batho ba kgopela seo. “[Legofsiswi.]” Kudu kudu mola go Wate ya
29, ba ile ba tsenealela taba ye kudu. Ke nyaka gore ge re tloga fa, re
nape re yo thoma gona re lebelele go re mošomo o a thoma o a sepela. Kke a
tseba gore le šetše le beakantše, kitimang ka lebelo gore kabo ya rena ya
diterelo e tle e kgone go tšwela pele ka potlako.

Taba ye nngwe yeo e lego gore e ile ya bolelwa mo gare ga beke ge re dutše
fa Mopresidente o šetše a e hlalo šitše, ke taba ya dintlo. Go na le
bakgekolo le bakgalabje ba rena ba be ba eme mo ba lla ka megokgo ba
kgopela gore hle a nke le re lebeleleng le rena re bana ba lena le le
mmušo, le le Palamente. Ke a leboga moPrimiaraTonakgolo Ace Magashule. Ba
ile ba emelela tonanakgolo le bašomi ka yena, ba eme mo pele ga rena ba re
ba tlile go thoma ka lena gomme ba bannyane ba tla latela. Ke rata go ba
leboga kudu ka gore ba kwele kgopelo ya lena. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraphs follows.)

[We have spent the whole week debating the issue of electricity. I would
like to thank the Free State Provincial Administration, the district and
local municipalities, because they have already started with electricity
projects. You still have a long way to go because you have to provide
electricity to all the villages. People need electricity, especially in
Ward 29. [Applause.] This ward needs urgent attention with regard to
provision of electricity and we also have to go there for an oversight
visit. I know that you have plans in place for this, so please ensure
speedy service delivery.

We debated the issue of houses during the week and the President talked
about it also. Old men and women were making an appeal here, asking for
help from the government and Parliament. Thank you, Free State Premier, Ace
Magashule. The premier together with his cabinet made it clear that they
want to start by serving you first, then other people later. I appreciate
the fact that they heard your request.]

And the premier has committed himself regarding that.

Ke la mathomo mola lenaneo le le thomago, ke bona Tonakgolo ya
profenseProfentshe a dutše le rena mo go tloga Mošuopologo go fihla
Labohlano a šoma le rena mo fase mo. Ke la mathomo! O be a šoma le rena ka
mo ntlong ye a le theeditše gore le reng, ge re eya fase a sepela le rena
mafelong a tekolo go yo bona gore go diragala eng kua mafelong ao. A re
gonna a re: “Mahlangu sepela le wena o ye go bona gore go diragala eng”. Ke
rata go mo leboga le Matona a gagwe ka moka. Le šomile gabotse. Se sengwe
seo Moprimiara a se boletšego ke gore, go na le batho bao e lego gore ge ba
filwe mošomo wa mmušo gore ba le agele dintlo, ba tšhela selepe goba ba age
ntlo e be seripa, mola e le seripa ba  tšhabe ka tšhelete  ba kitimele go
gongwe. Tonakgolo o tloga a ithaopile gore batho bao ba tlile go ngwalwa
maina ka moka ba ka sehlwe ba hwetša mošomomo, o tlo ba tlo swarwa. Tona ya
Tlhabollo ya Dinagamagae le Tshokollo ya Naga tša Selegae Morena Nkwinti o
be a le mo go lena. (Translation of Sepedi paragraph follows.)

[This is the first time I have seen the premier of a province working with
us here from Monday to Friday since we started with this programme. I have
never seen it before. He listened to our debates and he even went on
oversight visits with us. He said to me: “Mahlangu, you must also go and
see what is happening out there.” I appreciate the work done by the premier
and his cabinet. The premier indicated that there are contractors who got
paid and ran away without completing the houses they were building. He
further indicated that he will make sure that those contractors get
blacklisted and they will also be arrested. The Minister of Rural
Development and Land Reform, hon Nkwinti, was also present.]

Uye wakhuluma nani ukuthi, angeke kusenzeka ukuthi umbuso uninikeze indawo
nihlale kuyo ningayisebenzisi, siswele ukudla. Into ezokwenzeka ukuthi labo
abazonikezwa indawo yokulima emasimini bazoqashiselwa leyo ndawo basinike
ukudla. Uma nihluleka ukusebenza emasimini umbuso uyanikhipha ufake abantu
abafuna ukusebenza.

Lokho kuzokwenza ukuthi nikwazi ukunciphisa izikweletu zenu, nikwazi
ukuqhubekela phambili nithole imisebenzi nakhele nabanye abantu imisebenzi.


Mongameli ngithanda ukubonga kakhulu ukuthi ukhulule oNgqongqoshe bakho
beze kithi bazohlanganyela nathi. Nayi into emnandi ngoMkhandlu Kazwelonke
Wezifundazwe, bonke abaholi beza lapha ukuziphendulela ebantwini. Namhlanje
uMongameli unathi khona lapha. Nimzwile eziphendulela. ONgqongqoshe bethu
bakhona namhlanje bazohlanganyela nathi ukuze banazise ukuthi benzani
ezifundazweni.

Abesigungu sikaMongameli abaphumelele ukufika banitshelile ngazo zonke
izinto ukuthi zisebenza njani embusweni. AmaKhansela neziMeya babemi lapha
phambi kwethu. Amalungu ePhalamende emi lapha phambi kwethu. (Translation
of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[When he spoke to you, he warned that you will not receive land on which to
stay or to use since we experience food scarcity. What will happen is that
farms will be let to those who will produce food for us in return. But when
you fail to work the farms, the government will remove you from those farms
and give them to others who are willing to work.

This will enable you to minimise your debts and continue finding jobs and
creating jobs for others.

Hon President, I would like to thank you very much for releasing the
Ministers to be with us. What is good about the NCOP is that all the
leaders come here to account to the people. And today the President is also
here amongst us. You heard him responding in person. Our Ministers are here
today to be with us and to tell us about what they are doing in the
provinces.

Those who are members of the President’s executive council have talked
about how things are done in government. They were all standing here before
us – councillors, mayors and Members of Parliament were standing here
before us.]

There is no other House in the whole world that can do that except the
National Council of Provinces. [Applause.]

Ezemfundo, ngaphambi kokuza lapha sisebenze izinyanga ezinhlanu senza
amalungiselelo okuza lapha. [We were engaged in education for five months
before we came here, and then we were kept busy preparing for coming here.]

I myself was here, together with the Deputy Chairperson, leading the teams
that are working on the ground.

Umsebenzi omningi wenziwe ngaphambi kokuba sifike lapha. Uma ungadlula
eMamello Primary School lapho safika sathola khona izindlu zangasese
zingekho, kunuka futhi kuvuza, uMnyango weZemisebenzi yoMphakathi
usuyasebenza kuleyo ndawo.

Nakwezinye izindawo esizivakashele ngoba sasikhulume noNgqongqoshe
baphakathi kanye noNgqongqoshe weSifunda, kanye naboMeya sebashona phansi
bayasebenza kulezo zindawo. Sifuna ukubona impumelelo ebantwini nezimpilo
zabantu zenziwa ngcono. Sizwene noNgqongqoshe ukuthi ngonyaka ozayo
phakathi koNcwaba noMandulo sizobuya khona la bazositshela ukuthi yiziphi
izinto abazenzile. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Most of the work was done before we came here. At Mamello Primary School
there were no toilets, and there were leakages which caused a terrible
smell. The Department of Public Works is working there.

And even during our visits to other places we spoke to the Ministers, the
MECs and the mayors about these problems and they are busy fixing them now.
We want to see progress and the people’s lives being made better. We agreed
with the Minister that next year between August and September we will come
back here so that they can account on the issues they have addressed.]

Re tlo boa go lena re le begele, re ba fa ngwaga ba tle ba re botše gore ba
dirile eng ka ditaba tšeo di hlagišitšwego ke batho ba. Ge re etla mo go
tša Maphelo, re kwele gore go na le badirelaleago bao ba tsenago mošomong
ka iri ya seswai ba tšwa ka seripagare go tšwa go iri ya lesomepedi
mosegare. Mme Ntombela o boletše mo maabane, o ile go nyakišiša ka bothata
bjoo. Ga gona motho yo a tlo tsenago mošomong ka iri ya seswai a tšwa ka
iri lesomepedi re mo lefela tšhelete ka moka mafelelong a kgwedi. Ge e le
gore ga ba nyake go šoma, tsela e bulegile a ba šuthelele ba bangwe.

Go na le taba yeo le e hlagišitšego, ge ke be ke le mo ke theeleditše ke
ile ka e araba. Re boletše ka taba ya makhanselara ka mokgwa wo
Mopresidente a šetšego a boletše gore ba seke ba swara mešomo ye mentši
motho a nnoši. Ke le boditše ka re mmušo o a e hlokomela taba yeo gore le
tla bona phetogo ka morago ga dikgetho tše di tlago tša mmušo wa selegaebo
mmasepala gore motho o swanetše a kgethea gore ke morutiši goba ke
mokhanselara goba ke eng. Mmušo o a e hlokomela taba yeo, le tla bona
diphetogo di etla ka pejana, le tla di bona.
Ge re etla go taba ya bosenyi. Le mo kwele MEC wa mMaphodisa le
Mokhomišenare wa Profense wo moswa wa maphodisa le mmone ba mo tsebišitše
mo. Mokhomišenare wa Profense Senganine o tšwa kua Limpopo ke mo tseba
gabotse. Ke motho wa go tšea gabotse- botse, o tlo šomišana le lena gore
bosenyi bjo bo tle bo fele, fela re kgopela  batho ba go patrola le lena
batho ba setšhaba le šomišane le di CPF le maphodisa gore re kgone go fetša
bosenyi mo fase. Ka mantšu a mmalwa ao ke a fetša, ke a leboga
Modulasetulo. (Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[After one year they have to come back and report to us about their
intervention on what has been said by these people. We heard that there are
social workers who arrive at work at 8:00 in the morning and leave at 12:30
in the afternoon. Hon Ntombela indicated that she is going to investigate
this. People do not have to arrive at their work at 8:00 in the morning and
leave at 12:30 in the afternoon while they receive a full salary. If people
do not want to work they must resign and give a chance to those who are
ready to work.

We debated the issue of the councillors who hold two full-time jobs at the
same time. The President indicated that the councillors are not allowed to
hold two full-time jobs at the same time. I told you that the government is
working on this issue and after the coming local government elections no
person will be allowed to hold two jobs at the same time. You are going to
see some changes very soon.

The MEC touched on the issue of crime and the new provincial commissioner N
C Sengani has been introduced to you. I know him very well; he is from
Limpopo. He is a hard worker and he is going to work with you in combating
crime. We are also appealing to the public to work with the community
police forum, CPF, and the police to curb crime. I hereby conclude my
speech. Thank you, Chairperson.]

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, your Excellency Mr President, hon Chairperson
of the National Council of Provinces, NCOP, hon Premier of the Free State,
other dignitaries, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, ...

... sanibonani mphakathi waseMamelodi. Ngiyanibingelela nonke. [...
greetings to the community of Mamelodi. I greet you all.]

Kgotsong bomme le bontate ba Foreisetata. Ke a le dumedisa ka lebitso la
DA. [Good day, ladies and gentlemen of the Free State. I greet you in the
name of the DA.] [Laughter.]

Chairperson, service delivery, along with the eradication of poverty by
promoting job creation, is indeed the biggest challenge facing the
government of this country. The co-operation between all spheres of
government is of paramount importance ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, there is a
point of order.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Deputy Chairperson, on a point of order: We
are not at a rally but in Parliament for Parliament’s business. No one can
greet people in a party’s name here. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Continue, hon Watson.

Mr A WATSON: Deputy Chairperson, I said that co-operation is of paramount
importance if this is to be achieved. The question to ask is, however,
whether the three spheres of government are working together efficiently,
if at all.

Listening to the people this week and, in fact, on previous visits across
the length and breadth of the country, it is obvious that government has
failed dismally in this regard. From my own activities, along with my
colleagues in the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs, conducting intervention oversight visits to numerous
municipalities, mostly dysfunctional and placed under administration, I can
relate many instances of unbelievable mismanagement usually going hand in
hand with massive corruption, Mr President, which could probably have been
avoided or solved more speedily if co-operative governance had been
practised properly.

Owing to the very limited time allocated to the opposition parties in this
three-hour debate, I will have to limit my input to one or two examples.

Ba mphile metsotso e tsheletseng feela. [I was given six minutes only.]

I hate to tell the opposition members in Parliament this week, hon
President, that the solution to their problems is to join your party. Now
would it not be nice and profitable for all the cadres and comrades if the
opposition disappeared completely? Would that not be a nice day for all of
you?

Nee, meneer, dit is geheel en al nie ’n opsie nie. Net hier aan die
agterkant van die berg is die majestuese setel van die distriks-
munisipaliteit Thabo Mofutsanyana wat ook onder administrasie geplaas is.
Luister bietjie hierna: Die burgermeester onder wie se beheer die
munisipaliteit in chaos verval het, is nou die verantwoordelike LUR vir
samewerkende regering in die Vrystaat en in beheer van plaaslike regering.

Ek vra u, meneer die President, of dit nou is hoe samewerking tussen die
sfere van regering bevorder moet word. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[No, Sir, this is not an option at all. Just on the other side of this
mountain one will find the majestic headquarters of the Thabo Mofutsanyana
District Municipality that has also been placed under administration.
Listen to this: The mayor under whose control the municipality fell into a
state of chaos is now the MEC for co-operative governance in the Free State
and is in charge of local government.

Now I’m asking you, Mr President, if this is how co-operation between
spheres of government should be promoted.]

Deputy Chairperson, let me also tell the President about the municipality
undoubtedly very close to his heart, which we visited last week. I am
referring to Msunduzi, the so-called city of choice, where services
virtually came to a standstill earlier this year because of the very evils
of incompetence and corruption.

Fortunately, your MEC intervened in terms of the provisions of section 139
of the Constitution and appointed an administrator after the removal of the
incompetent and reportedly corrupt mayor, together with a number of senior
officers.

This administration secured the services of a very efficient task team, who
not only uncovered maladministration and corruption of untold dimensions
but also laid serious charges against a number of downright crooked
officials in that administration.
Our task was to investigate the continuation of the intervention, and I
must say that I have seldom seen the community represented by a packed hall
of citizens from all walks of life, so united in their condemnation of the
situation and absolutely unanimous in their quest for the continuation of
intervention and also for the indictment of the culprits.

The continuation of the good work done by them, until at least after the
local government elections next year, was therefore a given but whilst the
MEC eagerly agreed, she also ruled in favour of the immediate disbandment
and removal of the task team, thereby negating the good work that had been
done thus far and virtually guaranteeing the alleged perpetrators a free
pass.

Ndiyabuza, Bawo uMongameli, ukuba bafihla ntoni? Ingathi bayalwamkela
urhwaphilizo. Ndiyakuxelela ukuba ngale ndlela, lo mtshini wakho awungekhe
usebenze. [Kwahlekwa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[I am asking, hon President, what are they hiding? It seems as if they
condone corruption. I am telling you, if this continues then your machine
gun will stop functioning. [Laughter.]]

It seems to me ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, you only
have one minute left. Please, conclude.

Mr A WATSON: I’m finishing off. It seems to me, sir, that instead of
speeding up service delivery, it has nearly become a conduit of corruption
for those who have government connections in many areas of our country.

Mamelang hantle batho ba ka. Batho ba haeso ke batho ba ka. Nna ke holetse
dithabeng tsa Lesotho, Mashaeng. Ke tloha ke le moo nna, ke batho ba ka ba
mono. Ke hopola hantle hore moo Lesotho Basotho ba re: “Ho fepa difariki ke
ho fumana madinyana”. Jwale ka selemo se tlang, le tla kgetha makhanselara
a matjha. Le se ke la lebala hore ho fepa difariki ke ho fumana madinyana.
Ke a leboha [Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[Listen attentively, my people. My fellow people are my people. I grew up
in the mountains of Lesotho, in Mashaeng. I am originally from there, those
are my people. I remember that in Lesotho the Basotho say: “When you feed
the pigs, you will get piglets.” So, next year you will be choosing new
councillors. Don’t forget that when you feed a pig, you will get piglets.
Thank you. [Applause.]]

The PREMIER OF THE EASTERN CAPE (Ms N Kiviet): Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon
President Baba Gedleyihlekisa Zuma, Chairperson of the NCOP Baba Mahlangu,
Premier of the Free State province Baba Ace Magashule, all fellow premiers,
MECs, Speakers, executive mayors and mayors, traditional leaders, Salga
leadership, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I greet you all.
Good morning.

The period since we came into office, deployed of course by the ANC, guided
by the leadership of our hon President, about 18 months today, has been the
most challenging, stimulating and rewarding period of our lives. We take
pride in the fact that we, as a collective, have sought to understand our
inherited challenges, devise strategic responses to those challenges and
begin to see meaningful results. Leadership of such a large and complex
project can never be easy, but when genuine progress becomes discernible,
even after such a short period, it is indeed gratifying.

The challenges of poverty and underdevelopment, especially of the former
Bantustans; unemployment and deindustrialisation, which has been
exacerbated by the recent economic crisis; huge infrastructure and service
backlogs; and service delivery challenges in both provincial and local
government are well known.

Our response as provincial leadership has been a twofold strategy: firstly,
to correct the inherent and systematic weaknesses in the state, focusing on
health, education, local government and fiscal recovery.

Secondly, it is to address the structural weaknesses in the provincial
economy through developing programmes and projects which, if resourced and
implemented, will reposition the Eastern Cape on the new national growth
path. These projects include the Coega transshipment hub, the Coega-Gauteng
logistics corridor, the upgrade of the East London harbour, the Wild Coast
N2 Development Corridor, the King Sabata Dalindyebo presidential project
and the Umzimvubu water transfer scheme.

Another case in point where intersphere collaboration is working well is
the King Sabata Dalindyebo Local Municipality intervention. In this
intersphere collaboration a master plan for the economic hub of the region,
which spans a 20-year horizon, has been developed. It addresses challenges
and identifies 280 projects for implementation in various focus areas, as
well as emphasising the need to approach the projects in an integrated and
co-ordinated manner. It is worth mentioning that the importance of
strengthening intergovernmental relations in order to bolster the principle
and spirit of working together by all spheres of government is key.

Furthermore, the strategic goal of the turnaround in the Departments of
Education and Health is to restore public and state trust in these
departments. To reach this goal, the following objectives are being
pursued, which are to eliminate corruption; to deliver on the departmental
mandates in an effective and efficient manner; to employ appropriate
capacity at both management and operational levels; and to achieve an
unqualified audit opinion from the Auditor-General.

Already, as part of this turnaround, good progress has been made in easing
the backlog in payments to service providers, identifying areas where huge
savings have been made, and will continue to be made and improving the
supply chain management contract and project management systems as part of
addressing irregular and fruitless expenditure plaguing these two key
departments.

In addition, disciplinary and criminal action has been instituted against
many officials found to be complicit in these practices.

The process of establishing early childhood development centres, ECDCs, is
progressing quite well, with 1 262 ECDCs being funded, benefiting 55 696
children. We have stabilised our school nutrition programme and currently
4 767 schools with 1,5 million learners are benefiting from that. Of these,
4 588 schools have been provided with cooking utensils and are on the
cooked meals plan with 10 117 meal servers.

With regard to health care, there are now 31 community health centres
implementing 24-hour services and 22 community health centres implementing
60% of the primary health care package in the province. The number of
patients on antiretroviral treatment, ART, is now at 123 552, having tested
399 851 people as part of the HIV counselling and testing campaign. The TB
cure rate is at 62,4% of TB patients that have been screened for HIV.

As you know, hon Deputy Chairperson, the Eastern Cape is largely a rural
province. We are taking many positive steps towards making the lives of our
rural communities better through integrated rural development initiatives
and through putting in place rural development pilot sites in all districts
of our province, taking on board the successes achieved at our first pilot
site in Mhlontlo.

Next week, on 25 and 26 November in East London, we will be hosting our
public sector transformation summit to drive home the message and
reorientate our public servants in the various spheres of government to be
part of the solution and not the problem in speeding up service delivery.
Various build-up engagements have already taken place across the province
to start addressing the mind-sets of employees to better serve the needs of
our developmental state.

Several other notable service delivery achievements are: the province is
progressing well with its Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP, targets
with the department creating a total of 22 294 work opportunities; we have
completed our provincial industrial development strategy, which aligns well
with the national government Industrial Policy Action Plan 2; and in the
East London Industrial Development Zone, IDZ, four major investments have
been completed - dairy worth R160 million, diamond polishing worth R150
million, mariculture worth R40 million and solar water heaters worth R120
million, which together will create 600 direct jobs and 1 000 indirect
jobs. Furthermore, about 1 300 construction jobs have already been created
in the IDZ.

The Eastern Cape government is committed to continuous improvement in the
delivery of services to communities and stands firm in the belief that,
through honesty and dedication in working together, we have achieved and
shall continue to achieve more. The province is ensuring that the lessons
learnt from the 2010 World Cup experience regarding the effective and
efficient delivery of services are translated into current governance
practices. We are mindful that a lot of work still lies ahead as we move
towards the end of our current financial year. We would like to assure our
President and the House at large that indeed the intersphere collaboration
approach works well for the province, and has made us achieve more. Thank
you, hon Deputy Chairperson. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr A FRITZ (Western Cape): Deputy Chairperson, I want to acknowledge the
hon President Jacob Zuma, the Chairperson of the NCOP Mr Mahlangu, the
premiers, the MECs present here today, hon members, councillors, mayors,
Salga, and most importantly, our bosses - people in the gallery at the back
there who voted us into power, for whom we are supposed to be working.

Firstly, I want to say that the importance of distinctive, interdependent
and interrelated spheres of government cannot be overemphasised. The
different spheres must co-operate in order to give effect to coherent
governance and ensure the wellbeing of all South Africans. By the same
token it is exactly the independence of a sphere of government that can
ensure that those rights afforded to all of us by our Constitution are
protected.

Therefore, we should guard against increased centralisation and control
under the national government as it undermines the spirit of our
Constitution. It is important to have a separation of powers between local,
provincial and national government in order to strengthen democracy and
ensure accountability.

Centralisation affects the way in which we can hold our representatives
accountable. It may also make justice more difficult to achieve where power
is abused, as the different spheres of government form important checks and
balances on each other.

I believe that we should create broader opportunities so that everyone in
our society has a chance to fulfil his or her potential. I believe that
each sphere of government - the local, the provincial and the national -
has an important role to play and needs to be independent of the others.

Yes, they do need to work together. However, local solutions to local
problems can provide better service delivery. What does a bureaucrat in
Tshwane know about gangs in Hanover Park? What does an official sitting
behind a desk in the capital know about the suffering of the people in this
province in that they do not have access to clean running water? Each
sphere should therefore be bolstered so that local municipalities can
provide proper services to communities so that provinces can be actively
involved in ensuring good levels of education and health, for example.

Having said that, it is the responsibility of ordinary citizens to ensure
that they get the services that they are entitled to; they cannot provide
running water and sanitation on their own. That is the role of government.

Two of the biggest threats to our democracy in society today are corruption
and incompetence of government officials. Corruption prevents delivery of
services, because some politicians have benefited from a deal that resulted
in a project not being done, or the quality of that project is so bad that
it will have to be done over at double the cost. Incompetence of officials
that are unable to spend the money allocated to their particular
municipality is another threat, because they don’t have the ability to do
so because they are not trained to carry out that mandate.

However, in a democracy the politicians must fear the electorate and not
the other way around. It is only when leaders start fearing the very people
who voted for them that we will see real delivery and accountability. When
leaders don’t deliver on their mandate the electorate has the power to
remove them and vote for an alternative government. [Applause.] It is no
use voting for a government in May and then toyi-toying down the streets in
June protesting about the lack of service delivery. What sense does that
make?

Voters, the people, get the government that they deserve. As voters, you
have the right to choose your government. More importantly, you have the
responsibility to hold that government to account when they fail in their
duty. The only way you can do that is to hit hard where it hurts the most;
and that is at the voting station.

Too many of our public representatives see public offices or being an MP as
a nice, cushy job. Oh! Madam Chair, we must come out of that culture and do
the work for which the poor voted. In a democracy you have a right to
change your mind and that does not make you any less loyal to your
particular movement or your ideology.

In the Western Cape government we have developed a system whereby every
minister is held accountable based on their own performance. The model we
have developed is based on each ministry obtaining the highest points of
excellence. Our people deserve the best quality service and as provincial
ministers we must be held accountable. In other words, I challenge voters
to fire me as well if I don’t deliver.

Everybody, irrespective of their political affiliation, has a right to
access all the services. This should never be dictated to you by any
political party. No government is without its fair share of challenges.
Officials are appointed to ensure that services are delivered to all the
people, but if they are not fit for that purpose, the only ones losing out
are in fact ordinary people like you and me.

When councillors are not qualified to do the job as public representatives,
they should be replaced! We must stop the practice of appointing friends,
girlfriends and party loyalists to jobs that they are not able to do!
[Applause.] They need the necessary skills to be effective in the job that
they are appointed to do. Otherwise, the ordinary man in the street will
suffer.

Madam Chair, you can choose to put up with the lack of service delivery and
continue to protest and toyi-toyi or you can use the democratic power of
your vote and opt for an alternative government, which has earned the
reputation for excellent service delivery for all the people.

It cannot be right for a community to burn their only library in the area
down. It cannot be right for a community to burn motor vehicles that enter
certain areas because of a lack of service delivery. It cannot be right for
a bus full of innocent children from Khayelitsha – in our own township on
their way to a music camp - to be injured by stone-throwing people, with a
small group of them completely traumatising those children! It cannot be
right for people to attack one of our vehicles transporting matric exam
answer sheets from hundreds of matriculants of Khayelitsha. In our
democracy we have legal channels through which aggrieved citizens can
channel their grievances.

Where the law has been broken, where police and private vehicles are
destroyed, the law must take its course and the guilty person must be
brought to book. In this regard, we must also hold the police accountable
to arrest the perpetrators and have them prosecuted. As a country we cannot
afford to have our country slip into anarchy. South Africans must use their
votes - not stones - to effect a change in government if it is needed. The
power is in your hands.

The Western Cape government fully supports co-operative governance between
each of the distinct spheres of government, in order for the people of this
country to really benefit from service delivery of the highest standard.
Each sphere of government needs to focus on their core area of service
delivery, and once this has been achieved we will truly see our
Constitution in action. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M SKWATSHA (Western Cape): Deputy Chairperson, Chairperson of the NCOP,
His Excellency President Jacob Zuma, Premier Ace Magashule, all other
premiers, hon members, nani nonke bantu abagcwele apha [and all the people
who are here], I greet you. The ANC firmly welcomes the President’s
address. Hon President, you were addressing us - as you have mentioned - in
the birth province of the ANC. This is a province that holds political and
historical significance in the history of our country.

This region is named after a great stalwart and son of our movement,
Comrade Thabo Mofutsanyana, a dedicated compatriot who cultivated and
nurtured the seeds of the struggle against apartheid. He, together with
other ANC giants like Prof Z K Matthews, led the people to rise against the
repressive laws of apartheid. Allow me to pay tribute to the great
stalwarts and committed sons and daughters of our movement.

Deputy Chairperson, indeed, for the ANC, the Free State represents the
birthplace of the struggle for freedom, and the crystallisation of the
yearning of our people to create a formidable organisation to take up the
fight against apartheid. It is fitting therefore that we extend our
appreciation to the people of the Free State and this district.
The President spoke about our government’s commitment to ensure that all
spheres of government work together. As the ANC, we remain truly committed
to advancing the principles of co-operative governance, and ensuring that
the various spheres of government work together. The three spheres of
government have a constitutional duty to assist and support each other,
share information and consult each other, co-operate in the development and
execution of their policies, adhere to agreed procedures and maintain
friendly relations. These principles are clearly expressed in our
Constitution.

All spheres of government should respect and adhere to the Constitution and
the institutions that it has established, such as Chapter 9 institutions.
We have heard of provinces, or rather a particular province, that
undermines the Constitution. When the SA Human Rights Commission ruled
against the Western Cape government on the dehumanising toilet saga in
Khayelitsha, that particular government called this commission the
political hit squad of the ANC.

We cannot allow any suggestions that seem to postulate that the
institutions established through the Constitution are hit squads of the
ANC, simply because they ruled against a particular government.

Shockingly, this past Tuesday, on 3rd Degree, one of the investigative
programmes on e.tv, the mayor of the City of Cape Town, Mayor Dan Plato, in
fact, supported the building of zinc toilets for the people of Khayelitsha,
and he argued that because they stay in shacks their toilets should be the
same. What else would you call this? Would the same be said if these people
stayed in Constantia? You can only call this racism at its worst.

We have also seen projects like Sakhisizwe, which was the initiative of the
ANC’s city council ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Skwatsha, please
wait just a second. Mr Watson, please behave.

Mr M SKWATSHA (Western Cape): Am I speaking too much truth? The DA-led city
council cancelled projects that were created by our people for refuse
removal in Mitchells Plain and surrounding areas in the Cape Flats. Some
residents had their water cut, and when they complained they were accused
of having been bribed or bought by the ANC. The selective delivery of
services and neglect of townships by this city is an issue that all of us
should look at with utmost urgency and vigilance. We as the ANC cannot keep
quiet.

Our common struggle to build a better South Africa and ensure a better life
for all the people knows no boundaries, as the President has emphasised.
All artificial, political and geographic boundaries will have to be
brazenly dismantled to ensure that all the people of South Africa enjoy the
fruits of freedom, regardless of their location within the boundaries of
our country.
I want to support the MEC who has just spoken here in that the will of the
people must always be respected, but I also want to assure the MEC that
when people vote for a particular party, and a few months down the line
they protest, that is a democratic expression of their will, and they have
every right to do that. There is nothing wrong in doing so.

Hon Deputy Chairperson, as a person who comes from the Western Cape, I was
excited to be in a province that is completely free. I interacted and
communicated with the people of Diyatalawa, a project that you can see is
there for the benefit of our people. We want to join the premier of the
Free State in reassuring the people of this district and this municipality
that we have heard of their plight.

Working together with our people will harness opportunities presented by
this democracy. We are aware that as we prepare for next year’s elections
our people will continue to be part of our resolve to dismantle the legacy
of apartheid. As we prepare for these elections I also want to support the
President in saying that councillors are hardworking, and for those few
that are lazy there is no place. Our people can no longer wait to be free.
[Applause.]

When we took up the fight against apartheid we understood that the darkness
that had befallen our people for many years was only a momentary setback,
and that the sun would rise to make their lives prosperous. Operation
Hlasela is a case in point. [Applause.]
Such was our optimism when we were fighting apartheid that we were inspired
to take it to the streets against the might of apartheid, and we were only
armed with our conviction. We did this because we knew of and understood
the plight of our people. Despite their frustrations the people bear
testimony to the fact that steadily, through operations like Hlasela, the
dark clouds of despair are lifting, giving way to a season of hope. Our
country has for centuries bled from a thousand wounds of neglect. We are
now a nation at work building a better life for our people.

The ANC is conscious of the fact that transforming South Africa and
ensuring a better quality of life is made harder by the effects of the
apartheid system. We welcome the commitment made by the various spheres of
government to move decisively, responding to the plight of the people of
Thabo Mofutsanyana. We welcome the commitment made by the Free State
government to work with local farmers to intensify the land reform
programme, and to ensure that more land is in the hands of the rural poor.

We are pleased by the pronouncements that the people of Thabo Mofutsanyana,
particularly the youth, will also join the masses of young people who are
given technical skills and financial resources to generate economic
opportunities.

Premier, with our own eyes we have seen the successes of Operation Hlasela
in areas like Diyatalawa – as I have mentioned. We leave your province with
a great sense of pride and urge you to continue with the good work.
[Applause.]

We are making these pronouncements with neither hesitation nor doubt,
precisely because we know that this provincial government is a people’s
government. It continues to deliver a message that says to our people, “We
know your challenges, and we will ensure that they are resolved so that you
too can enjoy a better quality of life.”

We should ensure that criminals do not take over our streets and compromise
the safety of our people in their homes, and in the streets. We want to
thank the President for reassuring our nation that the ANC remains
committed to the realisation of the interests of the masses of our people.
Working together we can do more. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Before I ask the next
speaker to proceed, may I just plead with everyone who is going to come
forward to bear with us in terms of time, please? Unfortunately I am going
to cut your speaking time by two minutes, which will actually allow us to
ensure that the people who are still going to travel are on time for their
flights. Thanks.

Mr C MAKASI (Mpumalanga): Deputy Chairperson, His Excellency the President
of South Africa, J G Zuma, Chairperson of the NCOP, hon premiers, hon
speakers, members of the executive council, hon Members of Parliament and
members of the provincial legislature, executive mayors and mayors, Salga
representatives, councillors, traditional leaders, ladies and gentlemen, I
stand to support the address by the President of South Africa, His
Excellency President J G Zuma.

The pace of service delivery in provinces is not only dictated by the
budget allocation and resources one has towards addressing the needs of our
communities. Those needs come about through the legacies that were left
behind by apartheid. The spate of incidents of municipal unrest that has
taken place in the past year also points to the growing demand by our
people for speedier service delivery despite our budgetary constraints in
the provinces. The working together of all spheres of government therefore
becomes critical in addressing this particular demand, while also noting
that service delivery occurs in the local government space and sphere.

There is a growing need for us to harness our resources for the
acceleration of poverty eradication through delivery of clean water and
proper sanitation, and provision of electricity and decent shelter. We need
to have a joint focus on the manner in which we conduct our government
business, focusing on planning, enhancement of competencies and capacity to
implement. We need to strengthen our monitoring and evaluation processes
and the Ministries dealing with planning, monitoring and evaluation must
strengthen this function across all spheres of government.

We need to also focus on the signed delivery and performance agreements, as
the President has alluded, in order to improve performance across all
spheres of government. We must discharge our responsibilities with
effectiveness and efficiency, emphasising the priorities that we have set
ourselves to achieve, using the Batho Pele principles. Public
representatives must close the social distance that sometimes exists
between them and the communities they serve; queries from the communities
must be processed promptly within the set timeframes.

The Mpumalanga government has, in the past year, through its improved
intergovernmental relations, managed to address challenges with regard to
municipal unrest that erupted throughout the province immediately after the
2009 national government elections - three months after the elections, to
be exact.

We are still indicating that it was the right of the people to do this. We
have put four municipalities under section 139 and we have succeeded in
stabilising these municipalities. As I am speaking all municipalities are
currently stable. There were councillors who were forced to resign after
these interventions by the province and let me indicate that in all the by-
elections that resulted from these processes the ANC managed to win all
seats. [Applause.]
We have also launched a successful comprehensive rural development
programme in the Mkhondo municipality in the Gert Sibande District. Our
intention in the coming financial year is to roll out this programme to
five more municipalities within the province. Under agriculture, we also
have a programme called Masibuyele Emasimini whereby seeds are issued to
households and we assist the households with ploughing. This programme is
being rolled out throughout the province, together with the Department of
Water and Environmental Affairs; we are rolling out massive water
infrastructure projects across the province towards the provision of clean
potable water to our communities.

We are continuously rehabilitating our coal haulage routes, the road
network that is there in the Gert Sibande and Nkangala districts. We are
going to continuously upgrade our roads. In the coming financial year we
aim to upgrade up to 12 different roads across the province. We are going
to continuously rehabilitate the route network that we have.

On the education front, let me indicate that we are currently doing away
with all unsafe structures and our target is to make sure that all children
learn under a safe roof, in a proper classroom. Realising that we did not
perform very well in our examinations in the past year, we have come up
with support programmes for learners. We are also happy with the support of
and interventions that the Ministry of Basic Education has made in
normalising challenges with regard to irregularities in the matric
examination.

We are looking forward to an uneventful examination process and much
improved examination results. We are also grateful for the support we enjoy
from the Ministry of Higher Education towards the building of a university
in the province; this is highly appreciated. We have made significant
strides towards the provision of jobs.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, please
conclude.

Mr C MAKASI: Deputy Chairperson, it is indeed through working together that
all spheres of government can speed up service delivery and provide a
better life for all, I thank you.

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Phini likaSihlalo wale Ndlu, Mama uMemela, mhlonishwa
Mongameli wezwe lakithi eNingizimu Afrika, Msholozi, amalungu ahloniphekile
ale Ndlu nezimeya zonke namakhosi akhona, singekufihle ukuthi lapha ezweni
lakithi kusekhona izindawo lapho izinsiza zisahamba kancane khona.
Njengakuso lesi sifundazwe kodwa akuyona leyo into engingama ngihlonize
ngayo bese ngithi ngihlomile ngoba ngiyimbangi sekufanele ngeshele ngayo
intombi. Uma singakwazi ukugcizelela ezinhlakeni zoMthethosisekelo wezwe
njengoba nawe ushilo ngaphambilini ukuthi ukusebenzisana kohulumeni kuyinto
ekhona emphakathini. Uma oNgqongqoshe bethu ezingeni likazwelonke
bengangababukeli phansi oNgqongqoshe abakohulumeni bezifundazwe, cishe
siyophumelela ukusiza bonke abantu. Uma oNgqongqoshe kuhulumeni
bezifundazwe bengangabukeli phansi izimeya namakhansela kusho ukuthi
ngempela siyokwazi ukuqeda usizi kubantu bakithi.

Akuzona lezi izinto esingahlala ngazo sigiye phezu kwazo. Nasi nje
isibonelo esisodwa engingasenza, uma ungabheka umasipala walaphaya eNkandla
unikezwa izigidi ezingama-49 ngonyaka, uyokwenzani kubantu baseNkandla?
Ayikho into oyoyenza into eyinselele enkulu ngukuthi akufuneki kube khona
imincintiswano phakathi kwayo yonke le mikhakha emithathu kahulumeni. Uma
sithi sizoncintisana afike uKhabazela abhavumule eNkandla, kusho ukuthi
udlala ngosizi lwabantu bakwamkhulu uMamonga. Uyazi-ke uKhabazela ukuthi
uMamonga wayeshaya ekhaya; manje-ke asifisi-ke ukuthi abantu bakithi babe
njalo.

KuMnumzane uMagashule, ngithi mnewethu uyingane encane enezinyanga eziyi-18
izelwe kodwa-ke yize noma kunjalo mina nginethemba ngoba kufanele
ngilingise ubabamkhulu uMqalajuba. Nginethemba lokuthi kukhona lapho uya
khona, [Ihlombe.] Ngithi ezinsizweni nezintombi zakithi osebenza nazo faka
isitswebhu kakhulu ngoba engikubonile akuyona into engingabuya ngizogiya
ngayo la, kodwa ngithi ngiyakwethemba njengendoda. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Deputy Chairperson, Ms Memela, hon President of our
country, South Africa, Msholozi, hon members of this House, mayors and all
chiefs present, we cannot hide the fact that here in our country there are
places where service delivery is still slow. An example is this province,
but that is not something I can stand here and perform about and use as my
weapon to score political points because I am from the opposition. If we
can emphasise the spheres of government as you have said before, working
together as government is something that is happening in the communities.
If our Ministers in the national sphere of government do not undermine our
MECs, we will be close to helping everybody. If the MECs do not undermine
the mayors and the councillors it is clear that we will be able to overcome
the misery of our people.

These are not the things we should dwell on and make a noise about. Here is
one example I can mention: If you look at Nkandla municipality, they are
allocated R49 million a year, and what is it going to do for the people of
Nkandla? It is not going to do anything. The only challenge is that there
must not be any competition amongst these three spheres of government. If
we are going to compete, Khabazela will come and growl at Nkandla, which
means he is finding joy in the misery of the people of my grandfather
Mamonga. Khabazela knows that Mamonga used corporal punishment at home for
his children; now we do not wish for that to happen to our people.

Mr Magashule, my brother, you are an 18-month-old baby but even so I have
faith because I have to try to be like my grandfather Mqalajuba. I have
faith that you are going somewhere. [Applause.] To the brothers and sisters
you are working with, you must tighten your ropes because what I saw is not
something I would come and be amused about, but I have faith in you. Thank
you. [Applause.]]

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Deputy Chairperson, and Your Excellency Mr President,
given the fact that our time has been cut, I table my prepared speech. In
essence the concept of my speech is a tribute to two people: the first one
is the doctor who was recently raped in Pelonomi Hospital. It is a tribute
to the nurses, doctors and personnel that provide health services to our
people in the province and in South Africa.

The second tribute is to a Grade 2 learner, called Sibongile Zwane, a
learner at Teboho Primary School. She fractured her arm last week Tuesday;
10 days later she has not been attended to by a doctor at the local
hospital. Ten days, no doctor; and for little Sibongile, no service
delivery. She is an example of what hundreds of citizens of this area
attested to as everyday experiences trying to manage their day-to-day lives
in this area.

This is certainly not what Thabo Mofutsanyana stood for. He once said, “All
we were fighting for was to live like people in the country of our birth.”
We heard this week many stories of people complaining. As one lady said,
“We are treated as if we are not South African citizens.” Sibongile was,
this week, treated as one of those.

In presenting alternatives, it is the Congress of the People’s considered
view that drastic measures will be the only way to resolve addressing these
challenges. [Interjections.]

Firstly, the NCOP must do serious introspection in terms of our
functionality in dealing with our core function.

Secondly, the executive needs to take the activities of the NCOP more
seriously. The hon President and the Deputy President must honour their
commitments to the NCOP. Unfortunately, as once again experienced this
week, the Ministers do not have the same contributions. In terms of co-
operative governance, the roles and responsibilities of the various spheres
of government need to be synchronised. There are too many chiefs and too
few Indians; there is too much talk and too little action.

Lastly, the constitutional imperative of organised local government needs
to be enhanced. Currently, Salga is only part of the high profile
activities like today. We must increase their activity in the NCOP. If
government does not act swiftly and implement some of these proposals, the
experience of Sibongile Zwane this week, as echoed by many others, will
become the norm. The people of this area certainly deserve better. I thank
you.
The PREMIER OF THE NORTHERN CAPE (Ms H Jenkins): Hon Deputy Chair of the
NCOP and Chairperson of the session; Chairperson of the NCOP, Mr Mahlangu;
Your Excellency President of the Republic of South Africa, Mr Jacob Zuma;
Premier Ace Magashule, our host premier; all other premiers present, as
well as the MECs representing their premiers; Members of the NCOP; Members
of the National Assembly, as well as members of the provincial
legislatures; Cllr Ramokhoase, representative of the SA Local Government
Association, Salga; traditional leaders present, executive mayor and my
good friend, Mayor Queen Mopedi; all mayors, executive mayors, speakers and
councillors; people of South Africa, the Free State and Thabo Mafutsanyana
in particular; and ladies and gentlemen, it is indeed a singular honour for
the Northern Cape province to acknowledge and support the address of our
President, Mr Jacob Zuma, to this august House.

We are gathered here with the express view of ensuring that we continue to
serve our people with dedication, dignity and integrity, serving them
selflessly. We are indeed delighted to speak on the pertinent matter, that
of “All spheres of government working together to speed up the delivery of
services”.

The spheres of government are intended to promote and facilitate co-
operative decision-making, and make sure that policies and programmes of
government, across all spheres, encourage service delivery that meets the
needs of citizens in an effective way.
When delivering his 2010 state of the nation address, our hon President,
who is here with us today, called 2010 the year of action, with an emphasis
on a government that knows where people live, understands their needs and
works faster and smarter. Further priorities as identified by the President
were, inter alia, education and health, crime fighting, land reform, rural
development, and job creation.

Furthermore, our President reaffirmed that the South African government’s
commitment is to advance the vision of an inclusive society: a South Africa
that belongs to all; a nation united in its diversity; a people working
together for the greater good of all. The developmental state is, thus, a
concerted effort by government to build our nation, eradicate poverty,
promote literacy, provide health and decent education, and grow the economy
in a manner that must ensure that people are not left out, but are fully
participating and become part of the solution to their problems, hardships
and challenges.

It is for this reason that we say that the three spheres of government must
live up to the expectation which, in essence, is aimed at accelerating the
prospect of growth and development, as well as enhancing service delivery
to all our people.

As the ANC-led government in the Northern Cape province, we have committed
ourselves, as the leadership collective, to - for the duration of our term
of office - striving to ensure that no person sleeps without food and that
all people have decent shelter, access to electricity and provision of
potable water, as well as proper infrastructure.

As a result of the rural characteristics of our province, we have also
started to implement a comprehensive rural development strategy to respond
to the myriad of problems faced by rural communities in a holistic and
integrated manner. We will see to it that the programme succeeds and makes
a meaningful and tangible impact on the lives of all rural communities in
the province.

I need to make an example here of Riemvasmaak, in the Siyanda District,
which is an area that is a notable example of an integrated and
comprehensive rural development programme that is beginning to yield
positive results and bring much needed services to this far-flung rural
community. There is a need to strengthen the capacity of all our government
structures, especially the local sphere of government, to discharge their
responsibilities efficiently and effectively.

Yesterday, we launched an Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP, project in
Mier in the Kalahari where, in a joint venture between national, provincial
and local governments, we were able to create job opportunities for 315
previously unemployed people, using labour-intensive EPWP methods. This
venture is in anticipation of the Bloodhound Project which will take place
in Hakskeen Pan in 2012, when Andy Green, a fighter pilot from Britain,
will attempt to break the world land speed record. A number of
infrastructural and tourism promotion projects will be embarked upon to
ensure that we are ready to receive and host approximately 10 000
international visitors during the event.

The local sphere of government must, as a matter of principle, attract
people with the requisite skills to ensure that they render services in a
transparent, accountable and responsive manner. Municipalities need to grow
local economies, so that they can respond to the twin challenges of poverty
and unemployment, as well as contribute to the improvement of socioeconomic
conditions of our communities.

As the Northern Cape provincial government, we will be launching Operation
Nala, with the express aim of integrating and co-ordinating our efforts
across all spheres of government, and to change the pace and effectiveness
of service delivery.

I would also like to take this opportunity to inform this House that the
Square Kilometre Array, SKA, as well as the Karoo Array Telescope programme
and infrastructural preparations, are progressing well. This is also an
example of where the three spheres of government are working very well
together.

Considering that we only attained freedom in 1994 and being mindful of the
fact that, within the context of state affordability, we have progressed
remarkably well as a nation, we are, however, obliged to acknowledge that
much work lies ahead in our collective attempt to serve as a sparkling
example to the rest of the world that indeed South Africa is a winning
nation. Thank you. [Applause.]

Cllr J RAMOKHOASE (Salga): Hon Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Chairperson
of the NCOP, His Excellency President Jacob Zuma, hon Minister, Deputy
Ministers, hon premiers, hon Premier of the Free State Mr Ace Magashule,
hon speakers of provincial legislatures, deputy speakers of legislatures,
MECs, MPs, MPLs, hon executive mayors, mayors, speakers of councils,
councillors, Salga leadership, Chairperson of Traditional Leaders, our
officials, the House at large and my fellow people of the Free State, as I
stand in front of you today, I am putting forward the voice of the people
and the SA Local Government Association, as well as all supporters of the
local government.

We stand here today, Mr President, to support the statement you have just
put forward because it is a reflection of the school of thought that Salga
believes in throughout. We therefore want to support the statement and
commit to continuing to support the President and his Parliament
throughout.

As we march towards the 2011 local government elections, this week has
given us a significant opportunity as a province and government as a whole
to reflect on the progress made in expanding the delivery of services and
to acknowledge the challenges facing government in our quest to speed up
service delivery to our people.

Effective performance against our constitutional mandate requires a
coherent and co-ordinated set of support initiatives from all spheres of
government. While local government is uniquely positioned as the sphere of
government closest to the people, it is the responsibility of all spheres
of government to ensure a better life for our people. But, as indicated
earlier in the week, the belief that we are one government is yet to be
solidified in policy, practice and implementation. The President has just
alluded to that.

While there is a realisation that the achievement of shared growth and
integrated sustainable development requires collaboration and partnership
among various actors, particularly between the spheres of government and
its departments, it has proven to be especially challenging in the light of
the varied roles and resources of the different spheres to invest in the
same physical spaces. Remember that it is a call by the President that we
need to do things quicker, cheaper and faster.

The fact is that the national and provincial governments, while equally
responsible, are not at the coalface of the delivery chain and so are not
subjected to the same pressure as local government, which is then perceived
as the villain when service delivery breaks down. That is a matter that we
are all aware of and we believe and understand that local government and
councillors are at the coalface for the people.

In this regard, we would like to acknowledge the work of Parliament’s
multisectoral Ad Hoc Committee on co-ordinated Oversight on Service
Delivery, whose report was adopted by the National Assembly on 10
September. This was very good for us. We believe that this has created an
understanding among policy-makers of the complex Co-operative governance
framework within which local government operates and the support required
by municipalities in delivering key government services. It is very
important that other spheres of government see it as we see it from Salga’s
perspective.

Parliament would also be able to hold executives at national level to
account for the incoherent approaches followed with regard to supporting or
failing to support local government and failing to adhere to the
constitutional and legislative framework when dealing with local
government. This is an important element in moving towards an integrated
governance framework centred on local government.

Accountability is fundamental to our democratic system of government, as
embedded in section 195 of the Constitution. It should also form the
bedrock of our outcomes-based approach and commitment to do things
differently and result in a clear understanding and appreciation of the
roles and responsibilities of the relevant participants, importantly, those
of the responsible political, administrative and financial heads.

Sound governance is often a combination of legal and organisational
structure, management and leadership, aimed at facilitating accountability
and improving performance. Failure to do so in practice, on our part, will
ultimately lead to poor service delivery.

However, equally critical to its success is that politicians and
administrators alike must understand the interrelationship and
interdependencies of the activities in the governance environment. The
importance of sound monitoring systems – the President has alluded to those
things - and instruments cannot be overstated. Our interrelationship system
and supporting structures must ensure that relevant information flows up,
down, across and in all levels in the various government departments in a
timely manner to allow for effective decision-making.

To conclude, in my view, unless an integrated and coherent approach to
addressing the challenge of governance is taken, the spheres and
departments of government will continue to plan and implement policies and
programmes in isolation from each other. Such an approach is prudent and
vital because, from the residents’ and investors’ perspective, there is
only one government, also mentioned by the President. Communities are not
interested in which sphere of government or which department is responsible
for providing housing, sanitation or health care. They become frustrated
when municipalities appear to pass the buck to provincial or national
government. We must begin to operate as one government. Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

The PREMIER OF KWAZULU-NATAL (Dr Z L Mkhize): His Excellency President
Zuma, the Chair and the Deputy Chair of the NCOP, Premier Magashule – our
host premier – premiers, MECs and Members of the NCOP, Salga members,
mayors, councillors, traditional and religious leaders, and the community
of the Free State and neighbouring provinces, we want to thank the NCOP for
inviting us to this session and we also want to indicate our appreciation
to the President for his address.

I wish to indicate that KwaZulu-Natal is making progress in meeting the
priorities of our government in line with the electoral mandate. All
national government outcomes have been aligned with departmental plans in
KwaZulu-Natal. The signing of service delivery agreements by the premier
and the MEC with the Minister signifies KwaZulu-Natal’s commitment to
ensure that targets set by the President are met. This has necessitated
change in the manner of doing business on the part of provincial
governments, with more integration and co-operation across departments and
all spheres of government. We want to agree with the President that
provinces should not behave like independent states. They should respect
the fact that in some cases there might be a different party in charge of a
province other than the ruling party at national level.

The challenge which was faced by government at the beginning of our term
was that of overexpenditure totalling more than R4 billion, mainly due to
salary increases and the occupation-specific dispensation in the
departments of health and education. The provincial government put in place
severe austerity measures to reduce this. The process was uncomfortable and
required resolute leadership in implementation, which the provincial
government and political leadership provided, with good results. This
financial year we face a much better year with no overexpenditure forecast.
The province began to stay cash-positive and earned positive praise from
the Minister of Finance, who recommended that this model be used for other
sectors of government.

A strong effort has been put into combating fraud and corruption in
government, with several investigations and progress resulting in several
public servants being suspended and internal disciplinary procedures being
initiated through a dedicated team led by a retired judge. Several other
public servants and private individuals are facing arrest or are already
facing courts or have been convicted. The message of zero tolerance against
fraud and corruption is loud and clear.

We have committed ourselves to ensuring food security and supporting
agrarian and land reform. We embarked on a One Home, One Garden programme,
supplying seeds and implements to indigent families to encourage food
security. We formed a special vehicle, which we call the Agribusiness
Development Agency, to expedite land reform and save emerging farmers and
beneficiaries of land reform from losing their farms through repossession
by banks. Indications are that the agency is yielding good results, and the
mechanisation by our provincial government is assisting farmers on communal
land to maximise productivity and move towards self-sufficiency. We have
received a lot of support. One example is that of SA Breweries, where we
have been able to persuade them to remove beer pictures on a number of
township billboards and put up vegetable billboards that say “One Home, One
Garden”. They also complied with us on a contract of 5 000 tons of maize to
be purchased from emerging farmers on communal land.

Crime prevention measures are co-ordinated through our united front against
crime, bringing together the police and the community and business leaders
to combat crime. This operation has ensured that community safety
structures focus on priority crimes, including those in rural areas as well
as in the farming community. We have had shocking massacres such as in
Ntshongweni where 10 people, including a six–month-old baby, were killed.
Police responded with speed in apprehending the perpetrators. Unfortunately
two of those suspects were killed in the exchange of fire with the police.
The remaining suspect made a full confession to the court on this crime. We
commend the police on this and on other cases for a speedy response and
firm hand in sending a message that crime does not pay and that the
government is serious about fighting crime.

We are embarking on a strong campaign to fight drugs. They seem to be a
factor in most of the shocking crimes, especially the type which is locally
known as “whoonga”. We appeal to our national government to urgently assist
in a comprehensive programme to combat drugs, including the rehabilitation
of addicts. Our programme will involve community organisations - religious,
cultural and others – sports mobilisation and attention on youth
development, women and vulnerable groups.

HIV and Aids is most severe in our province. We have embarked on a very
strong campaign to deal with this challenge, ensuring that we have united
leadership at all levels, which plays a very strong role in leading the
campaign. We have designed a programme for implementation in every ward,
mobilising all community structures and individuals to work together with
public servants to fight the disease. Almost all of 300 clinics have
started dispensing antiretroviral treatment and anti-TB treatment together
as instructed by the President. We have also initiated male medical
circumcision. Up to now - in the past nine months - we have circumcised
18 000 males. Community health workers have been integrated to focus on
this important duty as a first line in the fight against diseases in our
primary health system, managed jointly by the departments of social
development and health.

More than 3 000 new nursing posts have been filled. The community volunteer
service programme has been initiated to ensure peer education and
behavioural change amongst the youth whilst providing skills and job
opportunities. This is what we believe is important in combating the spread
of HIV and Aids. It will also deal with problems of crime amongst young
people. We thank the Ministers of Defence and of Rural Development and Land
Reform for support in this particular programme.

Additional support has also been given to boost education and improve
matric results and skills development. We are aggressively addressing
infrastructure backlogs to ensure job creation. But we also had block
housing projects. We have revived many of these. Yesterday I inspected and
handed over a number of successfully completed houses to new owners in
eThekwini. Provincial government continues to work together with
municipalities to speed up service delivery. Whilst 500 000 houses have
been delivered since 1994, we note that 900 000 houses remain as a backlog
for the province.

Road construction, especially with regard to access to rural areas, ensures
access to public amenities and opens up economic opportunities. The
Expanded Public Works Programme has assisted in job creation, and we use
infrastructure delivery to keep up the economic growth stimulated by the
2010 World Cup. On 9 and 10 December we will convene a summit on water and
energy which will be hosted to speed up delivery of these services together
with municipalities.

We continue to face challenges in municipalities and have had to impose
section 139 of the Constitution on several municipalities - Msunduzi,
Indaka, Tugela and uMhlabuyalingana. This is also showing good results. I
just want to indicate that it was the ANC leadership that removed the mayor
and executive committee members, taking responsibility for the challenges
that were taking place in these municipalities. So, the information of the
hon Mr Watson is deficient. KwaZulu-Natal ... [Interjections.]

Thank you very much. We continue to work together to deliver a better life
for all. KwaZulu-Natal supports the approach the President has taken. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Hon Deputy Chair, hon Chair and His Excellency hon President,
all protocol observed, allow me to just add my voice to what the President
said this morning when he said that officials in departments are not doing
people a favour when they carry out service delivery. He said it is their
duty to carry out service delivery because it is the people who voted for
the government and they work on behalf of the people there.

Let me echo the words of the Chairperson on Monday night when he said that
we must think, talk and act. I think it is high time there was action in
this rural area; it is high time people were served with dignity; and it is
high time we served the people of this area with respect and honour so that
they can reap the fruits of the struggle.

Let me also applaud the premier of this province, hon Ace Magashule. He set
an example. I was amazed, and I agree with the hon Chairperson. Since we
have taken Parliament to the people, he is the first premier to be here
every day of the week. [Applause.] I challenge all other premiers in this
country to do the same. Take the people seriously! [Applause.]

Something else that I would like to say is that he set an example by
building 60 m2 to 70 m2 houses for the elderly. He appreciates the elderly
because it is because of the elderly that we are what we are today. They
have suffered and struggled. Why must they still suffer with their own
government? [Applause.] It is time that he moved away from petty issues and
served the people; it is time that he took the bull by the horns; and it is
time that he set an example. Let us remove those who are not willing to
listen or work! [Applause.]
He was born in this province so that this province can prosper. Some of the
leaders of this province - councillors - put this area in a mess because
they don’t want to think or talk and therefore can’t act. [Applause.] You
need to think and talk, and then you can act. I challenge this district
municipality. When we listened to other people during this week, there was
an indication that there is no youth development. [Applause.] The youth are
crying. How can people plead for help in the new democracy for 16 years?
The premier can’t do it alone. He needs the people to assist him. Remember
what he said in the extended lekgotla this year ... [Interjections.] [Time
expired.]

Mofts M QABATHE (Foreistata): Ha ke lebohe Motsamaisi wa mosebetsi. Ke
lebisa tlhompho e kgolo ho Mopresidente wa rona Jacob Zuma, Modulasetulo le
Motlatsi wa Modulasetulo wa Lekgotla la Naha la Diprovense, Letona Ace
Magashule le Matona a mang, Maloko a Lekgotla la Naha la Diprovense le
Maloko a Matlo a ketsamelao, marena a rona, boetapele ba Lekgotla la Mmuso
wa Selehae la Afrika Borwa, setjhaba sa Freisetata, le bohlokwa haholo.

Ha ke nke monyetla ona Motsamaisi, ho leboha setjhaba ka ho tshepa mokgatlo
wa ANC ka puso ya naha ya bona. Mokgatlo wa ANC o ile wa re puso e tla ba
ya setjhaba ka setjhaba. Re lebohe mokgatlo wa ANC ka ho tshepahala kanong
eo. Ke ena Palamente e tlile bathong, e a mamela. Ha e ipate, ha e balehe
mme ha e bolaise batho gase e llisang mahlo le dithunya. [Mahofi.] Mehleng
ya mmuso wa bohanyapetsi re ne re tla e bona kae ntho e monate hakana?

Ba mebala yohle ka ditumelo ho fapana, ba batona le ba batshehadi, re kgona
ho phela le ho nyakalla mmoho. Ba ileng ba tswa ka hara naha ba ntse ba
kgutla. Ba bone hore ha ho na makgulo a matala ho feta makgulo a Afrika
Borwa tlasa boetapele ba mokgatlo wa ANC. Tshepo ena ya setjhaba ho puso ya
mokgatlo wa ANC e bonahetse hape le ka dikgetho tsa tlatsetso tseo re
tswang ho tsona. Wa ripitla, wa papetla mokgatlo wa ANC. Wa bontsha hore ke
ona lefika la mengwaha setjhabeng sa rona mme o tla nne o boele o etse
jwalo le ka dikgetho tsa mebuso ya lehae tseo re yang ho tsona. Ke mokgatlo
wa ANC feela oo e leng tshepo ya batho. [Mahofi.]

Naha ya rona ya hlohonolofatswa ka ho ba le boetapele bo tsotellang, bo
mamelang, bo ikokobeditseng mme bo le bathong tlasa boetapele ba
Mopresidente Jacob Zuma. Moetapele wa sebele ya sa kgeseng mmala kapa maemo
a motho. Borapolasi le mmapolasi ba Freisetata, ba batsho le ba basweu ke
dipaki tsa taba eo ke e buang. Mopresidente o ba etetse le pele e ka ba
Mopresidente. A ba etela le ka morao hoba e be Mopresidente leetong la hae
la morao-rao mane Boertjiefees, Bultfontein.

Boetapeleng ba mokgatlo wa ANC re fetola maphelo mapolasing. Maloko a
Palamente a iponetse. Le tswa Diyatalawa matlong a polasi a disekwere tsa
dimetara tse 74. Dikamore tsa ho robala di tharo ho isa boneng mme di na le
kamore ya ho hlapela le ntlwana. Ho na le sekolo, sebaka sa tlhokomelo ya
bana le holo. Ba reketswe dikgomo mme ba ahelwa sebaka sa ho di hama. Ba
batletswe dikgoho le ho ahelwa dirobe tsa tsona. Re ntse re lokisa ditsela
moo. Mafapha kaofela a na le seabo ho tsetela Motseng wa Temo wa
Diyatalawa. Kgolokweng ha e a salla morao. Re ahela morena le setjhaba
matlo. Re ahile le tleleniki moo. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs
follows.)

[Ms M QABATHE (Free State): I would like to thank the Chairperson. I want
to express my greatest respect to our President Jacob Zuma, Chairperson and
Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Premier Ace
Magashule and other  MECs, Members of the NCOP and members of the
legislatures, our chiefs, leadership of the SA Local Government
Association, and the people of the Free State; you are very important.

Let me take this opportunity, Chairperson, and thank the people for having
trust in the ANC to govern their country. The ANC said that this government
would be by the people for the people. We also thank the ANC for being
trustworthy in that promise. Parliament has finally come to the people. It
listens. It does not hide and it does not run away and fire teargas and
rubber bullets at the people. [Applause.] Where could we see this during
the apartheid government?

People from different races and different positions, males and females,
live and rejoice together. Those who left the country are now coming back.
They have realised that there are no greener pastures than here in South
Africa under the leadership of the ANC. People’s trust in the ANC has been
evident even in the recent by-elections. The ANC destroyed and defeated
others. It showed that it is the backbone of our nation and will do the
same in the upcoming municipal elections. The ANC is the only hope for the
people. [Applause.]

Our country is blessed with a caring leadership that listens, obeys and is
always with the people under the leadership of President Jacob Zuma. He is
a true leader who does not discriminate against race or one’s position.
Free State farmers, both black and white, are witnesses of what I am
talking about. The President visited them before even becoming the
President. He also visited them after he became President, during his
recent trip to the Boertjiefees [Boertjie festival] in Bultfontein.

The leadership of the ANC is changing the lives of those living in the
farms. Members of Parliament have witnessed this. You visited farm houses
of 74 m2 in Diyatalawa. They have three to four bedrooms and a bathroom
with a toilet. There is a school, a crèche and a hall. Cows were bought for
farmers and they were provided with structures where they could milk them.
Chickens were bought for them and chicken hatcheries were built. We are
still constructing roads there. All departments have a role to play to
invest in Diyatalawa Agri-Village. Kgolokweng has not been left behind. We
are building houses for the chief and the community. We have also built a
clinic.]

All government spheres are working together to give a comprehensive
service.

Sena ke qalo feela hoba re sa fetela mapolasing a Wilhelmina, Cherry le a
mang. Re sebetsa mmoho le matjhaba rona pusong ya mokgatlo wa ANC. Ke kahoo
re fumaneng thuso ya dimilione tse 45 ho tswa mmusong wa China. Re ntse re
aha sebaka sa qhotsiso ya mahe a ditlhapi mane letamong la Xhariep,
seterekeng sa Xhariep. Kaho e a phethelwa kgweding ya Tshitwe. [Mahofi.]

Hosane Letona Nkwinti o tla be a le motseng wa Bloemfontein moo a tla beng
a thusa borapolasi-potlana ho ba le karolo ya diabo ntlong e nngwe ya tse
kgolo tsa ho buhela diphoofolo Bloemfontein. Letona Tina Joemat-Pettersson
o tla tlisa dipakana tse 85 tsa diterekere Freisetata. (Translation of
Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[This is just the beginning because we are also going to do the same at
farms like Wilhelmina, Cherry and others. We work together with communities
in the ANC government. That is why we received a donation of R45 million
from the government of China. We are busy building a fish hatchery on the
Xhariep dam, Xhariep district. The construction will be completed in
December. [Applause.]

Minister Nkwinti will be in Bloemfontein tomorrow to assist developing
farmers to acquire shares in one of the biggest abattoirs in Bloemfontein.
Minister Tina Joemat-Pettersson will bring along 85 tractors to the Free
State.]

Indeed all spheres of government are working together to speed up service
delivery.

Tlasa boetapele ba mmuso wa mokgatlo wa ANC, re ile ra tshwara dikopano tsa
basebeletsi ba mapolasi diprovenseng kaofela. Di ile tsa felella ka Kopano
ya Naha ya Baseletsi ba Mapolasi. Ka morao ho Kopano eo, mona Freisetata re
ile ra hira babatlisisi ba babedi le motho ya nang le digerata tsa molao ho
sala morao le ho rarolla dinyewe tsohle tsa ho lelekwa mosebetsing ka tsela
e seng molaong, ho lelekwa polasing le ho thunthetswa ha ditokelo tsa botho
tse ileng tsa hlahiswa kopanong eo re neng re le ho yona. Tse ngata re se
re di hlotse le ho di lokisa. Maqhama re a a aha mahareng a borapolasi le
basebetsi ba bona.

Mmuso wa mokgatlo wa ANC o aha naha. Re le mmoho ba batsho, ba basweu le ba
mmala, re ketekile Mohope wa Lefatshe mapolasing, ra isa dithelebishene tse
tsamaiswang mapolasing, ra tshehetsa Bafana Bafana re le kaofela, re le
ntho e le nngwe, re kopane.

Re ntse re kopane kaofela, ba batsho le ba basweu, re hlwekisa metse. Re
hlwekisa dinoka tsa rona. Re sebetsa mmoho le bomasepala. Ha re otlwa ke
koduwa ya sewa sa kgohlo ya Rift, re ile ra nna ra sebetsa mmoho. Ha re
welwa ke koduwa ya mello ya hlaha e ileng ya tjhesa mona Freisetata, re ile
ra nna ra sebetsa mmoho ho tima hlaha. Mmoho, ba batsho le ba basweu, re a
sebetsa. Ha ho na mang kapa mang ya tla kena dipakeng tsa rona ho re
qabanya. Presidente re o utlwile. (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs
follows.)

[We have held meetings with farm workers in all provinces under the
leadership of the ANC government. This ended with the National Farm
workers’ Summit. In the Free State, we hired two investigators and somebody
with a law degree after the summit to follow up and resolve all unfair
dismissal cases, farm evictions and human rights abuses that were raised in
the summit we attended. We have dealt with and resolved a lot of issues. We
built relationships between farmers and their workers.

The ANC government is building the nation. Together as blacks, whites and
coloureds we celebrated the World Cup on the farms. We brought big screens,
and we supported Bafana Bafana together as one and united.

We are all still together, blacks and whites, to purify water. We purify
our rivers. We work together with the municipalities. We also worked
together when we were hit by Rift Valley Fever. When we were experiencing
wild veld fires around the Free State, we continued to work together to
battle the blaze. We work together, blacks and whites. No one will come
between us and cause friction. We have heard you, President.]

All agricultural projects that have faltered will be given immediate
attention. On local government and human settlement, we say to the nation
we are on course with regard to Operation Clean Audit 2014. The Auditor-
General’s report ...

... e bontsha hore ho na le ntlafalo mafapheng ka kakaretso. Bomasepala le
bona ba tlo ba motjheng. Re lebelletse diphetoho tse ntle. Re kgonne hore
ho bomasepala ba 25 bao re nang le bona, re kwale dikgeo tse 23 tsa
Baofisiri ba ka Sehloohong ba Ditjhelete. Botshwari ba Matlotlo le Puso ya
Kopanelo le Merero ya Setso di sebetsa mmoho le bomasepala. Mashano ana a
mokgatlo wa DA a ho reka divoutu ha se nnete. Ho a sebetswa ho bomasepala.
[Mahofi.]

Tlasa boetapele ba Letona Ace Magashule, boetapele bo nang le tjhebelopele,
ditho tsa Lekgotla la Phethahatso provenseng di ronngwe ho sebetsa le
bomasepala ho tlisa botsitso le momahano ya maqhama a tshebetso ...
(Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[... shows that there is an improvement in the departments in general.
Municipalities will follow suit. We are expecting favourable changes. We
were able to fill 23 of the 25 chief financial officer vacancies in our
municipalities. Treasury, and Co-operative Governance, Traditional Affairs,
and Human Settlements work together with the municipalities. Rumours by the
DA about other people buying votes are not true. People work hard in the
municipalities. [Applause.]

Under the leadership of Premier Ace Magashule, the leadership with vision,
members of the executive council in the province have been mandated to work
with the municipalities to bring stability and ideas for working
relationships ...]

...to enable us to deal proactively with the challenges rather than
reacting to them.

Ha e yo ntho e ntseng e buuwa ya batho ba lapetseng divoutu mme ba bua
dintho tse ngata tseo re sa di tsebeng. [There is no such thing as people
being hungry for votes. They talk about so many things that we do not know
about.]

All spheres of government are definitely working together, Mr President!

O botsa potso kgafetsa, Presidente ... [You often ask a question, Mr
President ...]

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, on a point of order: Can you please rule? Is it
in order for a member to stand at the podium and call another member a
liar? The interpreter said that.
Ms M QABATHE (Free State): Ke a leboha Motsamaisi wa dipuisano. Ke ne ke re
Mopresidente o re botsa potso kgafetsa. O re: ... [Thank you, Chairperson.
I was saying the President often asks a question. He asks: ...]

“What is it that you are doing differently where you are?”

Potso ena re ile ra e utlwa. Ke a leboha Motsamaisi wa dipuisano. Mosebetsi
o etswang Freisetata o mongata haholo. Feela re re mmuso wa mokgatlo wa ANC
tlasa boetapele ba Mopresidente Jacob Zuma ke wona feela, ha ho na o mong.
(Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[We have heard this question. Thank you, Chairperson. There is a lot of
work that has been done in the Free State. We say the ANC government, under
the leadership of President Jacob Zuma, is the only one, there is no
other.]

The ANC lives and the ANC leads. [Applause.]

Mr M NKOMFE (Gauteng): Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, Mr Mninwa Mahlangu;
Deputy Chair of the NCOP; His Excellency the President of the Republic,
Baba Jacob Zuma; esteemed NCOP delegates that are here; the Premier of the
Free State, Ace Magashule, and other premiers and hon members, let me start
by saying that as the Gauteng province we acknowledge and welcome the
invitation from the NCOP to make a statement, and also welcome and align
ourselves with the address by the President of the Republic of South
Africa.

One of the critical challenges we face is the delivery of quality services,
and in this context we are talking of delivery on time and with the
necessary speed to meet the expectations of our people. The scale and the
enormity of the challenge are such that our people are impatient for
effective service delivery. It is in this context that numerous groupings
have come up to highlight the living conditions of our people and some of
the protests that we are seeing should be seen.

It is also important that I indicate the fact that, as government, we have
always been aware of the concerns of our people and the conditions in which
they are living. In this regard, we have consistently crafted different
approaches and tactics to address the hardships and suffering afflicting
our people. Notwithstanding the fact that service delivery is taking place
at a very high level that has never been seen in our country before, in my
view it is not enough; and I think more can still be done.

However, the conditions that impact on the rich and the impact of service
must actually be appreciated. In this context, I want to factor in the
Gauteng province and I’m addressing the national executive here, Mr
President, to say that the main issue of limited resources is the one that
is going to give us problems. I’m quite aware that the Treasury and
national executive committee are doing quite a lot in addressing what has
come to be known as the equitable share.

Our province, as one knows, is a province of “amagoduka” [people who reside
in rural areas but work in the urban areas]. I’m sure each one of us here
knows a person who is staying in Gauteng. Therefore, we have the challenge
of in-migration and that in-migration is going to result in poverty and
cause limitations in so far as the issue of resources and service delivery
is concerned. We want to raise that issue very sharply.

There are four issues that we want to raise: Firstly, we are conscious of
the critical areas that require intervention in the three spheres of
government. Now, we know that our greatest weakness, as government
generally, across the system is the effective co-ordination of programmes
amongst the three spheres of government. This has resulted in a situation
where programmes are conceived, only to falter on implementation because
delineation of roles and responsibilities is not clear and this results in
poor delivery of programmes. This challenge of co-ordination sometimes
leads to squabbles over who controls the budget for which programme.
Unfortunately and cumulatively, this tends to compromise service delivery.

Secondly, the other challenges we have observed are poor planning and a
lack of capacity. In many instances poor planning manifests itself in the
duplication of projects, which results in resources being wasted across the
three spheres of government. It also shows in situations where we plan and
implement projects without encouraging the involvement of communities,
resulting in projects being vandalised as an expression of rejection by
communities. This reflects the problem of capacity within our Public
Service, as well as a lack of commitment. That talks directly to the issue
of diagnosing the real problems of our people and ensuring that we
correctly, concretely and adequately pull out what the issues are.

Generally, the area of intergovernmental relations remains a challenge in
our system of government. We need a proper framework and strategy that will
promote closer working relations amongst the three spheres of government.
In Gauteng we have gone a long way in working on that.

Notwithstanding the challenges that we have raised, in Gauteng we are
working hard to strengthen the areas of weakness in this regard. The
structures to promote co-ordination between municipalities and the
provincial government are in place and are addressing these situations. We
are now putting more emphasis on resources, particularly with regard to
monitoring and evaluation. We understand that if we focus on this area it
will be easy for us to detect problems in the system as early as possible.
We are happy that the SA Local Government Association, Salga, is actually
on board but I think it is something that is still a challenge; we have to
work very hard on that.

We have also embarked on a drive to improve skills, particularly through
training amongst employees, fill vacancies and also follow strict
recruitment procedures, particularly with regard to searching for the best
talent in the market. This is done in order to address the issue of
capacity and competence in the workplace. Two issues that are very
important in Gauteng - and I’m sure even in other provinces - are the
issues of project management capacity skills within government and, most
importantly, contract management, because very often our government is
actually adversely affected by the manner in which our Public Service
negotiates our contracts, as it were.

It is our belief that government can achieve more and deliver quality
services if the three spheres of government work in sync with one another.
There is no doubt that collaboration amongst the three spheres should be
encouraged, and if we want to speed up delivery we should actually go in
that direction. It is in this regard that, as Gauteng, we think that the
platform of the NCOP will ensure the realisation of the objective of
ensuring that there is co-operation amongst the municipalities. Thank you.

Vho M G PADAGI (Limpopo): Mudzulatshidulo; Mudzulatshidulo wa NCOP, Vho M J
Mahlangu; Phuresidennde wa Riphabuḽiki ya Afurika Tshipembe, Vho Jacob
Zuma; Mulangavundu wa Free State, Vho Ace Magashule na vhaṅwe vhalangavundu
vho konaho u swika, ndi khou vha resha. (Translation of Tshivenda paragraph
follows.)

[Mr M G PADAGI (Limpopo): Deputy Chairperson; Chairperson of the NCOP, Mr M
J Mahlangu; President of the Republic of South Africa, Mr Jacob Zuma;
Premier of the Free State, Mr Ace Magashule, and other premiers who are
present, I greet you.]

I bring you warm and fraternal greetings from the government and the people
of Limpopo.

Chairperson, in Limpopo we have vibrant policies in place which seek to
guide our energy in a direction that benefits the people, especially our
people in the rural areas, as Limpopo is largely rural and the basic
services do not easily reach them. We have devoted much of our attention to
the cause of ensuring proper implementation of such policies in an
environment that is planned, monitored and perpetually evaluated.

This approach enables us to regularly inspect and evaluate our impact as
government in delivering and making interventions where it is necessary.
Our programme of action for service delivery is underpinned by the Medium-
Term Strategic Framework, which is the bedrock of our administrations
policy direction.

What forms part of our key priority areas are the provision and the
improvement of health care facilities; the Comprehensive Rural Development
Programme, which is linked to land and agrarian reform and food security;
the enhancement of skills and human resources through, among others, the
opening of the doors of learning; the fighting of crime and corruption; and
the building of a strong economy that is able to create decent and quality
job opportunities for our people.

We are still faced with the elementary obligation of providing basic
services to our people, which include houses. We are at work realising our
resolve in ensuring that the people of Limpopo are, in the main,
beneficiaries of economic activities that are taking place in the province,
given the large mineral deposits in our region. We have drawn up the
Limpopo Employment, Growth and Development Plan, which is an economic
document that is aimed at growing the path of our economy.

We have identified job creation as a sustainable new method of fighting
poverty and underdevelopment among our communities. We are hard at work
building an economy that is able to grow while it is creating vibrant job
opportunities for our people. Through the Limpopo Employment, Growth and
Development Plan we are working towards ensuring that the mining activities
in the province that bring in millions also benefit the local communities.
We have managed to deliver a crime-free and incident-free World Cup
tournament in our province.

Once more Limpopo has emerged as the leading province with regard to the
crime rate. We are deepening our interaction with communities around
enforcement in order to ensure that crime is exposed and fought from all
corners. Our low crime rate has been attested to by the latest crime
statistics that show our province has one of the lowest crime rates.

The process of expediting service delivery to the people continues to make
a meaningful difference in the lives of the majority, especially in the
rural areas of the province. Although our province is ranked the lowest
when it comes to access to universal basic services, we have managed to
expand the provision of basic services in the form of water, sanitation,
and electricity to many people. We have continued to provide people with
houses and other infrastructure development programmes.

We have declared this year the year of intensive learning in the province
as we continue to regard education as a strategic bedrock for a sustainable
and better tomorrow. The number of children with access to basic education
has exceeded the anticipated target. The school nutrition programme assists
in the realisation of our resolve to fight hunger at schools, enabling the
environment to be conducive for learning to take place.  Through working
closely with communities we have been able to register great strides in the
war against crime and corruption.

This brief account of Limpopo should serve as a motivation that we are on
the correct path in building a prosperous society which is able and
committed to the overriding cause of creating a better life for all. Thank
you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Chair, may I start by saying that
it is interesting to have noted that during the debate on the address by
the President, a very interesting observation was made that a member and
leader of Cope took an opportunity to quote Thabo Mofutsanyana. I found it
interesting that Cope could quote, in actual fact, one of the greatest
communists that this country has ever produced. Perhaps it is a lesson
that, as we move forward, some of these liberalist approaches that they
have would definitely not be of comfort to a great communist such as
Comrade Thabo Mofutsanyana. [Applause.]

Let me also take this opportunity to pay tribute to our grandmother, Gxowa,
a revolutionary, an organiser, a visionary, who joined the ANC in the early
years of her life. She participated in and led the programmes leading up to
the Women’s March and, subsequent to that, the adoption of the Freedom
Charter. It is indeed fitting that the National Council of Provinces held
its programme of Taking Parliament to the People here. This exercise is a
fulfilment of the vision of the Freedom Charter that the likes of Mrs Gxowa
fought for.

Accordingly, the strategic objective of the ANC, which is the creation of a
nonracist, nonsexist and democratic South Africa - that particular
characterisation of this strategic objective -  continues to teach us that,
while people say that in 16 years the ANC has done nothing, fundamentally
ours has been to build a nation; fundamentally ours has been to build a
society that has respect for women and a society that has an understanding
that in actual fact we have been divided for many decades by the very same
former National Party that was mentioned by a member here earlier.

Members will remember that as the ANC we resolved that the Fourth
Parliament needed to be characterised differently and that the
characterisation of this particular Fourth Parliament needed to be as an
activist Parliament. It needs to be a Parliament that is rooted amongst the
people. It needs to be a Parliament that responds to the needs and the
interests of the people. It needs to be a Parliament that must strengthen
its oversight capacity in order to be able to hold the executive
accountable. It is that kind of Parliament that we have here today - a
Parliament that is engaging with the people; a Parliament that is engaging
with the executive; and a Parliament which says: “Yes, together with our
people we will march forward.”

The National Council of Provinces plays a very central role in bringing the
three spheres of government together. It remains the only democratic
institution in the country that is constitutionally designed to bring all
three spheres of government together under one roof. Through programmes
such as Taking Parliament to the People, the NCOP gets an opportunity to
bring together all our people under one roof. This would include, amongst
others, the community, the Cabinet, the President, the MECs, mayors and
everybody who is involved in the process of transforming our country for
the betterment of the lives of our people. This is the reason why we need
to emphasise our commitment in ensuring that at the end of each programme
the lives of our people become much better.

In fighting poverty we take note of the issues raised during the visits and
public hearings, including that there are fundamental challenges in
supporting small business initiatives. The Freedom Charter clearly states:
“The people shall share in the country’s wealth.”

While our organisation, the ANC, has made substantial progress in realising
this goal, we acknowledge that we have not yet achieved true economic
transformation, which includes fundamentally changing the structure of the
South African economy and the distribution of wealth and income in our
society.

The National Council of Provinces commits to monitor the promises made by
our councillors, without specifically mentioning names, particularly with
regard to a commitment that was made yesterday that the district has a
budget set aside to assist small and emerging businesses to buy stock or
embark on training and development. It would be quite an interesting aspect
for us as the NCOP with our committees to do follow-ups into understand
exactly what our commitment is and what it is that is happening on the
ground.

We are told a lot about corruption. Yes, of course, the way that corruption
is put to us and to society sounds like a new thing. As the ANC, we have
taken it upon ourselves to ensure that we put systems in place that will
combat corruption. We have put systems in place in government that identify
and expose corruption. It is no coincidence that so many cases of
corruption have been reported, so many cases of corruption have been
captured. In actual fact, it is this organisation, the ANC, that went to
Polokwane; that went to Durban and re-emphasised the point of the
transformation of the judiciary by strengthening the instruments that are
put in place in order to fight corruption. Therefore, as the ANC, we cannot
be taught how to fight corruption. It is our resolve to fight corruption.
[Applause.]
Interestingly as well, it is quite hypocritical the way this whole issue of
corruption is put to society, especially by the DA. The manner in which
they put the matter of corruption to society is by saying that the ANC is
corrupt, but they are not talking about the white-collar crime that is
happening; they are not talking about the corruption that is happening in
the private sector. Let me give an example of something that the DA never
said anything ...

... ka sone, bagaetsho. A le a itse gore go na le dilo tse ba di bitsang di
“cartel”. Ke ditlamo tse di kopanang, mme di rerisane go baya tlhwatlhwa e
e amang batho ba ba kobo di khutshwane; batho ba ba sokolang; batho ba ba
tlhokang thuso mme DA ga e bue ka batho bao. Gona jaanong go ne go na le
“cartel” e e bonweng molato mo borothong. Bana ba tlhoka borotho kwa
sekolong. (Translation of Setswana paragraph follows.)

[... about. Did you know about a thing called a cartel? It is a consortium
of independent organisations formed to limit competition by controlling the
price, production and distribution of a product or service that affects
poor people, struggling people, people who need help - and the DA does not
talk about those people. Now there is a cartel that was found guilty of
price fixing on bread. Children need bread for school.]

They are hypocrites nevertheless. Thank you very much, Chair. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]
The PREMIER OF THE FREE STATE (Mr E S Magashule): Hon Chair of the NCOP,
hon President of the Republic of South Africa, hon premiers, MECs, members
of the House, traditional leadership, SA Local Government Association,
Salga, leadership, our hon councillors, the hosting mayor, Dr Mzangwa,
Mmathokwana Mopedi and the community, the NCOP is doing such a good job.
The Taking Parliament to the People programme, I think, must be commended.

Thank you to the hardworking members of the NCOP for coming to the Free
State. I’m sure, moving forward, we can draw strength from whatever you
have said. Let me remind South Africans – and I agree with the President -
that South Africa is a unitary country and, indeed, there are different
challenges in different provinces.  The Free State is not like the Eastern
Cape, KwaZulu-Natal or Limpopo.

In the Eastern Cape there are big challenges. I think the history of where
we come from in terms of the Bantustans or homelands - for example, the
Ciskei and the Transkei - and the poverty created in that province and many
other provinces must be taken seriously. Therefore we need the support of
the people of South Africa and the national government to work together
with all the municipalities, local governments and provincial governments.

Let me take the members back to the past. In the past, ...

... re ne re sa dumellwa ho vouta rona re le batho ba batsho. Re ne re
lahletswe dibantustaneng Kapa Botjhabela kwana Transkei le Ciskei. Re
lahletswe Bophuthatswana, KwaZulu-Natala le Venda. Ha re hopoleng nalane
eo. Ha re hopoleng hore dipetlele tsa rona kajeno lena ke tsa batho
kaofela, ha pele ho ne ho na le tsa makgowa le tsa batho ba batsho.

Ha re hopoleng moo re tswang teng hore dimaene le moruo wa naha, ditsela le
marokgo a Afrika Borwa a ahilwe ke rona batho ba batsho ba dulang mona
Afrika Borwa empa mofufutso oo ha o se o qhalehile, ha ho letho leo re
ileng ra le etsa.

Ditoropo tsa rona di ne di na le matlo, tsamaiso ya dikgwere-kgwere,
ditsela tsa sekontiri, motlakase le tsohle. Ha re hopoleng hore rona batho
ba batsho re ne re sa kgone ho dula moo re batlang mme re sa kgone ho
tsamaya moo re batlang. Ha ke le nke hanyane ha e le mona le tswa nalaneng
eo, ke le bontshe ho ya pele hore re entse eng rona re le mmuso wa mokgatlo
wa ANC diprovenseng le tlase ho bomasepala. Ha re hopoleng moo re tswang
teng hore batho ba batsho ba ne ba sa fumane tjhelete ya penshene e
lekanang le ya makgowa.

Ha re hopoleng moo re tswang teng hore ka selemo sa 1953 Ngaka Verwoerd o
ile a fetisa molao wa Thuto ya Kgethollo. Ha thwe bana ba rona ba batho ba
batsho ba tla rwalla dipatsi le ho kga metsi, mme ba se dumellwe ho etsa
Mmetse le Thuto ya Mahlale. Jwale, ha re bua ka dintho tseo kaofela ha
tsona, ha re hopoleng moo re tswang teng hore re tle re kgone ho utlwisisa
moo re batlang ho ya teng re le mokgatlo wa ANC mmoho le setjhaba sa Afrika
Borwa.

Ha re hopoleng moo re tswang teng hobane Palamente le Mopresidente ba ne a
sa kgone ho fihla setjhabeng empa kajeno lena ba fihlile. Jwale, ha re
bueng ka seo re batlang ho se etsa hobane ka selemo sa 1994 ha setjhaba se
qeta ho voutela mokgatlo wa ANC, lona batho ba ka hara Ntlo ena le ne le
qala ho vouta. Ka mora dilemo tse ka bang makgolo-kgolo mmuso wa kgethollo
le kgatello o re tshwere, la qala ho vouta.

Jwale, ha le voutile ka selemo sa 1994, le tla kgona ho utlwisisa hore ba
neng ba hloka metsi e ne e le dimilione-milione tsa batho. Ba neng ba hloka
dibukana tsa boitsebiso e ne e le dimilione-milione tsa batho. Ba neng ba
sa kgone ho vouta e ne e le rona. E ne e le rona ba neng ba sa dumellwa ho
dula le ho kena dikolo moo re batlang teng mme re etse Mmetse. Nna le wena
re ne re etsa “Momo le Semboho ba mema Didimaho”. Le lebetse ka pele jwang?
[Mahofi.] Le lebala ka pele jwang? Mopresidente o re kopile hore re etse
dintho ka tsela e fapaneng le ya pele, Modulasetulo. Taba ya ho tlisa
Palamente bathong ... (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[... we were not allowed to vote, as black people. We were thrown into
Bantustans in the Eastern Cape – the Transkei and the Ciskei. We were
thrown into Bophuthatswana, KwaZulu-Natal and Venda. Let us remember that
part of history. Let us not forget that our hospitals today are for
everyone, whereas before there were separate hospitals for white and black
people.

Let us remember where we come from, that mines, the economy of the country,
roads and bridges were built by us, black people, who live here in South
Africa. But when all that sweat had gone to waste, nothing was done.

Our towns had houses, sanitation, tarred roads, electricity and everything.
Let us remember that as black people we could not stay wherever we wanted
to. Now that you’ve remembered all that history, let me continue to show
you what the ANC government has done in the provinces and even in the
municipalities. Let us remember that black people did not receive pension
money equal to that of white people.

Let us remember that in 1953 Dr Verwoerd passed the apartheid education
law. It was said that our black children would fetch wood and water, and
they were not allowed to do maths and science. Now, let us talk about all
those things. Let us remember where we come from so that we can understand
where we want to go as the ANC, together with the nation of South Africa.

Let us remember where we come from because Parliament and the President
could not reach the nation but today he is here. Now, let us talk about
what we want to do because in 1994 when the nation voted for the ANC you
people in this House were also voting for the first time. After years and
years of the government of discrimination and oppression, you could now
vote.

Now that you voted in 1994, you will understand that there were millions
and millions of people who needed water. A million others needed identity
documents. We were the ones who could not vote. We were the ones who were
not allowed to live and attend schools where we wanted to and do maths. You
and I used to do noun groups by reciting them according to their prefixes.
How can you forget so quickly? [Applause.] How can you forget so quickly?
The President asked us to do things in a different way to before,
Chairperson. The issue of bringing Parliament to the people ...]

... means we are doing things differently because, for the first time since
1994, the people of South Africa can interact with the Ministers and
Members of Parliament. What a good thing!

In the Free State, President, our manifesto said we must create decent
jobs. Within four months during our administration, we ensured that 1 069
temporary teachers became permanent. Today they are permanent. [Applause.]
When we took over, you said we must create decent jobs. In our hospitals
and government buildings where we had security companies, we have made sure
that those security officers and some of the police reservists are well
trained. We have terminated contracts of security companies because those
people must be permanent so that they can have decent jobs. [Applause.]
In terms of education, I have documents which I will give to the Chair of
the NCOP and the President. These documents reflect that 3 099 students
have been taken to schools and universities through our bursaries as a
provincial government. [Applause.] Since Motheo District Municipality is
the biggest, it has 1 228 learners; Thabo Mofutsanyana has 563;
Lejweleputswa has 631; Fezile Dabi has 410; and the Xhariep District
Municipality has 208.

I have just checked how many people from Qwaqwa are our bursary holders. In
terms of this report - their names, identity documents and telephone
numbers are here – 239 people from Phuthaditjhaba, Maluti-A-Phofung Local
Municipality, have bursaries from the provincial government. [Applause.] I
also tried to check whether our bursaries are only received by black
people. No, that is not the case because in 1955 in die Vryheidsmanifes het
ons gesê dat Suid-Afrika aan almal behoort – wit en swart [... in the
Freedom Charter we stated that South Africa belongs to everyone – white and
black].

Lengolong la tokoloho ka 1955 re ile ra re Afrika Borwa ke ya rona kaofela.
Ha ke bala mabitso hona jwale tokomaneng ena ke fumana boVan Zyl, Naude,
Botes, Blignaut, Viljoen, Oorkamp, Koornhof le Sinclair. Ba bangata feela
ho etsa bonnete ba hore ha re aha Afrika Borwa ho ya pele, le ka 1996 ...
(Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[In the 1955 Freedom Charter we said that South Africa belongs to all those
who live in it. When I read out the names now in this document I find
people such as Van Zyl, Naude, Botes, Blignaut, Viljoen, Oorkamp, Koornhof
and Sinclair. There are so many of them because we wanted to make sure that
when we built South Africa going forward, even in 1996 ...]

... ons het ook in die Grondwet van Suid-Afrika gesê dat Suid-Afrika aan
almal behoort - wit en swart. [... we also stated in the Constitution of
South Africa that South Africa belongs to everyone – white and black.]

Ke kahoo re tla yang pele re tsamaya mmoho le setjhaba sa Afrika Borwa. Ke
kahoo selemong sena se fetileng sa 2010 re butseng dikolo tse 12 tse ntjha
tseo bana ba rona ba ka ithutang ho tsona. Ke a kgolwa Ditho tsa rona di di
bone. Mona Qwaqwa feela ... (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[That is why we will move forward together as the nation of South Africa.
That is why last year, 2010, we opened 12 new schools, schools where our
children learn. I’m sure that our members saw them. Here in Qwaqwa ...]

... we have 20 students’ who are studying medicine - 20, at different
universities. [Applause.] In the whole of the Free State, we have given 108
medical students bursaries, and we are going to give them bursaries for the
next six years. We will do this because we have identified and we know that
there are no doctors. You can’t blame us for not having doctors as a
province. You must blame apartheid because it denied black people the
opportunity to study mathematics and science. Therefore when you want to
blame us you must understand where we come from.

Consciously and deliberately, we are investing in human resource
development as a country. We have built farm schools. You can go to
Manthatisi here in Qwaqwa and you will find rural kids at that school. We
have given, as I have said, bursaries to blacks and whites.

In terms of health, no one can deny that we have challenges. People must
not make as if we are denying that there are challenges in health. However,
I have said you must look at our history; you must flash back. In the past
these hospitals were only meant for white people and there were very few.
Today we have free medical access, and many of our people have access to
these facilities.

Yes, there might not be medicine available tomorrow. The reason for that is
that the numbers have increased and these numbers were denied this access
in the past. So understand where we come from so that you will understand
how we must build the future as we move forward.

People must understand that in the past they could criticise us. However,
let the truth be told. You can go to our various municipalities where you
want us to appoint people on merit. We agree that that is what we should do
because the Freedom Charter demands that we do that. However, go there and
see how many white people were employed there in the past without
qualifications. [Applause.] The truth must be told. We are compiling that
report and we know.

That is why in our municipalities – you can go to Moqhaka Local
Municipality, Ngwathe Local Municipality and various provincial departments
– we have employed black and white chartered accountants. There are many
black chartered accountants who are prepared to come and work for
government. I think we must congratulate them.

Moving forward, and if we work together, we can do more. We can tell you
about qualifications because when something is black, people criticise it.
I think the qualifications, competency and merit of our heads of department
must be known.

We have revitalised and are still busy revitalising our townships. That is
why in the next financial year we have decided to put aside R300 million
just for township roads so that we move forward as a province. Moving
forward, in terms of local government, I think we agree that there are
challenges.
I was saying to the people here that to be a councillor is not like being a
Member of Parliament or a premier because a councillor is there on the
ground. When people want water, water is there on the ground. When people
want better services, these services are there on the ground. If people are
not paying for their services they can’t get better services because the
province collects money and sends it to the local government. That is why
we need to work together.

I agree with the President and everybody that there are many good
councillors. There might be a few ...

... hobane ho thwe tapole e le nngwe e bodisa tse ngata, empa re se ke ra
akaretsa. Re etse bonnete ba hore re sebetsa mmoho. Ke kahoo ke batlang
hore ... [... because it is said that one potato can spoil the whole bag,
but we must not generalise. We must make sure that we work together. That
is why I want ...]

Hon Watson says, “The government has failed dismally.”

Ho tjho ntate Watson. Bomasepala ba rona ha ba a atleha. Empa bomasepala ba
rona ha ba tshwane le ba nako e fetileng bao e neng e le ba makgowa feela.
Ba ne ba isa ditshebeletso ho batho ba mmalwa feela. Metseng ya rona le
kajeno re ntse re hloka mabone. Dintho tseo kaofela ke tseo re tlamehileng
re di lwantshe ho ya pele.

Ke batla hore ka mantswe ana, re utlwile dillo tsa baahi mme re se re nkile
dikgato. Re se re dumellane le ba tsa bophelo bo botle hore re tla aha
ditliniki tsane tse Bolata re sebedisana mmoho le setjhaba. E re ke re ho
Ditho kaofela ... (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[So says hon Watson. Our municipalities did not succeed. But our
municipalities are not the same as the previous ones who were serving
whites only. They provided services only to the few. Even today in our
communities we still need electricity. We must fight all of those things in
order to move forward.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we heard the cries of the citizens
and so we took a step. We made an agreement with the Department of Health
that we will build those clinics in Bolata, working together with the
community. Allow me to say to all the members ...]

... Geseënde Kersfees en ’n voorspoedige Nuwejaar. Ke a leboha. [... Merry
Christmas and a prosperous New Year. Thank you.][Time expired.][Applause.]]


The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Please sit down and listen! The President is
responding.
The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Thank you, Chairperson of the NCOP, once
again for the opportunity to say something in response to the debate. Thank
you very much for a very good debate by the members of the NCOP, the
premiers, and members who represented their own premiers. I think, as
usual, it has been a very lively debate. Of course, at times people miss
the opportunity by focusing in a different way in the debate on the matters
that affect the citizens of this country.

I am referring to a statement that was made by an hon member here, and the
statement was that the government had failed dismally. I don’t know. Unless
I don’t understand English, I don’t know what that means. It is an
exaggeration. It is actually aimed at making propaganda, because it is not
true. It cannot be true. Government is functioning very well. There are
challenges, and I think the statement should capture the fact that there
are challenges. I have always said to the opposition that they should be an
opposition in a constructive fashion, that they should help the government
to do the work in the country, and that they should identify the specific
areas they believe need to be identified as weaknesses.

These sweeping statements are very nice to make. You can make them at any
time and say that generally people are corrupt and that generally the
government has failed and is dysfunctional. I mean, it says nothing. This
is what educated people talk about, “full of sound and fury, signifying
nothing”. That is because it says nothing. [Applause.] I think the debate
must help us to understand what the shortcomings are, so that we can deal
with them. Of course, that is how the debate becomes lively.

I must also come back to the point of corruption, because I think, again,
the approach to corruption at times does not help us. For example, before
1994 there was no talk of corruption, and corruption was something that
touched the core of government then. In fact, if you talked about
corruption before 1994, you were likely to be the one who went to prison.
[Applause.] There was a lid on it; nobody could talk about it. What this
government did when we came into power – because we knew this was a problem
– was to say that we would fight corruption, and we would expose
corruption. We took the lid away, and the struggle against corruption only
started after 1994 in this country, not before. It is this government that
has said that it will fight corruption until it is eradicated, and we are
fighting it. People have lost jobs, some have gone to prison, and some have
had to pay back the money. It is important to acknowledge that, because if
you just keep on saying that this government is corrupt, without
recognising that, you then ensure that we don’t listen very carefully to
what you say.

Thank you, premiers, for the contribution you have made. I think generally
you have indicated that provinces are working and there are programmes that
you enumerated here. That is pleasing. Premier Ace, you said a number of
things, but one of the things that I believe we need to take lessons from
is how you have solved the problem of part-time teachers. I think we must
all learn from what you have done. I just don’t know what the formula is.
[Applause.] It is one thing, among the many things you have said, that we
must take away.

Hon members, I will not refer to each and every person who spoke here,
because that could take long. I am mindful of the fact that the presiding
officers said that we should limit the time because people have to travel.
Therefore, I will just say a few things which I believe are important.

We have made the call that we must work differently. We must do things
differently, and it is important that we adhere to that. Governments
historically do things in a particular way, and this is what I think we
must change. Usually, the wheels of government turn very slowly. It walks
very slowly, and we are saying that it must change. There is something in
government that just makes people do things very slowly. I am saying that
it must change, because it causes unnecessary blockages and delays and,
therefore, it slows down delivery. It creates an impression about
government. What you should realise is that when a person has been a public
servant in the corridors of the government buildings, when they walk, they
walk very slowly to take a document from one point to another. The same
person, if he is employed by the private sector, will walk very fast in the
corridors of the private sector buildings. There is something wrong that we
need to correct, and I think we have an opportunity to correct it. We must
do things differently. I agree with those who have made those points. I
think the majority of the speakers have said that we should work as one
government. That is true. Let us work as one government. We are not many
governments in one country.

We can’t make people suffer because they belong to the government of either
the Free State or Gauteng, as if they are not our people. I think the
manner in which, politically, we described the situation of the three
spheres of government could not explain it appropriately. Therefore, people
believed they lived in other countries. It is one country.

I am also aware of the challenges that we face. At times we make an unfair
comparison, because the government in the past – the one I say we said
nothing about – governed a minority of people in this country. Other people
were not party to it. They were outside. They were given their places, such
as homelands. So, you had a very small government in terms of how modern
governments are structured. We now have a government that governs the
entire population of this country in the same way. It is a big challenge,
with backlogs that are critical in every respect. I think we should also
appreciate that as we move forward.

We have said, in this administration, that there are areas we need to focus
on, and I want to touch on these areas, because I think it is important to
have the same frame of mind. We have five priorities, and all of them are
meant to address the challenges of our country. They affect all citizens.
Education is one, and we have done a lot of work in planning how to tackle
education.

There is a 10-point plan for us to tackle education. Because education is
so important, it is one of the portfolios that we separated into two –
Basic Education and Higher Education and Training. The reason for this was
that the bigger department tended to make all of us focus on higher
education in the main. We did not focus on basic education, and yet
anything that has life has to be attended to at the beginning – the
foundation.

We therefore ended up with the problem, for example, of continuous bad
results for matric. We thought that it was important to focus on this, so
that we are able to produce young people who will do things differently in
education, because even with those who pass, a good percentage do not
qualify for tertiary education. They pass without exemption. We need to
remedy that.

This is a matter that all of us need to appreciate. If we talk about nation-
building, education is one of the critical building blocks. Therefore, it
should be government and the nation as a whole that affect, in the main,
those who deal with education. There must be that understanding that if you
don’t pay attention to education, you are actually failing to pay attention
to the development of the country. With education we can solve the poverty
problem in all its facets. So, we have identified it as a critical point. I
am happy now because it’s not just a dream.

I have just come from South Korea, a country that was poverty-stricken and
living on donations. What it did was focus on education, and it has
defeated poverty. It is now a donor country, helping others who are still
trapped in poverty. They have many universities - not a few, many. So,
building universities is not a waste; it is in fact the creation of a
foundation for education. I am saying this fully aware that two of our
provinces do not have even a single university. This is a terrible
statement against us. We must correct that.

We also put health as another high-level priority. Again, a lot of work has
been done to plan how to turn health around, because any nation needs
health. If you visit countries that have succeeded in delivering on health,
you will realise they have developed. To us it is even more important
because we are dealing with a huge population that was disadvantaged for
decades, if not centuries. So, it is one of the priorities.

We also prioritised rural development. I was very happy that many of the
provinces said that they have programmes that deal with rural development.
Fortunately, the Minister dealing with this is doing a lot of work to try
and do things differently at that level. I believe that very soon we will
hear what is happening.

We also said that, as a priority, we are going to fight crime. I think that
there is evidence that we are fighting crime very seriously.

What we then said was that we must create jobs. That is a priority that I
believe we need to put all our efforts into. I think we have done a lot of
work on others. The creation of jobs we need to work together on, almost as
if it’s the only priority. If we solve the question of jobs we almost halve
the problems. Everybody must be employed. That directly addresses the
poverty.

We need to be innovative, so that we don’t say other people can’t work
because they don’t have skills, unless you qualify the types of skills that
you are talking about. Everyone can work; let us create the jobs that
relate to what those people can do. This is an issue that I believe, from
next year, must be the critical thing for all of us - in all departments,
in the provinces, as well as in the municipalities. We must determine what
jobs we can create.

I was speaking to someone just yesterday, to those who can count money, big
money. I can only count up to thousands. Some can count up to millions;
some tell me about Bs; some tell me about Ts. I can’t count that much. I
have never seen a trillion in my life, or even a billion. [Applause.] I was
saying to them, because we are told that the rand is too strong and there
is money coming here, let us change that disadvantage into an advantage.
Let us put that money where the challenges are, so that by the time the
problems go away the money has been invested. I think we can do more if we
work together.

Chairperson, I am sure that we have taken time to debate the input, and I
think I can’t, once again, introduce the debate. I think that we have
debated enough. Mine is to thank you and thank the hon members for debating
my input in the manner in which they have done. I am sure that this will go
a long way as regards the debate today, but you have been here interacting
with the community. I am sure that the community is very pleased to see
Parliament here, and to be able to interact with it. You must continue to
do so; it is a good thing. [Applause.]

Ke a leboga, bagaetsho. [Thank you.]

Challenges are big; we need to stand together, both men and women. Not just
men and women in the general sense.

Bomme ba nnete, a ba sware thipa ka bogaleng; le bontate ba nnete,
dikwankwetla, bao ba nago le maatla, bao ba kgonago go šoma ka maatla. [I
mean real women who can deal with challenges and overcome them; real men
who are strong and powerful; men who are committed to their work.]

We still have a challenge to fulfil or to achieve what this province said
to us in 1912, what we must do to change the quality of the lives of our
people. We need to work harder, all of us. If we work together, we
certainly can do more. [Applause.] Thank you.

Ke a leboga. [Thank you.]

Debate concluded.

MODULASETULO WA NCOP: A re tšeeng madulo a rena. Le seke la tšwa, dulang
fase, ga re a fetša. Ke a tseba gore le lapile e bile le mmerekong. Ke tlo
dira ka mokgwa wo, ke tla dira ditsebišo.

Ga bjale, ge ke fetša go tswalela Ngwako wo, le dule fase le seke la
tšhikinyega. Mopresidente wa naga, Tonakgolo le nna, re tla ya mola. Ka
Labone ge re boledišana le bao ba sa itekanelago, ke ile ka kgopela
Tonakgolo gore re ka dira gore re ba thušenyana ka se sengwe. Ba kgonne go
re humanela ditulo tša mabili tše 20. [Legoswi.]

Re tla fa ba babedi fela gore re seketše nako, tše dingwe Mme Ntombela o
tla šala a di fa ba bangwe. Go na le ba babedi gona bjale ka mo Ngwakong,
tše dingwe ba tla ba fa ge ba šetše ba sepela.
Taba ya bobedi, bao ba ba namelago dinamelwa tša bona kua O R Tambo, ke
kgopela gore le seke la ya dijong tša mosegare. Dinamelwa tša lena di le
emetše mola diofising tša selete. Ge le tloga fa, itlhaganeleng gona gore
di seke tša le tlogela, le kgone go humana difofane tša lena kua O R Tambo.
Re tla kgopela bjalo. Bao ba ikotlellago ba ka ya dijong tša mosegare.

Ke rile le dule fase. Ge re fetša mo le Mopresidente, a šetše a tšwile,
kamoka ga lena le ka emelela la tšwa. Ga bjale dulang fase hle go fihla ge
Ngwako o fetša.

Ke tla kgopela Mopresidente le Tonakgolo gore ba ye go phethagatša mošomo.

Bašomedi ba peleng, Maluti Bus Service, ba tla hwetša tšheke ya dimilione
tše R11 go tšwa go Mopresidente. Re a ba lebogiša. Re leboga ka maatla.
(Translation of Sepedi speech follows.)

[The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Let us all take our seats. Please do not go
out because we are not done yet. I know that you have been working and as a
result you are tired.

I have announcements to make and I therefore request that you remain seated
when the House adjourns. The President of the Republic, the Minister and I
will go to that side. When we were talking to the people who are physically
challenged on Thursday I suggested to the Minister that we do something to
help them. There are 20 wheelchairs here that are to be given to them.
[Applause.]

We will give only two wheelchairs to two people who are now present in the
House. Hon Ntombela will issue the rest of the wheelchairs to the others
when they leave.

People who are to catch a flight at O R Tambo International Airport will
have to miss their lunch because their transport is waiting for them at the
district offices. Please make sure you don’t miss the transport because
that will lead to you missing your flight as well. Only those people who
are using their own transport can remain for lunch.

Please remain seated. When the House adjourns we will allow the President
to leave first and then the rest of the members will be allowed to leave.

I will request the President and the Minister to fulfil the task.

The previous service provider, Maluti Bus Services, will receive a cheque
of R11 million from the President. We congratulate them. Thank you very
much.]

The Council adjourned at 13:44.
                                 __________
                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         WEDNESDAY, 17 NOVEMBER 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces


The Chairperson


1.    Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
    respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)    Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 17 November 2010:


        (a)      Adjustments Appropriation Bill [B 34 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 77).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on
             Appropriations of the National Council of Provinces.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

Report of the Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests on the
Auditor-General’s report on the alleged non-disclosure of members’
interests:

The Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests, co-chaired by Mr L T
Landers and Mr B L Mashile, met on 19 August 2010 to consider the report of
the Auditor-General on the alleged non-disclosure of interests by members
of Parliament.

Attendance
National Assembly
Kohler-Barnard, D
Luyenge, Z
Mangena, M S
Ngcobo, B T
Nhlengethwa, D G
Van der Merwe, J H

National Council of Provinces
Mabe, B P
Magadla, N W
Moshodi, M L
Rantho, D Z

Apologies
Bekker, J M
Dreyer, A
Radebe, B A

The Auditor-General’s annual audit of Parliament for 2009-10 included a
full audit of the 2009 Register of Members’ Interests, focusing on the
accuracy of disclosures by members of Parliament in respect of their
interests in companies or close corporations. Members’ disclosure of
interests in 2009 was tested against the Company and Intellectual Property
Rights Organisation (Cipro) database.

Upon examining the Auditor-General’s findings, the Registrar determined
that 31 members had not complied with the requirements of the Code of
Conduct. After consultation with the co-chairpersons, the procedure used
for the investigation of complaints in respect of non-disclosures was
followed. This approach is consistent with previous practice when the
Auditor-General found that members had not fully disclosed their interests.

On 20 July 2010, correspondence was sent to each member who had been
identified with a request that they respond to the allegation that their
disclosures for 2009 were not complete. Each member responded to the
allegation, the details of which are set out below.

After consideration of the explanations received, the Committee agreed that
in most cases the companies in question are dormant or never operated. Some
members indicated that their omission had been an oversight. They had
previously disclosed the interests and therefore there was no intent
wilfully to mislead the Committee.

In its consideration of the matter, the Committee also noted that the
disclosures that had been audited were the first of the 4th Parliament and
the majority of members were newly elected.

The Committee further noted that in most instances the companies are
dormant and members had not received any benefit from the company or
companies concerned.
The Committee acknowledged that it has the mandate to assist members with
compliance with the requirements of the Code of Conduct and that there
should be ongoing briefings to ensure that members are properly informed.

The Committee reiterated, however, that the onus for full disclosure rests
upon members. It agreed that members of Parliament are expected to comply
fully with the requirements of the Code.

All members, with the exception of Mr Van der Merwe, agreed that the non-
disclosure of interests is a breach of the Code of Conduct, even if the
companies are dormant or if the non-disclosure had been an omission.

The Committee therefore recommends the following penalties. All members who
have been found guilty of breaching the Code must -

(a)   attend a compulsory briefing on the requirements of the Code of
Conduct;
(b)   be informed in writing that the non-disclosure of interests is
considered seriously;
(c)   correct their existing records in their 2010 disclosure; and
(d)   issued a warning that any future non-disclosure could result in the
maximum penalty.

Mr Van der Merwe was of the view that as there had been no wilful breach,
members should only be required to correct their disclosures.

The Committee is aware that in some cases members did not disclose more
than one company and though it may appear that the Committee has been
lenient in the penalty imposed, it wanted to be consistent in its approach
to all members and issue a uniform penalty to all who have not disclosed.

1. BHENGU NR
Company information
62 ARUBA, registration 1998/041240/23,

Member’s response
The member tried to contact the other directors, but they too indicated
that they have no knowledge of this company. The company has had no
business dealings. The member indicated that she is in the process of
checking with Cipro whether the registration was wrongful. To date the
member has not been able to provide further information. She is in the
process of resigning from the company.

Finding
Breach - cited as a member by Cipro. The member could not provide
additional information to show that the company had been registered without
her authorisation.

2. BLAAI, BC
Company information
SIYATHEMBANA TRADING 166, 2008/008778/07,

Member’s response
The member responded that the exclusion had been an omission and that no
benefits had been received. The member apologised for the oversight.
Finding
Breach - the member conceded that she had not disclosed.

3. BOROTO, M G
Company information
THEMBISILE TRANSPORT SERVICES, 2004/051764/23,

Member’s response
The company never operated. The member was not aware that the company was
registered. However, the member apologised for the non-disclosure.

Finding
Breach - the member had not complied with the requirements of the Code of
Conduct for members of Parliament.

4. CHAUKE, H P
Company information
IKAMVA LETHU MKHONTO INVESTMENTS, 2008/012108/07,
PEOYARONA HOLDINGS, 2008/024876/07,
CAMEL ROCK TRADING 443, 2008/080286/23,
IMVUSA TRADING 2155, 2009/025821/23,
GOT THE EDGE 2, 2002/008570/23,
SIZISA UKHANYO TRADING, 2004/083348/23,
ABAPHUMEMELE, 2005/007898/23,

Member’s response
The member indicated that the companies are dormant and he had received no
benefit from them. He said that the non-disclosure was an omission.

Finding
Breach - the member conceded that he had not disclosed. The committee noted
that seven companies had not been disclosed.

5. DUMA, N M
Company information
SEKADUMA CONSTRUCTION, 2004/041736/23,

Member’s response
The company is dormant. It was an omission, as it had been disclosed
previously.

Finding
Breach – the member conceded that he had not disclosed.

6. GOLOLO, C L
Company information
KGA KUNA MATATA TRADING, 2008/009917/23
SUNSHINE DUNES TRADING, 2003/003584/23,
SAMKEDZE TRADING ENTERPRISE, 2008/155839/23

Member’s response
The companies were dormant and never operated. No benefits were received.
The member apologised for the omission.

Finding
Breach – the member conceded that he had not disclosed.

7. HOLOMISA, S P
Company information
KWA TSHEZI LODGE, 2000/028550/07,

Member’s response
This company name has changed and member was informed that he was no longer
a director. Following up to see why this was not affected.

Finding
Breach - it is the member’s responsibility to ensure the correctness of his
disclosure.

8. KOMPHELA, B M
Company information
MATSAPA TRADING 618, 2008/166309/23,

Member’s response
The member said that he had updated his disclosure on 5 September 2008.
However, the information had not been included in the 2009 disclosure.

Finding
Breach – the member did not disclose.

9. KOPANE, S P
Company information
DELA CASA TRADING 550, 2008/014235/23,
KHATHOLOHA BED AND BREAKFAST, 2008/019104/23,

Member’s response
The companies are dormant and never operated.

Finding
Breach – the member did not disclose.

10. KRUMBOCK, G R
Company information
RUPERSASH SURVEYS, 1997/041207/23,

Member’s response
The company is dormant. This was an oversight, as the company had been
disclosed in previous years.

Finding
Breach – the member did not disclose.

11. LUCAS, E J
Company information
JABULANI SPARES, 1992/015723/23,
JIL BUSINESS CONSULTANCIES, 1998/024076/23,
VUSANI MINING RESOURCES, 2005/099750/23,
CORPCLO 2210, 2004/044237/23,
INKULULEKO INVESTMENTS, 1999/019975/07,
INKULULEKO LEISURES, 2000/016649/07,
INKULULEKO OFFICE AUTOMATION, 2000/009478/07,
UNGOYE INVESTMENTS, 2005/004425/07,
LANDA PETROLEUM, 2008/005772/07,

Member’s response
The member apologised for the omission. He said that he was rationalising
his representations to the companies at present. The Committee noted that
nine companies had not been disclosed.

Finding
Breach – the member did not disclose.

12. LUTHULI, A M
Company information
ALBERLITO HOSPITAL PROPERTIES, 2004/023093/07,
ALBERLITO HOSPITAL, 2006/005938/07,

Member’s response
The member, as alternate director, received no remuneration. She has
resigned and the resignation has been accepted.

Finding
Breach – the member did not disclose.

13. MABIJA, L
Company information
TATAMASASE TRADING CENTRE, 2008/025680/07,
Member’s response
The Cipro document indicated that the member was appointed on 20 October
2010, i.e. after the date of disclosure.

Finding
No breach - the member was appointed on 20 October 2009, after the date of
disclosure.

14. MGABADELI, H C
Company information
VPZ CONSULTING, 2004/034742/23,

Member’s response
The company is dormant and never operated.

Finding
Breach – the member did not disclose.

15. MNGUNI, P B
Company information
ZIYAWA BUSINESS ENTERPRISE, 2003/006038/23,

Member’s response
The company never operated and the member has no contact with other
directors.

Finding
Breach – the member did not disclose.

17. MOKGORO, G G
Company information
MAJESTIC SILVER TRADING 40, 2005/003527/07,

Member’s response
The member represents the interests of the Kuruman community in this
company and does not receive any remuneration.

Finding
Breach – the member did not disclose.

18. MOSS, L N
Company information
SIYATHEMBANI PROPERTY AND EQUITY INVESTMENTS, 2008/002784/07,

Member’s response
At the time of disclosure, the member was not aware that the registration
of the company had been finalised.

Finding
Breach – the member did not disclose.

19. MSIMANG, C T
Company information
NASOU VIA AFRIKA, 1996/012379/07,
TOWER CITY TRADING 263, 2003/053113/23,
VIA AFRIKA INTERNATIONAL, 2006/023443/07,
FUNDA NJALO TRAINING, 2007/056778/23,
THABIZOLO PROMOTIONS, 2008/121362/23,

Member’s response
NEG is a holding company of which Nasou via Africa and Via Africa are
subsidiaries. NEG was disclosed. Funda Njalo is an NGO. Tower City only
started operating in 2010. Thabazolo Promotions is dormant.

Finding
Breach in respect of Tower City Trading and Thabazolo Promotions, as they
were not disclosed. The member is also in breach in respect of Funda Njalo,
as it is registered as a close corporation and should therefore be
disclosed.

20. MSWELI, H S
Company information
SIGAWULA CATERERS AND EVENTS MANAGEMENT, 2005/019097/23,

Member’s response
The member did not realise that she was expected to disclose as the company
is dormant.

Finding
Breach – the member conceded that she did not disclose.

21. NDABANDABA, G
Company information
LOZANO PROPERTY INVESTMENTS, 1988/014254/23,

Member’s response
The company is dormant. The member was not aware that the company still
exists.

Finding
Breach - the member did not disclose.

22. NTAPANE, Z S
Company information
SEE BEYOND TRADING, 2004/062859/23,

Member’s response
The company is dormant and should have been deregistered. The member will
deregister the company.

Finding
Breach - the member did not disclose.

23. NZIMANDE, P M
Company information
EYETHU SONKE DRIVERS TRAINING, 2001/051404/23,
Member’s response
The company is dormant and should have been deregistered. The member will
follow it up with Cipro.

Finding
Breach  - the member did not disclose.

24. NYANDA, F N
Company information
THANDA VIVI CONSTRUCTION, 2002/017235/23,

Member’s response
The company is dormant and the member received no benefit.

Finding
Breach  - the member did not disclose.

25. RASMENI, R N
Company information
BUNU SISTERS TRADING AND PROJECTS, 2007/141468/23,

Member’s response
The non-disclosure was an omission.

Finding
Breach - the member did not disclose.
26. RWEXANA, S P
Company information
AFRICAN WOMEN CO-ORDINATED INVESTMENTS, 2003/012102/07,
UNCEDO LWAMAKHOSIKAZI TRADING, 2007/183297/23,
ABAPHUMELELI TRADING, 2005/105361/23,
AFRICAN WOMEN COORDINATED INVESTMENTS, 2003/012102/07,

Member’s response
The companies are dormant and did not operate.

Finding
Breach - the member did not disclose.

27. SCHAFER, D A
Company information
MTS INSOLVENCY ADMINISTRATORS, 2009/028139/23,

Member’s response
The non-disclosure was an omission. The member is not sure if the
registration had been finalised at the time of disclosure.

Finding
Breach - the member did not disclose.

28. SIBANYONI, J B
Company information
MALUJU CIVIL ENGINEERING, 2004/054333/23,

Member’s response
The company is dormant and never operated.

Finding
Breach  - the member did not disclose.

29. SIZANI, P S
Company information
WOODY CAPE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION, 1998/042298/23,
EAGLE SKILLS DEVELOPMENT AGENCY, 2003/104395/23,
STONE SIZANI CONSULTING, 2004/063102/23,
PURPLE MOSS DEVELOPMENTS, 2007/151336/23,
BUYISIKAMVA HARDWARE SOULTIONS, 2005/053332/23,
MENTACOR TRADING, 2002/011739/23,
EXCEL INDUSTRIES SOUTH AFRICA, 2004/092613/23,

Member’s response
The member had asked a private company to do a search of all interests
registered at Cipro and that information was submitted. However, the
company did not do a check of close corporations and therefore they had not
been included in the member’s submission. There was no intention to mislead
the Committee.

Finding
Breach – the member did not disclose as required. The Committee noted that
seven companies had not been disclosed.

30. THOMPSON, B
Company information
LION'S HEAD TRANSPORT SERVICES, 2006/144197/23,

Member’s response
The company is dormant.

Finding
Breach - the member did not disclose.

31. TSHWETE, P
Company information
UNCEDO LWAMAKHOSIKAZI TRADING, 2007/183297/23,
MELODY HILLS TRADING 196, 2008/228305/23,
THUTHUKANI WOMEN INVESTMENT, 2008/231725/23,
NKONKA ENERGY RESOURCES, 2009/018728/07,

Member’s response
The companies are dormant, but their non-disclosure was an omission.

Finding
Breach – the member did not disclose.

32. ZULU, M M
Company information
BANELE INVESTMENTS, 2004/067671/23,

Member’s response
The member is in the process of resigning.

Finding
Breach - the member did not disclose.



_Signed_
_Signed_
LT Landers                                   BL Mashile
Report to be considered.

National Council of Provinces

   1. The Report of the Select Committee  on  Economic  Development  on  the
      Amendments to Articles VI and XIV.A of the International Atomic Energy
      Agency Statute, dated 16 November 2010:
      The Select Committee on Economic Development,  having  considered  the
      request for the ratification of the Amendments proposed to Articles VI
      and XIV.A of the International Atomic Energy  Agency  (IAEA)  Statute,
      referred to it, recommends that  the  Council,  in  terms  of  section
      231(2) of the Constitution, approve the said Agreement.


      Report to be considered

                         THURSDAY, 18 NOVEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

     1) Bills passed by National Assembly on 18 November 2010:
          a) South African Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 17D – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Births and Deaths Registration Amendment Bill [B 18D – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Rport and Financial Statements of the Road Traffic Management
        Corporation for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 255-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the International Air
        Services Council (IASC) for 2009-2010.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Air Service Licensing
        Council (IASC) for 2009-2010.


National Council of Provinces

   1. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
      Development on the Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill [B16D-
      2010] (National Assembly – sec 76), dated 17 November 2010:

      The Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,
      having considered the Civilian Secretariat  for  Police  Service  Bill
      [B16B-2010] (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it, reports that
      it has agreed to the Bill with amendments [B 16C – 2010],  and  tables
      Bill 16D-2010 for consideration.


      Report to be considered.

2. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
   Development on the Independent Police Investigative Directorate Bill
   [B15D-2010], (National Assembly – sec 76), dated 17 November 2010:

   The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Development,  having
   considered the Independent Police Investigative Directorate  Bill  [B15B-
   2010] (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it, reports that  it  has
   agreed to the Bill with amendments [B 15C – 2010], and tables  Bill  16D-
   2010 for consideration.


   Report to be considered.

3. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
   Development on the Regulation of Interception of Communications and
   Provision of Communication-related Information Amendment Bill [B 38 –
   2010] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 17 November 2010:

   The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Development,  having
   considered the Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision
   of  Communication-related  Information  Amendment  Bill  [B  38  –  2010]
   (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, reports that it has  agreed
   to the Bill without amendments.


   Report to be considered.


4. Report of the Select  Committee  on  Appropriations  on  the  Adjustments
   Appropriation Bill [B34-2010] (National Assembly- section 77),  dated  17
   November 2010.

   The Select Committee on Appropriations, having considered the  Adjustment
   Appropriation Bill [B 34 – 2010], referred to it, and classified  by  the
   JTM as section 77 Bill, reports the Bill without amendments.


   Report to be considered.

5. Report of the Select Committee on Appropriations on the 2010 Medium  Term
   Budget Policy Statement, dated 16 November 2010

   The Select Committee on Appropriations, having considered the 2010 Medium
   Term  Budget  Policy  Statement  and  heard  comments   from   identified
   stakeholders, reports as follows:

1. Introduction

The Minister of Finance tabled  the  Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement
(henceforth referred to as the MTBPS) on  27  October  2010,  outlining  the
budget priorities of government for the medium  term  estimates.  The  MTBPS
(spending  issues  portion)  was  referred  to  the  Select   Committee   on
Appropriations (the Committee) to consider and  report  in  accordance  with
their  respective  mandates  as  outlined  in  the  Money  Bills   Amendment
Procedure and Related Matters Act No 9 of 2009 (henceforth  referred  to  as
the Act). Among its responsibilities, as per Section 6 (8) of  the  Act,  in
respect of the MTBPS, the Committee is required to consider  and  report  on
the following issues:

 • The spending priorities of national for the next three years;
 • The proposed division of revenue between the spheres  of  government  and
   between arms of government within a sphere for the next three years; and
 • The proposed substantial adjustments to conditional grants  to  provinces
   and local government, if any.

2. Medium Term Spending Priorities

Government prioritises its resources in the following areas:
    • job creation initiatives and realigning support to business to enhance
      employment opportunities;
    • enhancing the quality of education and skills development;
    • improving the provision of quality health care;
    • driving a more comprehensive rural development strategy; and
    • intensifying the fight against crime and corruption.

The MTBPS reflects public service delivery commitments  as  informed  by  an
agreed set of development and  transformation  goals.  In  making  strategic
choices over the  medium  term,  will  focus  on  these  outcomes  with  the
greatest potential impact on economic growth and  development.  The  overall
increase over the medium  term  period  is  R7.3  billion  for  the  2010/11
financial year and R67 billion over the following three years.

3. Budget Estimates for the 2010/11 Mid-Year

Table  1  (below)  summarises  budget  estimates  for   three   spheres   of
government.
Table 1: Adjusted Budget Allocations
|                    |Column A    |Column B        |Column C     |
|Sphere of Government|            |                |             |
|                    |2010/11     |2010/11         |Amount       |
|                    |allocation  |adjustments     |adjusted     |
|                    |            |                |             |
|                    |R’000       |R’000           |R’000        |
|National            |527 001 492 |519 980 624     |- 7 020 868  |
|Provincial          |260 973 745 |265 139 448     |    4 165 703|
|Local               |30 167 706  |30 558 566      |      390 860|
|Total               |818 142 943 |815 678 638     |- 2 464 305  |


Source: National Treasury (2010)

The total allocations to national departments  decreased  by  R7.0  billion,
allocation to provinces increased by R4.2 billion and allocations  to  local
government increased by R0.4billion. In effect  the  general  decrease  will
not impact on provincial  and  local  spheres  of  government  like  on  the
national sphere of government where allocations were reduced.  It  is  clear
the reduced allocations are due to shortfall in expected revenue.  In  terms
of section 6(1) of the Division of Revenue Act (henceforth  referred  to  as
DoRA), if actual revenue raised nationally in respect of the financial  year
falls short of the anticipated revenue set out in Schedule 1,  the  national
government bears the shortfall and in terms of section 6(2) of the  DoRA  if
actual revenue raised nationally in respect of the  financial  year  exceeds
the anticipated revenue set out in Schedule 1, the  excess  accrues  to  the
national government, subject to subsection (3).

With respect to schedule 4 grants (i.e. allocations  made  to  provinces  to
supplement the funding of programmes or  functions  funded  from  provincial
budgets), the Further Education and Training  Colleges  Grant  is  the  only
grant that  received  additional  allocations  during  the  2010  adjustment
period. The Further Education  and  Training  Colleges  Grant  increased  by
R31.297 million from R3.773 billion to R3.804 billion.

The following new allocations  and  amendments  were  noted  in  respect  of
specific purpose grants to provinces:

 • Agricultural Disaster Management Grant – R50.00 million was allocated  to
   the  Western  Cape  Province  for  expenditure  related  to  agricultural
   disasters such as drought. This grant is allocated as the need arises.
 • Provincial Infrastructure Disaster Relief Grant –  R214.398  million  was
   allocated to  KwaZulu-Natal  for  the  rehabilitation  of  infrastructure
   destroyed by flooding. This Grant is allocated as the need arises.
 • Comprehensive HIV and Aids Grant  –  increases  by  R40.00  million  from
   R6.011 757 billion to R6.051 757 billion.
 • Human Settlements Development Grant – increases by a net  amount  of  R15
   million. Gauteng Province receives an additional  allocation  of  R115.00
   million and North West Province’s allocation  is  adjusted  downwards  by
   R100 million.
 • Devolution of Property Rates Fund Grant – increases by  R769.035  million
   from R1.096 192 billion to R1.865 227 billion. This Grant could assist in
   reducing the current debt by government departments to municipalities.

Schedule 6 Grant
The following amendments were noted in respect of  specific  purpose  grants
to municipalities:

 • Water Services Operating Subsidy Grant – increases by R8.399 million from
   R661.704 million to R670.103 million. This Grant subsidises water schemes
   owned and/or operated by the Department of  Water  Affairs  or  by  other
   agencies on behalf of the Department and transfer these schemes to  Local
   Government.
 • Municipal Drought Relief  Grant  –  increases  by  R92.000  million  from
   R228.357 million to R320.357 million. The Grant provides capital  finance
   for  basic  water  supply  in  municipal  infrastructure   for   affected
   households, micro enterprises and social institutions.
Schedule 7 Grant
The following amendments were noted in  respect  of  allocations-in-kind  to
municipalities for designated special programmes:

 • The Integrated  National  Electrification  Programme  (Eskom)  Grant  was
   adjusted downwards by R31.970 million from R1.751 780 billion  to  R1.719
   810 billion during  the  2010  adjustment  period.  This  Grant  provides
   capital subsidies to Eskom to  address  the  electrification  backlog  of
   permanently occupied dwellings, the installation of  bulk  infrastructure
   and rehabilitation of electrification infrastructure.
 • Water Services Operating Subsidy Grant –  increases  by  R13.678  million
   from R145.978 million to R159.656 million. The net additional allocations
   to the Water Services Operating Subsidy Grant amount to  R22.077  million
   (includes R8.399 million as per schedule 6 and  R13.678  million  as  per
   schedule 7) in the 2010/11 financial year.

4. Hearings on the 2010 MTBPS

Hearings on the 2010 MTBPS took place on 02 and 03 November 2010.

The Standing and Select Committees on  Appropriations  jointly  invited  the
following stakeholders: the National Department  of  Cooperative  Governance
and Traditional Affairs, the South  African  Local  Government  Association,
the Financial and Fiscal Commission, the  Human  Sciences  Research  Council
and Peoples Budget Coalition. Furthermore, the University of Free State  and
the Industrial Development Corporation were invited to comment on the  MTBPS
but could not honour the invitation due to certain reasons.

4.1 Financial and Fiscal Commission
The Financial and Fiscal Commission (henceforth  referred  to  as  the  FFC)
highlighted the potential risks to the moderate economic growth  projections
for the South African economy, which include: interruptions  in  the  global
recovery, exchange rate volatility, human resource needs  and  the  proposed
fiscal austerity/consolidation framework over the medium-term.

The FFC submitted that for the South African economy to grow faster, a  more
inclusive economic growth strategy that is multi-faceted in its approach  is
required. The  FFC  advised  that  the  strategy  should  focus  on  poverty
alleviation,  the  labour  absorption   capacity   of   the   economy,   the
productivity of public expenditure (i.e. quality improvements in  access  to
social services),  accelerated  implementation  of  approved  infrastructure
projects; increased spending  on  maintenance  and  rehabilitation  and  the
rooting out of corruption in all sectors of the economy. The  FFC  requested
that more detail be provided in relation to the  economic  policy  direction
of  government  which  frames  the   fiscal   environment   in   which   the
intergovernmental  fiscal  relations  system  must  operate  for   effective
Commission engagement.

The  FFC  raised  concerns  with  respect  to  the  downward  revisions   of
agriculture and health spending over the medium term, particularly in  light
of the fact that these sectors contribute positively to economic growth  and
form part of the 12 identified national priority outcomes

The FFC noted that national government’s share of the  Division  of  Revenue
declines over the 2010/11 Medium Term  Expenditure  Framework,  whereas  the
provincial and local government shares increases over the same  period.  The
FFC commented that the current formula for determining the  local  equitable
share (LES) is unconstitutional in respect of the Revenue-raising  component
(RRC). Furthermore, the FFC cautioned against potential negative effects  on
middle income municipalities resulting from  the  government’s  approach  to
focus on targeted funding for poorer  municipalities  to  the  detriment  of
middle income municipalities.

The FFC submitted that the biggest expenditure challenge in  the  provincial
government is the rising  personnel  spending  compared  to  other  spending
items that lead to  growth  and  development.  With  respect  to  the  local
government sphere, the FFC said that the biggest expenditure challenges  are
the   poor   performance   against    conditional    grants    (particularly
infrastructure) highlighted by rollovers amounting to R1.8  billion  in  the
2010/11 financial year.

With respect  to  proposed  substantial  adjustments  to  conditional  grant
allocations to provinces and local government the FFC noted the following:

 • Education Conditional Grants: Dinaledi schools – Mathematics and  Science
   proficiency are identified as key outcomes, but low  pass  rates  do  not
   augur well for the future;
 • Health Conditional Grants: Comprehensive HIV and Aids Programme  –  There
   is a mismatch between the burden of disease and the population;
 • National Tertiary Services Grant: The health expenditure is dominated  by
   tertiary level hospitals,  therefore  the  next  tier  of  hospitals  are
   negatively affected, therefore the same effort should be directed towards
   primary health care facilities;
 • Eradication of Backlogs in Education an Health  Infrastructure  Grants  –
   The government should reconsider its decision to  discontinue  grants  in
   these areas;
 • Agricultural Grants: Namely, Comprehensive Agriculture Support  Programme
   (CASP), Ilima letsema and Mafisa – The FFC agrees that it makes  economic
   sense  to  merge  these  conditional  grants   into   one   comprehensive
   agriculture finance programme as their impact  individually  is  limited;
   and
 • Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP) Incentive Grant for Infrastructure
   – The FFC noted low level of spending from this grant. The FFC is of  the
   view  that  more  effective  reporting  of  EPWP  projects   will   allow
   municipalities to access this incentive grant.

When the Committee  asked  the  FFC  to  elaborate  what  it  meant  by  the
unconstitutionality of the revenue raising component of the local  equitable
share (LES) formula, the FFC explained that the unconstitutionality  of  the
LES formula refers to the existing practice whereby deductions or  additions
to municipalities’ equitable share are based on  actual  revenue  collection
figures, which disregards the municipality’s  capacity  to  collect  revenue
and the degree of effort made by the municipality to  collect  all  revenues
owed. The FFC advised that this is in contravention of the Constitution  and
therefore recommends that the LES formula should contain  a  revenue-raising
capacity variable.

4.2  Department of Cooperative Governance

The Department of Cooperative Governance (henceforth referred  to  as  DCoG)
provided the Appropriations Committees with an overview of key  focus  areas
and budget priorities  over  the  2011  Medium  Term  Expenditure  Framework
(MTEF)  that  will  contribute  to  the  national  priority  outcome  9:   A
responsible, accountable, effective and efficient local  government  system.
Key strategies and programmes proposed by DCoG for the 2011 MTEF include:

 • A differentiated approach to supporting local government  (i.e.  covering
   aspects of finance, services and labour);
 • Propose a single window of coordination, support to municipal finance and
   administration capability; and
 • Propose a refined ward committee  model  to  deepen  democracy,  improved
   support to human settlements outcomes, implementation  of  the  community
   work programme and accelerated access to basic services.

DCoG indicated that it has requested additional allocations to the  baseline
allocations  of   municipal   transfers,   which   include   the   Municipal
Infrastructure Grant (MIG), Bulk Infrastructure Fund  (BIF)  and  the  Local
Government Equitable Share (LGES). DCoG submitted that:

 • An additional allocations of R16.9 billion over the 2010/11 MTEF  to  the
   MIG baseline is requested on the  basis  of  meeting  sector  targets  to
   eradicate infrastructure backlogs;

 • An additional allocations of R26.3 billion over the 2010/11 MTEF  to  the
   BIF is requested on the basis of unlocking the delivery  of  reticulation
   services by funding bulk infrastructure and procuring well  located  land
   towards addressing backlogs in order to ensure universal access to  basic
   services. DCoG explained that  the  BIF  will  be  specifically  used  to
   upgrade, refurbish and rehabilitate bulk infrastructure such as Water and
   Waste Water Treatment Works; and

 • An additional allocations of R4.2 billion over the 2010/11  MTEF  to  the
   LGES is  requested  on  the  basis  of  complementing  the  institutional
   component of the LGES  by  funding  critical  skills  in  municipalities,
   prioritising water and sanitation over the MTEF in order to  build  long-
   term municipal institutional capacity through the  proposed  reconfigured
   Municipal  Systems  Improvement  Systems  Grant  (MSIG)  into  the  Local
   Government Institutional and Systems Support Grant (LGISSG).

DCoG further submitted that additional funding has also been  requested  for
the following departmental programmes:  Special  Purpose  Vehicle,  Disaster
Management, and the Implementation of  the  Masters  Systems  Plan  for  the
National Disaster Management Plan,  Municipal  Infrastructure  Audit,  Local
Government Turnaround Strategy and the Township Renewal Programme.

When the Committee raised the following points of clarity in respect of  the
proposed Special Purpose Vehicle:

 • Elaborate on the rationale for a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV)?
 • What form will the SPV take?
 •  It  appears  that  the  SPV  will  encroach  on  the  mandate  of  local
   municipalities,  in  that  case  who  will  be   held   accountable   for
   infrastructure and service delivery?
 • The success of the SPV  largely  depends  on  cooperation  and  alignment
   between the three spheres of government, how does DCoG intend  overcoming
   this challenge?
 • How DCoG envisages achieving the targets and outcomes  in  light  of  the
   current capacity?
 • How will DCoG monitor the activities of the SPV?

DCoG responded that the proposed SPV came about after an in  depth  analysis
of the challenges affecting municipal infrastructure and  service  delivery,
which were informed by the State of the Nation Report, the Local  Government
Turnaround Strategy and the need to deliver on  outcome  9.   DCoG  reported
that it cannot divulge the form that the SPV will take (there are  a  number
of options) as it still needs to table the proposal to the Executive.   DCoG
views the SPV as  an  implementing  agent  and  local  municipalities  would
therefore freely enters into service level agreements  with  the  SPV,  with
the local municipality being ultimately accountable for  infrastructure  and
service  delivery.   DCoG  has  identified  a  lack   of   cooperation   and
coordination between the three spheres of government  as  a  risk  and  will
attempt to mitigate the risk by proposing that the SPV be  a  single  window
for coordination among the three spheres of government.   DCoG  acknowledges
the need to bring in additional technical capacity in order for the  SPV  to
achieve its goals and will draw on capacity within the  private  sector  and
government entities.  The  activities  and  outcomes  of  the  SPV  will  be
monitored by a joint  monitoring  and  evaluation  panel  comprised  of  all
relevant stakeholders.

4.3  South African Local Government Association

The South African Local Government Association (henceforth  referred  to  as
SALGA) indicated that the economic recovery was a  welcome  sign  for  local
government. However, SALGA also cautioned that the economic  recovery  bears
pressure on demand for  quality  municipal  services  and  subsequently  the
ability of municipal services  to  support  the  expansion  of  productivity
within local industries and  the  sustainability  of  key  economic  sectors
operating within municipal boundaries.

SALGA further recommended a comprehensive review  of  the  local  government
fiscal framework to address amongst  others,  the  limited  vertical  share.
There should be a systematic review of baselines to ensure:
 • Revenue allocations to local government as a whole are congruent with its
   full range of developmental and service delivery responsibilities; and
 • The vertical share of local government meets the  increasing  demand  for
   municipal services.

Furthermore, SALGA recommended that this should be combined with efforts  to
build the  capacity  of  weaker  municipalities  to  spend  efficiently  and
effectively.

Concern was raised regarding whether the proposed minor adjustments  to  the
local government equitable share (LGES) formula  to  allocate  more  funding
towards  poorer   municipalities   are   substantive   enough   to   address
institutional challenges, such as: the need to appoint skilled personnel  to
manage finances,  human  resources,  service  delivery  functions  and  core
administration functions. In addition, the availability of credible data  on
key  variables  relating  to  the  socio-economic  demographic  and  spatial
profiles of municipalities needs to be addressed  not  only  to  update  the
data underpinning the LGES formula but also to  enable  a  more  fundamental
review of the structure of the formula itself.

With regard to conditional grants, SALGA made the following submissions:

 • The management of grants should be reviewed;
 • The approach on conditional grants should not be a one size fits all,  it
   should be based on municipal needs and its capacity to deliver;
 • Analyse past performance to improve the operational effectiveness of  the
   grants;
 • A conditional  grant  for  rural  municipalities  for  job  creation  and
   economic development should be introduced;
 • Disaster management funding should reach municipalities earlier;
 • Electricity Demand Side Management funding must be effectively  targeted;
   and
 • Increase funding for the water services operating subsidy grant to assist
   municipalities struggling with refurbishment and maintenance.

Since infrastructure funding remains a challenge, it was argued  that  there
should be an explicit link  between  municipal  infrastructure  grant  (MIG)
allocations and  LES  allocations,  especially  in  smaller  municipalities.
Funding should be set aside through MIG for  the  funding  of  refurbishment
and   upgrade   of   existing   infrastructure   in   smaller   and   poorer
municipalities.
SALGA  welcomed  the  envisaged  devolvement  of  the  housing  and   public
transport functions  to  cities  and  the  increase  in  the  Devolution  of
Property Rates Grant.

The Committees on Appropriations  raised  concern  regarding  the  perceived
lack  of  support  provided  by   SALGA   with   respect   to   capacitating
municipalities. SALGA responded that in support of municipalities  they  are
partnering with universities who are service  providers  to  strengthen  the
capacity  of  financial  management.   For   example   the   University   of
Witwatersrand is offering a course  in  financial  management.  Furthermore,
SALGA reported that it is reviewing the possibility of electing a  permanent
member to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP)  to  provide  support  to
the Committees concerning local government matters.

The Committees on Appropriations sought clarity on the  impact  of  the  new
demarcations and SALGA reported that there are 382 new wards in the  country
which will have a huge financial burden on the government,  particularly  in
Johannesburg where there are more than 60 new wards. This also  implies  the
increase in the number of councillors which, in turn, increases  the  amount
allocated in respect of the institutional component of equitable share  that
funds the payments of councillors.

4.4  Human Sciences Research Council
The  Human  Science  Research  Council  (henceforth  referred  to  as  HSRC)
applauds the Appropriations Committees  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance  for
enabling public engagement with the national  budget  priority  setting  and
decision making processes. Furthermore, applauds  efforts  to  chart  a  new
inclusive growth path that serves as an agenda for collective action.

The HSRC identified the following strengths in respect of the MTBPS:
 • Employment is clearly stated as the government’s  top  priority.  However
   the MTBPS should be complemented by more detail  on  how  the  government
   will implement a new development path that will  create  5  million  jobs
   within 10 years;
 • It takes into account the scale of challenges faced in areas of  poverty,
   education and health;
 • It recognises cities as engines of growth, thus requiring more investment
   in infrastructure to address bottlenecks and backlogs;
 • It recognises that expanding informal settlements need investment;
 • It provides for faster growth in municipal spending compared to growth in
   provincial and national expenditure;
 • It recognises that investment in transport can improve  living  standards
   for workers, cut transport costs and increase productivity; and
 • It gives due  attention  to  rural  development,  youth  employment,  the
   Industrial Policy Action Plan and the Community Works Programme.

The  HSRC  noted  the  insufficiency  of  progress  with  respect  to  broad
education,  health  and  economic  indicators.  The  HSRC  recommends   that
investment in these broad areas targeted for priority needs  to  be  further
specified.

With respect to Education, the challenge is how and where to  intervene,  in
order to break the cycle of the education and development trap.  Substantial
investments in early learning through reception year  and  foundation  phase
of schools are critical  to  breaking  the  stagnation  of  low  performance
scores.

The Aids epidemic  is  stabilising,  however  intensive  efforts  are  still
required. The 3rd  national  HIV  prevalence,  incidence  and  communication
survey (2008) revealed a number of positive trends. A  decline  in  the  HIV
prevalence in the teenage population (15-19 years)  has  been  observed,  as
well as a decline in  mother-to-child  infections.  However,  HIV  infection
risks remain high in the country, with women aged between 25  and  29  years
continuing to record very high levels of HIV infection.

In respect to economic growth, the HSRC noted the importance of a  knowledge
economy, which would contribute to economic growth.  South  Africa’s  scores
are low in respect of the Knowledge Economy Index and  the  number  of  full
time equivalent researchers per 1 000 people compared to  its  counterparts.
Furthermore there has been slow  uptake  of  the  Research  and  Development
(R&D) tax  incentive  by  the  private  sector.  The  extent  to  which  the
requisite institutional reforms and actions to support the incentive  regime
have been implemented by government should also be  considered.  Hence,  the
HSRC calls for the government to continue to prioritise R&D and monitor  and
evaluate programmes that must deliver on R & D outcomes.

The HSRC furthermore placed emphasis on the need  for  research  information
to inform medium term expenditure decisions, with concerns raised  regarding
whether national data collection needs in the areas of health and  education
are receiving sufficiently  allocations  from  national  funding.  The  HSRC
proposes a new national health survey (i.e. South  African  National  Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey [SANHANES])  that  will  provide  real-time
annual monitoring of the health status of the nation and  fill  the  current
gap  in  national  health  surveys.  Furthermore,   proposes   accessibility
modelling (that  will  identify  access  norms  and  standards,  demand  for
services, service infrastructure supply  etc.)  and  strategic  use  of  GIS
capabilities for spatial optimisation of  services,  resulting  in  improved
service delivery.

The HSRC commends the  acknowledgement  in  the  MTBPS  of  procurement  and
tender fraud which is currently under investigation and the efforts  of  the
Inter-Ministerial Committee on Anti-Corruption in  its  efforts  to  address
inefficiencies in, and improving the  effectiveness  of  public  management.
The HSRC also proposes a closer examination  of  the  nature  and  scope  of
service delivery protests to avoid future  conflicts  with  communities  and
facilitate implementation, given the imminent increases in tariffs and  user
charges.

The Appropriations Committees raised the  following  points  of  clarity  in
respect of the HSRC submission:

 • What are the HSRC’s recommendations for improving educational outcomes in
   light of the poor outcomes observed thus far?
 • The Committees also  wanted  to  know  whether  the  government  HIV/Aids
   awareness programme has been effective in light of the prevalence of  HIV
   infections continuing to remain high among women aged 25-29 years.
 • Concern was raised that the status of Tuberculosis (TB) was not mentioned
   in the HSRC presentation, as the prevalence of TB is quite high as well.
 • What conditionalities could be attached to social welfare grants?
 • What is the optimal percentage share of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) that
   need to be invested in R&D activities?
 • What comparative studies has the  HSRC  undertaken  in  relation  to  the
   economic growth potential of cities?

The HSRC responded that government has  been  proactive  by  intervening  in
critical areas such as curriculum and  teacher/educator  training  to  bring
about positive outcomes. The HSRC indicated that it would provide  empirical
evidence of factors affecting educational outcomes.

The HSRC explained that the prevalence indicator could be misleading  as  it
does not reflect the  positive  trends,  such  as  the  fact  that  HIV/Aids
patients are living longer as a  result  of  anti-retroviral  treatment  and
more people are becoming aware  of  their  HIV/Aids  status.  Prevalence  is
measured according to the number of  new  HIV  incidents  reported  and  the
mortality rate of HIV infected people or Aids patients. The  HSRC  indicated
that in the Western Cape, TB forms part the  Burden  of  Disease  Programme,
whereby HIV/Aids and  TB  are  diagnosed  and  treated  together.  This  has
resulted in cost savings and improved diagnosis and  treatment  of  HIV/Aids
and TB. The HSRC were also of the opinion that the Western Cape model  could
possibly be implemented across the country.

The HSRC proposed the following conditionalities related to  certain  social
welfare grants:
      - School enrolment could be a conditionality attached to  the  child-
        support grant;
      - Teenage mothers should either  continue  with  their  schooling  or
        enrol in an Further Education and  Training  (FET)  institution  in
        order to gain access to the child-support grant; and
      - Conditionality in respect of the proposed  youth  employment  grant
        could be that the individual should show proof of actively  seeking
        work in order to qualify for the grant.

The HSRC reported that R& D as a  percentage  share  of  GDP  has  declined,
despite government committing to  1%  of  GDP,  Currently  the  R&  D  as  a
percentage  share  of  GDP  is  0.93  %.  The  HSRC  recommends  an  optimal
percentage share of 1.5% of GDP.

The HSRC reported that it forms part of a research group that  is  reviewing
and assessing the socio-economic status of cities.  Findings  are  that  the
economic performance of cities have benefited the country  as  a  whole  and
have been the drivers of employment creation. On  the  other  hand,  it  has
placed  greater  demand  on  cities  infrastructure  and  service  delivery,
resulting in greater pressure  on  the  cities  finances.  Hence,  the  HSRC
cautions  the  government  and  recommends  a  more  balanced  approach   in
investment and the  distribution  of  investment  between  rural  and  urban
areas.

4.5 Peoples Budget Coalition
The Peoples Budget Coalition raised the following concerns with respect to
the MTBPS:

 • It is of the view the MTBPS is proposing a contractionary budget;
 • The MTBPS should have taken a more development perspective,  particularly
   focusing on the Millennium Development Goals;
 • it is also of the view that the MTBPS does not place enough  emphasis  on
   the creation of employment;
 • Employment should be at the  primary focus  of  South  Africa’s  economic
   policy;
 • The economic growth projection of 3.9  per  cent  is  not  sufficient  to
   create jobs.
 • A concern was raised that the cost burden of the global economic recovery
   will be placed on the south.  Calls for fiscal consolidation by  the  G20
   are a means to introduce fiscal austerity measures in which public sector
   expenditure on social services are to be  cut.  Thus  a  call  for  South
   African fiscal policy to be independent of the G20 prescriptions;
 • Another concern was raised with regard to the currency  appreciation  and
   its implications for the export trade sector and the local producers that
   supply  to  the  export  market.   It  was  rgued  that  it  could   have
   implications for labour operating within this sector. Hence, the People’s
   Budget Coalition called for a coherent exchange  rate  management  policy
   package that is linked to industrial development policy  and  implemented
   at a macro-economic level.

The People’s Budget Coalition  also  questioned  the  Committee  as  to  the
progress  of  the  establishment  of  the  Parliamentary  Budget  Office  as
required by the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act.

5. Committee Observations:

Having  considered  the  2010  MTBPS  and  engaged  extensively   with   the
identified stakeholders, the Select Committee on  Appropriations  noted  the
following key observations or concerns:

5.1  Government  is  cautioned  against  the  potential   negative   effects
   resulting from the  government’s approach to focus  on  targeted  funding
   for  poorer  municipalities   to   the   detriment   of   middle   income
   municipalities.

5.2 It was highlighted that current practice that is used to  determine  the
   local equitable share (LES) is unconstitutional in respect of the Revenue-
   Raising Component (RRC).

5.3 The availability of credible data  on  key  variables  relating  to  the
   socio-economic demographic and spatial profiles of  municipalities  needs
   to be addressed not only to update the data underpinning the LGES formula
   but also to enable a more fundamental review  of  the  structure  of  the
   formula itself.
5.4 Concern was raised regarding whether the proposed minor  adjustments  to
the
   local government equitable share (LGES) formula to allocate more  funding
   towards  poorer  municipalities  are  substantive   enough   to   address
   institutional challenges, such as the need to appoint  skilled  personnel
   to manage finances, human resources, service delivery functions, and core
   administration function.
5.5 Government efforts to chart a new inclusive growth path that  serves  as
   an agenda for collective action  is  applauded.  However,  government  is
   required to provide  more  details  on  the  proposed  new  growth  path/
   economic policy direction of the country.

5.6 It was further highlighted that government,  at  the  provincial  level,
   seems to be spending more funds on the compensation of  employees  rather
   than on programmes.

5.7 Government is not  doing  well  with  respect  to  health  spending  and
   therefore the downward revision is justifiable.

6. Committee Recommendations

The Select Committee on Appropriations, having considered  the  2010  Medium
Term Budget Policy Statement and received comments and recommendations  from
the identified stakeholders, recommends to the House that  the  2010  Medium
Term Budget Policy Statement be supported.

The Select Committee on Appropriations further recommends the following:

 • That the overall expenditure of government  at  the  end  of  the  second
   quarter of each financial year needs to be at 50 percent. This will  most
   likely lead to improved quality of  spending  and  reduce  the  level  of
   unauthorised spending and fiscal dumping at  the  end  of  the  financial
   year.

 • That the Department of Co-operative Governance should consult  government
   and other relevant stakeholders with  respect  to  the  proposed  Special
   Vehicle Unit to avoid duplication of government programmes.
 • That the Department of  Health  should  investigate  reasons  for  under-
   spending of grants and discourage the  tendency  of  returning  funds  to
   National Treasury. This works against the plans to transform  our  Health
   institutions.


Report to be considered.

6. Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the 2010 Medium Term  Budget
   Policy Statement, dated 17 November 2010

   The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the 2010  Medium  Term
   Budget Policy Statement, reports as follows:

1. Introduction and Background

The Minister of Finance (the Minister) tabled the 2010  Medium  Term  Budget
Policy Statement (MTBPS) before Parliament on 27 October  2010.  In  tabling
the MTBPS, the Minister met his obligation under section 28  of  the  Public
Finance Management Act 1 of 1999 (PFMA) that requires the Minister to  table
multi-year budget  projections  for  revenue,  expenditure  and  key  macro-
economic projections on an annual basis. In addition to that,  the  Minister
also met his obligation under section 6(1)  of  the  Money  Bills  Amendment
Procedure and Related Matters Act 9 of 2009 (henceforth referred to  as  the
Money Bills Act) that requires the Minister  to  submit  to  Parliament  the
MTBPS.

According to section 6(5) of the Money Bills Act, the Standing Committee  on
Finance and Select Committee on Finance (the Committees) must 30 days  after
the tabling of MTBPS report to the National Assembly (NA) and  the  National
Council of Provinces (NCOP), respectively, on the proposed fiscal  framework
for the  next  three  financial  years.  In  line  with  section  6(2),  the
Committees report on a revised fiscal framework for the 2010/2011  financial
year and the proposed fiscal framework for the following  three  years;  and
an explanation  of  the  macro-economic  and  fiscal  policy  position,  the
macroeconomic  projections  and  the  assumptions  underpinning  the  fiscal
framework.

Following the tabling  of  the  2010  MTBPS  and  the  engagement  with  the
Minister,  the  Committees  held  hearings  on  10  and  11  November  2010,
receiving submissions from a  panel  of  economists,  organised  labour  and
organised business. This report reflects the main themes emerging  from  the
engagement with the Minister, economists,  organised  labour  and  organised
business. This report includes two main sections, namely:  Economic  Outlook
and Policy, and Fiscal Trends  and  Policy.  The  former  section  gives  an
overview of economic outlook and  policy  with  specific  reference  to  key
macro-economic indicators within the context of the current global  economic
environment. The latter section provides details of fiscal policy  over  the
Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF)  with  specific  reference  to  the
fiscal stance adopted by government.

2. The 2010 Medium Term Budget Policy Statement
Basically, the 2010 MTBPS provides an  account  of  current  trends  in  the
economy, the medium-term  outlook,  overview  of  macroeconomic  and  fiscal
considerations, and a summary of government’s spending plans for the  period
ahead. The MTBPS therefore sets out  Government’s  spending  plans  for  the
next three fiscal years, based  on  certain  macroeconomic  assumptions.  In
doing so, there is usually  a  wide  range  of  aspects  to  be  taken  into
account.   The  2010  MTBPS  covered  six  broad  themes,  namely:  economic
assumptions, fiscal framework, spending  priorities,  division  of  revenue,
changes to conditional grants and the mid-term report on spending.
3. Job Creation and Economic Growth

In order to meet the developmental needs of  South  Africa  a  new  economic
growth path needs to be developed in consultation with all  social  partners
across several frontiers;  which  includes  education,  skills  development,
national  health  insurance,   land   and   agrarian   reform,   residential
settlements  and  urban  renewal,  environment  management,   infrastructure
investment  and  maintenance,  enterprise  development,  and  public  sector
service delivery. However, before the implementation, there will be  a  need
for some ground work to be done in the public sector and private  sector  in
terms of coordinating public policy and market regulations.

The 2010 MTBPS indicated the need to raise the economy onto  a  more  labour
intensive method to create jobs across the board. The economic  growth  does
not assist the economy when there are less job opportunities being  created.
This means  that  the  policy  debate  goes  beyond  the  macroeconomic  and
financial challenges to include the social component.

The 2010 MTBPS outlines the macroeconomic,  fiscal  and  public  expenditure
dimensions of the proposed development path.  It  emphasised  the  need  for
the increase on infrastructure investment spending for faster growth and  to
reduce the budget deficit over the next period. The discipline in  financial
management in the public sector and improved education,  health,  and  other
infrastructure programmes is crucial. There is  a  need  for  the  following
factors to be agreed upon by government and its social partners:

 • Strengthening labour market  institutions  should  include  improved  and
   expanded further education and training opportunities, placement services
   and to increase the demand for labour;
 • An integrated approach in financing some of the  economic  infrastructure
   investment such as development enterprise, housing and farming support;
 • The enhanced industrial policy action plan which incorporates  industrial
   development and promotion, support for small businesses and  other  local
   opportunities;
 • More competition is required for certain industries  such  as  transport,
   communication and electricity;
 • The economic development of South  Africa  needs  to  be  linked  to  the
   African continent for improved economic performance; and
 • Improved service delivery is of great importance and  this  can  only  be
   possible  through  good  financial  management,  control  systems,   good
   governance, proper budgeting and well managed contractors to deliver  the
   agreed output or targets.

Crucial issues to be addressed  during  this  MTEF  period  include  how  to
increase job-creating growth. Other issues are promoting appropriate  budget
balance and to deal with capital flows and  the  resultant  appreciation  of
the rand.

The 2010 MTBPS re-affirms the  important  role  of  the  private  sector  in
growth and employment creation. While social  grants  provide  an  important
safety net for about a quarter of the population, South  Africa’s  long-term
prosperity depends on more people being drawn into work. The private  sector
accounts for 75 per cent of all economic  activity  and  a  slightly  higher
share of employment, and will remain the primary driver  for  job  creation.
The public sector plays a complementary role in this  process.  Alongside  a
range of initiatives to increase training and skills  development,  specific
government interventions to raise  employment  include  an  expanded  public
works program and a youth job imitative.

4. Macroeconomic Forecast

National Treasury reports  that  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  growth  is
expected to moderate in the second half of the 2010/11 financial  year.  The
2010 MTBPS indicates that, although the economy has  gained  strength  since
the budget was tabled at the beginning of the 2010/11  financial  year,  the
growth outlook has so far improved. This is evident from the  new  projected
economic growth, which is expected to be between 3 to 3.5 per  cent  in  the
2011 calendar year. The recovery in revenue and moderate  growth  in  public
spending is expected to  decrease  the  fiscal  deficit.  For  example,  the
estimated deficit  of  5.3  per  cent  of  GDP  projected  for  the  2010/11
financial year is projected  to  decline  to  3  per  cent  in  the  2013/14
financial year. The 2010 MTBPS  also  projects  that  government  debt  will
stabilise to 40 per cent of GDP by the  2015  calendar  year.  It  was  also
noted that  expenditure  has  increased  by  R67  billion  relative  to  the
baseline over the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF).   This  increase
in expenditure has been informed by the 12 outcome policy  priorities  which
include education, health, infrastructure, and job creation.

Inflation is expected to remain below  6  per  cent  over  the  Medium  Term
Expenditure  Framework  (MTEF)  while  private  investment  and   employment
recover gradually. Business Unity South Africa (BUSA) agrees that  inflation
forecasts are realistic with headline Consumer Price Index  (CPI)  inflation
is expected to remain below 6 per  cent  over  the  next  three  years,  but
indicated that it remains  essential  to  successfully  anchor  inflationary
expectations. According to BUSA, lower  inflation  presents  an  opportunity
for the use of monetary policy to further support economic activity.  Growth
prospects are expected to be  driven  by  household  consumption  and  gross
fixed  capital  formation  and  will  undoubtedly  be  assisted   by   lower
inflation.

The 2010 MTBPS indicates that  sustained  exchange  rate  appreciation  will
lead  to  unbalanced  growth,  widening  the  current  account  deficit  and
increasing  the  economy’s  vulnerability  to  shocks.   Table   1   (below)
summarises the key macroeconomic projections  inclusive  of  2007  and  2013
calendar years.
Table 1: Macroeconomic Projections 2007 - 2013
|Calendar Year    |2007         2008  |2010   |2011            |
|                 |2009               |Estimat|2012            |
|                 |Actual             |e      |2013            |
|                 |                   |       |Forecast        |
|Percentage change unless otherwise indicated                  |
|Final household  |5.5   |2.4   |-3.1 |2.6    |3.4  |4.1  |4.5  |
|consumption      |      |      |     |       |     |     |     |
|Final government |4.7   |4.9   |4.7  |4.9    |4.3  |4.2  |3.7  |
|consumption      |      |      |     |       |     |     |     |
|Gross fixed      |14.2  |11.7  |2.3  |0.8    |5.6  |5.0  |5.9  |
|capital formation|      |      |     |       |     |     |     |
|Gross domestic   |6.4   |3.3   |-1.8 |4.1    |4.2  |4.5  |4.9  |
|expenditure      |      |      |     |       |     |     |     |
|Exports          |5.9   |2.4   |-19.5|4.1    |5.7  |6.6  |7.6  |
|Imports          |9.0   |1.4   |-17.4|8.4    |7.8  |7.9  |8.7  |
|Real GDP growth  |5.5   |3.7   |-1.8 |3.0    |3.5  |4.1  |4.4  |
|GDP inflation    |8.2   |9.2   |7.3  |6.1    |5.3  |5.5  |5.6  |
|GDP at current   |2,017.|2,283.|2,407|2,631.4|2,867|3,148|3,471|
|prices           |1     |8     |.7   |       |.1   |.0   |.9   |
|(R billion)      |      |      |     |       |     |     |     |
|Headline CPI     |6.1   |9.9   |7.1  |4.4    |4.7  |5.0  |5.2  |
|inflation        |      |      |     |       |     |     |     |
|Current account  |-7.2  |-7.1  |-4.0 |-4.2   |-4.9 |-5.3 |-5.8 |
|balance  (% of   |      |      |     |       |     |     |     |
|GDP)             |      |      |     |       |     |     |     |


Source: National Treasury (2010)
4.1 Economic Policy and Outlook

South Africa experienced a decline in gross  domestic  product  of  1.8  per
cent in 2009, and a loss of employment estimated close to  a  million  jobs.
This  was  a  severe  deterioration,  despite  a  continued   expansion   in
government infrastructure spending  and  the  countercyclical  monetary  and
fiscal policy response.

Higher  commodity  prices  have  contributed  to  a  somewhat  more  buoyant
recovery in the 2010 calendar year than was anticipated at the beginning  of
the 2010  calendar  year  during  the  National  Budget  in  February  2010.
Households have started to spend again as interest rates  declined  together
with lower inflation.
According to the Federation of Trade Unions of South  Africa  (FEDUSA),  the
2010 MTBPS had to address a wide range of factors, ranging from the need  to
re-balance the economy after the deep  recession,  global  developments  and
the need to make some inroads  to  mass  unemployment  and  poverty.  FEDUSA
points out that, to this list, the urgent need to improve  service  delivery
and to eradicate corruption and fraud must be added.
4.2 The New Growth Path
The budget policy framework is informed by requirements of a new growth
path, in which six key sectors and activities have been identified for
unlocking employment potential:

    • Infrastructure, through the expansion of transport, energy, water,
      communications and housing;
    • Agriculture and the agro-processing sector;
    • Mining and mineral beneficiation;
    • The green economy and associated manufacturing and services;
    • Manufacturing sectors identified in the industrial policy action plan;
      and
    • Tourism and selected services sectors.

The Minister of Finance highlighted that the new growth  path  provides  the
basis  for  coordinated  policies  and  programmes  across  the  state,  and
reinvigorated dialogue and cooperation among social partners.

According to the Minister of Finance, South Africa  needs  to  promote  more
rapid job creation through a broad range of policy  initiatives  to  achieve
the country’s developmental aims. These include the following:


    • Labour-market institutions must be  strengthened,  including  expanded
      further education and training and specific interventions  are  needed
      to  increase  both  public  and  private  sector  demand  for  labour,
      especially for young work seekers;
    • A greater participation of development  finance  institutions  in  co-
      financing infrastructure projects, enterprise development, housing and
      farming support;
    • Industrial policy action plans have to be implemented,  together  with
      increased  support  for   small   enterprises   and   local   economic
      development;
    • Greater investment and competition  are  needed  in  the  electricity,
      transport and communications sectors;
    • Improved economic cooperation between countries  in  Southern  Africa,
      including financial and trade institutions, transport, communications,
      energy and water networks; and
    • Underlying all of the above, improvements in public  service  delivery
      will depend  on  better  financial  management,  good  governance  and
      disciplined pursuit of agreed service delivery outputs and targets.
BUSA  believes  that  the  2010  MTBPS  provided   important   guidance   on
macroeconomic policy direction. BUSA  welcomes  the  signals  that  the  new
growth path will be aligned  to  the  existing  framework  and  vice  versa.
Furthermore, BUSA believes that greater attention must be given  to  address
underlying  competitiveness issues and  that  reducing  the  cost  of  doing
business is supportive of the new growth path,  which is probably the  least
expensive approach to unlocking South Africa’s long term growth potential.
The Chief Economist at the Efficient Financial  Holdings,  Mr  Dawie  Roodt,
points out that despite a rather healthy fiscal stance, significant  changes
in certain variables can be expected  over  the  next  few  years.  The  new
growth path will require huge amounts of  money  and,  although  the  fiscal
deficit is likely to  remain  within  acceptable  levels,  huge  expenditure
requirements by the parastatals will add significantly  to  the  state  debt
burden. Expenditure by parastatals is under the line, i.e. items  which  are
not included in the deficit, but which are included in state debt. The  2010
MTBPS expects state debt relative to  GDP  to  top  40  per  cent  by  2014,
significantly higher than now but a  lot  lower  than  that  of  many  other
economies.

FEDUSA indicates that South  Africa’s  present  economic  growth  trajectory
cannot meet the country’s employment needs. Faster growth is  required  over
an extended period of time  to  significantly  increase  labour  absorption,
reduce high unemployment  and  achieve  a  more  equitable  distribution  of
income. FEDUSA welcomes the attention given to  the  serious  socio-economic
problem of unemployment through the proposed new growth path.  According  to
FEDUSA,  previous  programs  such  as  the  Reconstruction  and  Development
Programme  (RDP),  Growth   Employment   and   Redistribution   (GEAR)   and
Accelerated and Shared Growth Initiative of South Africa (ASGISA)  had  this
as their primary goal. The current strategies and programs contained in  the
budget already contain elements of the proposed new growth path.

The National Union of Metalworkers of  South  Africa  (NUMSA)  supports  the
call for a new growth path that will  place  employment  at  the  centre  of
government’s economic policy. The People’s  Budget  Coalition  (PBC)  points
out that the new growth path must be supported by policies that  create  and
retain  decent  work,  together  with  the  eradication   of   poverty   and
inequality.

The Institute for Democracy in South Africa (IDASA) is of the view that  the
2010 MTBPS does not contain much more detail on  the  so-called  new  growth
path intended to create five million jobs over  the  next  ten  years,  thus
reducing  the  unemployment  rate  from  approximately  25   per   cent   to
approximately 15 per cent by 2014.
5. Fiscal Policy

Fiscal policy guides government’s  decisions  about  revenue,  spending  and
borrowing. South Africa’s fiscal policy enables  government  to  deliver  on
its developmental mandate  by  providing  resources  in  a  manner  that  is
sustainable and that reinforces the stability of the economy.

National Treasury reported  that  the  consolidated  government  deficit  is
projected to recover from 6.3 per cent of GDP in the 2010/11 financial  year
to 3.2 per cent by the 2013/14 financial year. The recovery will  be  driven
by the strong uptake  in  revenue  and  the  stabilisation  in  non-interest
spending. Growth in expenditure will need to moderate as debt service  costs
increase over the MTEF. The counter-cyclical fiscal policy will aim to  grow
revenues while gradually reducing  non-interest  stimulus  spending.  It  is
important to keep the fiscal trajectory on a sustainable path while  meeting
growth expectations.
Table 2 (below) summarises  the  consolidated  government  fiscal  framework
inclusive of 2007/08- 2013/14 financial years.

Table 2: Consolidated government fiscal framework 2007/08 – 2013/14
|           |2007/08|2008/09|2009/10|2010/11  |2011/12  |2012/13|2013/14|
|R Billion  |   Outcome              |Estimate |Medium-term estimates     |
|           |Preliminary             |         |                          |
|Revenue    |625.7  |684.8  |666.9  |761.0    |843.0    |931.7  |1,040.2|
|Percentage |30.1%  |29.5%  |27.2%  |28.4%    |28.7%    |28.9%  |29.1%  |
|of GDP     |       |       |       |         |         |       |       |
|Expenditure|591.3  |711.7  |832.5  |904.1    |977.2    |1,059.1|1,154.2|
|Percentage |28.4%  |30.7%  |33.9%  |33.7%    |33.3%    |32.8%  |32.3%  |
|of GDP     |       |       |       |         |         |       |       |
|Budget     |34.4   |-26.8  |-165.6 |-143.1   |-134.2   |-127.4 |-114.0 |
|balance    |1.7%   |-1.2%  |-6.7%  |-5.3%    |-4.6%    |-3.9%  |-3.2%  |
|Percentage |       |       |       |         |         |       |       |
|of GDP     |       |       |       |         |         |       |       |


Source: National Treasury (2010)
The Minister of Finance indicates that, as the world economy  recovers  from
the  global  crisis,  there  is  considerable  debate  about   how   quickly
governments should be closing their budget deficits. It is argued  that  the
recovery will be held back  if  governments  cut  expenditure  too  quickly,
while  others  point  to  the  potentially  devastating  effects  of  fiscal
default.

FEDUSA commends government  on  its  fiscal  stance  during  and  after  the
recession. South Africa’s counter-cyclical policy is designed to steady  the
economy and  to  protect  core  social  and  economic  programs  from  undue
volatility. Before the recession, government saved revenue and had  a  small
balance surplus. During the recession, government ran a  deficit  so  as  to
maintain its spending. In this way, government moderated the adverse  impact
of the business cycle and raised long-term growth.

FEDUSA further points out that as the economy’s growth rate  increases,  the
rate of growth in government spending will have to  be  reduced.  While  the
higher fiscal deficit was the appropriate counter-cyclical  response  during
the downturn, government will have to reduce the level of borrowing  in  the
years ahead. As the economy recovers, government will tighten its stance  to
avoid pushing up interest rates and crowding out private-sector  investment.
It also follows that during the 2010  MTBPS  period,  monetary  policy  will
bear the brunt in efforts to maintain inflation within the target  range  of
3 to 6 per cent.

BUSA welcomes the announcement that the budget deficit  is  expected  to  be
narrowed to approximately 3 per cent of GDP by the 2013/14  financial  year,
and stabilisation of government debt at about 40 per  cent  of  GDP  in  the
2015/16 financial year. BUSA  believes  that  the  2010  MTBPS  has  broadly
struck the right balance between  fiscal  consolidation  and  being  growth-
friendly.

IDASA  is  of  the  view  that  the  2010  MTBPS  as  presented  is   fairly
conservative and that the South African budget policy  in  response  to  the
recession consists broadly of maintaining pre-recession  public  expenditure
commitments in the face  of  likely  declining  tax  revenue.  According  to
IDASA, it is necessary that the  budget  deficit  and  consequent  borrowing
requirements are permitted to increase. In other  words,  budget  policy  is
becoming fairly counter-cyclical through the use of automatic stabiliser  of
tax revenue fluctuation.

The PBC indicates that  the  budget  deficit  is  projected  to  narrow,  as
National Treasury  moderates  government  spending  in  order  to  stabilize
public debt at approximately 40 per cent  by  the  2015/16  financial  year.
This will not assist in speeding the recovery and stemming the tide  of  job
losses. The budget deficit is projected to be 3.2 per cent  by  the  2013/14
financial year.  The structural budget deficit,  which  takes  out  cyclical
effects, is projected to be 3 per cent.

6. Capital Flows and Exchange Rate Management

The 2010 MTBPS indicates that the net capital inflows to South  Africa  have
risen strongly over the last two years, reaching 5.5 per cent of GDP in  the
first half of 2010 compared with 4.7 per cent in 2009 as a whole.

As contained in the 2010 MTBPS, the rand has appreciated  by  7.5  per  cent
against the United States (US) dollar since December 2009, and  by  6.1  per
cent against a trade-weighted basket of  currencies.  Because  South  Africa
has higher inflation than its major trading  partners,  the  real  effective
rand exchange rate, which reflects losses or gains  in  competitiveness,  is
now approximately 12 per cent above its average level for the past decade.

National Treasury reported that due to international factors, capital  flows
were driven to emerging markets causing the rand  to  strengthen.  The  real
exchange rate is 12 per cent above its 10 year average. Chile has a  similar
degree of  overvaluation,  but  Brazil  on  the  other  hand  is  much  more
stretched.

National Treasury and the South African Reserve Bank  (SARB)  will  continue
to  purchase  foreign  exchange  reserves.  SARB  will   sterilise   inflows
associated with foreign direct investment  inflows  using  foreign  exchange
swaps. These include:
    •  Exchange  control  and  offshore  investment  limits  on  individuals
      amended;
    • To make SA  attractive  as  a  corporate  investment  destination  and
      encourage investment in the rest of the African continent;
    • Exchange controls on domestic companies will  be  reformed  to  remove
      barriers to their international expansion from a domestic base; and
    • Prudential framework for foreign  investment  by  private  and  public
      pension funds, including the Government Employees Pension Fund (GEPF).

BUSA reported that they support the commitment to a flexible  exchange  rate
management regime and believes that ‘leaning against the wind’ is the  least
costly option in dealing with the volatility of the  rand.   This  approach,
combined with reserve accumulation and exchange control reform  can  further
alleviate the pressures on the rand.

6.1 Potential Favourable Implications of Exchange Rate Management

According to the Chief Economist at the Industrial Development  Corporation,
Mr  Lumkile  Mondi,  potential  favourables  to  exchange  rate   management
includes  the  increase  in  price  competitiveness  of  exports,  at  least
temporarily   (bearing   in   mind   the   progressive   erosion   of   such
competitiveness depending  on  inflationary  impact).  This  could  lead  to
increased export market penetration, assuming there is  appropriate  demand.
If price competitiveness and stability  are  sustained,  it  could  lead  to
progressive  recapturing  of  foreign  markets  and  securing  new  external
customer bases.

The local market could be regained if price  competitiveness  and  stability
is sustained. Exchange rate management could provide  positive  implications
for the  bottom  line  of  commodity  exporters  whose  external  sales  are
denominated in foreign currencies, while operational costs  are  rand-based.
Foreign tourism earnings could be increased as a weaker  rand  raises  South
Africa’s attractiveness. Mr Lumkile Mondi pointed  out  that  these  factors
could  increase  local  production,  employment  gains,  higher   investment
propensity and job gains.

Mr Lumkile Mondi further  indicates  that  exchange  rate  management  could
contribute to higher dividend receipts (in rand terms)  from  South  African
investments abroad and potentially enhances  the  wealth  effect  for  South
African holders of offshore assets.  Positive  fiscal  implications  include
potentially  higher  tax  revenues  due  to  increased  economic   activity,
improved corporate returns and higher household incomes  through  employment
gains. Implications of the Balance of Payments may  be  positive  if  export
demand  recovers  substantially  and  significant  import  substitution   is
realised.

6.2 Potential Unfavourable Implications of Exchange Rate Management

As  indicated  by  Mr  Lumkile  Mondi,  exchange  rate  management   creates
uncertainty over potential  impact  of  intervention  in  terms  of  desired
outcomes and their sustainability. The cost of  interventions  is  dependent
on the choice of instruments,  while  an  abrupt  unwinding  of  substantial
speculative positions could have a destabilising effect,  at  least  in  the
short-term, but effects could be long-lasting if investors’ perceptions  are
unfavourable.
Considering South Africa’s low savings  propensity  and  its  dependency  on
foreign capital inflows to finance its current account deficit  and  funding
requirements, negative perceptions may have serious  adverse  repercussions.
The timing of interventions is critical  in  order  to  minimise  unintended
consequences, for example, a negative impact  on  the  cost  of  investment-
related imports, while exports may not  recover  sufficiently  due  to  weak
global demand.

Exchange  rate  management  could  lead  to  a  potential  higher  inflation
environment (via imported inflation, especially input  costs  such  as  fuel
and food items), with negative implications for interest  rates,  investment
activity, employment,  general  cost  of  living  and  domestic  consumption
demand. FEDUSA asserts that the  increased  capital  inflows  and  resultant
appreciation of the rand is partly a result  of  a  positive  interest  rate
differential, but also a result  of  South  Africa’s  relatively  favourable
fiscal position.

Although Government has opted for an exchange control  relief  as  the  main
focus area, FEDUSA is of the opinion that this leaves the  option  open  for
tax measures. In normal times, a tax on  capital  flows  may  lead  to  less
capital flows to South Africa. FEDUSA is therefore of the opinion  that  the
exchange  control  relief  is   the   right   option   under   the   current
circumstances. The PBC indicates that  as  emerging  market  exchange  rates
appreciate, they suck in imports from advanced  economies  and  struggle  to
expand their export markets.  The massive trade deficits that exchange  rate
appreciation will generate for countries in Southern Africa will  constitute
the basis for advanced economies to exit the crisis.  The  PBC  is  also  of
the view that  financing  long-term  investment,  using  short-term  capital
inflows, will create a massive imbalance  in  the  national  balance  sheet,
thus maturity mismatches will  result,  and  high  interest  rates  will  be
required to keep these mismatches away from binding.

While BUSA supports the view that international  cooperation  is  needed  to
achieve a more stable international financial environment,  the  PBC  argues
that short-term capital inflows must be taxed because they place  the  level
of the exchange rate in a manner that is inconsistent with the  requirements
of industrial development.

Mr Lumkile Mondi advised Government not to  interfere  with  the  prevailing
exchange rate management policy as the cost of  the  intervention  could  be
high  and  the  desired  outcomes  of  a  proposed  intervention   may   not
materialise as observed in Brazil and other  emerging  economies.  Mr  Mondi
suggested that the Government's long-term strategy should be to develop  the
infrastructure of the  entire  Southern  African  region,  both  to  improve
access to regional resources and to develop a local market to pick up  slack
left by the lack of growth in the US and Europe. Mr Mondi further  cautioned
that instead of fighting the Rand's relative strength, South  Africa  should
use the opportunity to import the capital components necessary  to  underpin
growth  in  the  region,  such  as  railway   engines   and   infrastructure
components.

7. Tax Revenue and Policy

Budget revenue is the amount of revenue available to the fiscus  to  finance
expenditure after  taking  into  account  tax  revenue,  other  revenue  and
transfers to other members of the Southern  African  Customs  Union  (SACU).
Tax revenue is the largest contributor to budget  revenue.  Tax  revenue  is
highly cyclical because taxes are levied on economic  activity.  This  means
that, if the economy is performing well, more tax revenue will be  collected
and vice versa.

South Africa’s spending programmes have to be  paid  for.  It  is  therefore
reassuring to be able to note that the  improved  economic  performance  has
contributed to a projected increase of R31 billion in tax  revenue  for  the
2010/11 financial year, by comparison with the estimated figures during  the
2010 National Budget in February 2010.

Total tax revenue is expected to amount  to  R679  billion  in  the  2010/11
financial year  (25.3 per cent of GDP). A strong  increase  in  value  added
tax (VAT)  proceeds  has  been  recorded,  partly  attributed  to  increased
consumer demand, but also  because  of  lower  capital  investment  and  the
associated  reduction  in  VAT  refunds.  Customs  duty   collections   have
improved, mainly as a result of higher vehicle and  component  imports.  For
the period ahead, tax revenue is expected to average about 26  per  cent  of
GDP that is still somewhat below the levels recorded before the recession.

IDASA indicated that, although tax revenue performed slightly better in  the
2010/11 financial year than anticipated and is  set  to  continue  doing  so
over the medium-term, the actual recovery of  tax  revenue  levels  to  pre-
recession levels will take considerable time. The overruns  of  this  fiscal
year largely reflect a highly cautious 2010 Budget, which did not  make  the
mistake of assuming things would turn out much better than they did.

8. Government Debt

According to the 2010 MTBPS, the fiscal  stance  targets  a  combination  of
revenue and expenditure that will enable  government  to  pay  for  existing
programmes while reinforcing the sustainability of the public finances  over
the following three years.

BUSA welcomes the announcement that the budget deficit  is  expected  to  be
narrowed to approximately 3 per cent of GDP by the 2013/14  financial  year,
and stabilisation of Government debt at approximately 40 per cent of GDP  in
the 2015/16 financial year. BUSA believes that the 2010  MTBPS  has  broadly
struck the right balance between  fiscal  consolidation  and  being  growth-
friendly. However, the overall public-sector borrowing requirement needs  to
be managed carefully and that huge borrowing programmes by  both  Eskom  and
Transnet do not jeopardise long term borrowing costs for the country.

It is noted in the 2010 MTBPS that real non-interest government  expenditure
per person has doubled over the past eight years, which  was  made  possible
by buoyant growth and revenue, and  the  declining  share  of  debt  service
costs in GDP. Government spending on infrastructure  and  social  assistance
continued to expand strongly during the economic downturn in 2008  and  2009
calendar years. Expenditure growth will be slower  over  the  period  ahead,
averaging real growth of approximately 3 per cent per year.

The main features can be summarised as follows:

    • Higher GDP growth and reduced inflation;
    • A recovery in tax revenue from 24.4 per cent of  GDP  in  the  2009/10
      financial year to 26.4 per cent of GDP by the 2013/14 financial year;
    • A moderation in the real growth  of  non-interest  expenditure  and  a
      reduction in the proportion of expenditure to GDP over the MTEF; and
    • A  rise  in  government  debt-service  costs  from  7.5  per  cent  of
      expenditure in the 2010/11 financial year  to  9.6  per  cent  by  the
      2013/14 financial year.

Table 3 (below) provides a summary of total  government  debt  inclusive  of
2007/08 and 2013/14 financial years.

Table 3: Total government debt 2007/08 – 2013/14
|As at 31 March|2007/08             |2010/11 |   2011/12           |
|R Billion     |2008/09             |Estimate|2012/13              |
|              |2009/10             |        |2013/14              |
|              |Outcome             |        |Medium-term estimates|
|Domestic Debt |      |      |      |        |       |      |      |
|Gross loan    |480.8 |529.7 |705.5 |880.9   |1 045.2|1     |1     |
|debt          |93.8  |101.3 |106.6 |107.2   |107.2  |211.6 |356.0 |
|Less: Cash    |387.0 |428.4 |598.9 |773.8   |938.0  |107.2 |107.2 |
|balance       |      |      |      |        |       |1     |1     |
|Net loan debt |      |      |      |        |       |104.4 |248.8 |
|Foreign       |      |      |      |        |       |      |      |
|Gross loan    |96.2  |97.3  |99.5  |96.7    |104.4  |107.7 |104.4 |
|debt          |-     |-     |25.2  |45.3    |56.5   |51.5  |37.8  |
|Less: Cash    |96.2  |97.3  |74.3  |51.4    |47.9   |56.2  |66.6  |
|balance       |      |      |      |        |       |      |      |
|Net loan debt |      |      |      |        |       |      |      |
|Total gross   |577.0 |627.0 |804.9 |977.6   |1 149.6|1     |1     |
|loan debt     |483.2 |525.6 |673.2 |825.2   |985.9  |319.3 |460.4 |
|Total net loan|      |      |      |        |       |1     |1     |
|debt          |      |      |      |        |       |160.6 |315.4 |
|As percentage |      |      |      |        |       |      |      |
|of GDP:       |27.7  |27.0  |32.8  |36.4    |39.2   |40.9  |40.9  |
|Total gross   |23.2  |22.6  |27.4  |30.7    |33.6   |36.0  |36.9  |
|loan debt     |      |      |      |        |       |      |      |
|Total net loan|      |      |      |        |       |      |      |
|debt          |16.7  |15.5  |12.4  |9.9     |9.1    |8.2   |7.2   |
|As percentage |      |      |      |        |       |      |      |
|of total gross|      |      |      |        |       |      |      |
|loan debt:    |      |      |      |        |       |      |      |
|Foreign gross |      |      |      |        |       |      |      |
|loan debt     |      |      |      |        |       |      |      |


Source: National Treasury (2010)

9. Key Issues

The following key issues have  been  identified  from  the  2010  MTBPS  and
submissions from organised labour and organised business:

    • Until recently, the constitutionally-required legislation setting  out
      the procedure for Parliament to amend the budget has been  enacted  as
      the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act  9,  2009.
      To support it in it’s application  of  the  Act,  Parliament  must  be
      capacitated through the  establishment  of  the  Parliamentary  Budget
      Office as mandated in this Act;
    • Most commentators welcomed the emphasis in both the unveiling  of  the
      new growth path and the 2010 MTBPS on the importance of  partnerships.
      However, some indicated that the 2010 MTBPS did not contain much  more
      detail on the new growth path which is intended to create five million
      jobs over the next ten years, thus reducing the unemployment rate from
      approximately 25 per cent to approximately 15 per  cent  by  the  2014
      calendar year. This is not surprising, given  that  the  detail  still
      needs to be worked out and other stakeholders be consulted.
    • Fiscal and monetary measures  are  being  taken  in  response  to  the
      present strength of the Rand.  However,  some  commentators  cautioned
      Government  not  to  interfere  with  the  prevailing  exchange   rate
      management policy as the cost of the intervention could  be  high  and
      the desired outcomes of a proposed intervention may not materialise.


10. Conclusion

In the context of the current economic and social challenges and that  of  a
small open economy integrated to the global marketplace, a commitment  to  a
prudent macroeconomic framework is crucial.  Prudent fiscal management  over
years assisted South Africa to ride the  tide  of  the  deep  recession.  It
helped the country to continue  with  its  expenditure  plans  and,  in  the
process, to act in a counter-cyclical  way.  However,  fiscal  policy  alone
cannot be  expected  to  successfully  address  South  Africa’s  challenges.
Whilst macroeconomic policy can go a  long  way  in  creating  a  favourable
macro-economic environment, it is important that  successful  implementation
of the micro-level programmes and projects generate tangible outcomes.

The clarification  of  Government’s  stance  on  certain  key  macroeconomic
issues provides a degree of certainty and predictability, and  will  further
support both consumer and  business  confidence.  The  details  of  the  new
growth path were not included in this year’s MTBPS,  although  many  of  the
proposed aspects are already part and parcel of the MTEF.  The  debates  and
consultations which will generate greater detail on a new growth  path  will
be an important opportunity to consider alternatives  and  to  secure  broad
ownership of a truly developmental framework.

The Committees and most commentators commended the Minister of Finance on  a
balanced approach that was followed in the 2010 MTBPS.

11. Committee Recommendations
Having considered the 2010 MTBPS and conducted hearings on the  2010  MTBPS,
the Select Committee on Finance recommends that:

11.1 The Minister of Finance should provide Parliament with details  on  how
National Treasury will  supplement  the  proposed  New  Growth  Path.  These
details to form   part of the 2011 National Budget in February 2011

11.2 The Minister of Finance considers providing details on  how  the  State
plans to   design and fund the much-needed  universal  health  care  system.
This information may be included in the 2011  National  Budget  in  February
2011.

11.3 The Minister of Finance provides more and updated details on how  South
Africa is  dealing  with  an  appreciating  Rand.  This  information  to  be
included in the 2011 National Budget in February 2011.

11.4 The Minister of Finance  should  provide  Parliament  with  details  on
proposals to address corruption in the public financial system.

11.5 The Minister of Finance  should  provide  Parliament  with  a  progress
report on the proposed wage subsidy as promised in March 2010.

11.6 The Minister of Finance should provide Parliament with further  details
on promoting small businesses.

12. Oral Submissions

Table 4 (below) contains a list of  people  who  made  oral  and/or  written
submissions before the Committees, some in their personal capacity.

         Table 4: List of Submissions’ People
|Name               |Position              |Organisation    |
|Mr. Pravin J.      |Minister of Finance   |National        |
|Gordhan            |                      |Treasury        |
|Mr. Nhlanhla Nene  |Deputy Minister of    |National        |
|                   |Finance               |Treasury        |
|Mr. Lesetja.       |Director-General      |National        |
|Kganyago           |                      |Treasury        |
|Mr Oupa Magashula  |Commissioner          |SARS            |
|Mr. Kenneth Brown  |Deputy                |National        |
|                   |Director-General:     |Treasury        |
|                   |Intergovernmental     |                |
|                   |relations             |                |
|Mr. Andrew         |Deputy                |National        |
|Donaldson          |Director-General:     |Treasury        |
|                   |Public Finances       |                |
|Mr Lumkile Mondi   |Chief Economist       |Industrial      |
|                   |                      |Development     |
|                   |                      |Corporation     |
|                   |                      |(IDC)           |
|Mr. Dawie Roodt    |Chief Economist       |Efficient       |
|                   |                      |Financial       |
|                   |                      |Holdings        |
|Prof. Raymond      |Deputy Chief Executive|BUSA            |
|Parsons            |                      |                |
|Ms. Simi Siwisa    |Director: Economic    |BUSA            |
|                   |Policy                |                |
|Mr.Coenraad        |Parliamentary Officer |Business        |
|Bezuidenhout       |                      |Parliamentary   |
|                   |                      |Office          |
|Ms.Prakashnee      |Parliamentary Officer |COSATU          |
|Govender           |                      |                |
|Mr. Sidney Kgara   |Parliamentary Officer |PBC             |
|Mr. Woody Aroun    |Parliamentary Officer |PBC             |
|Mr. Dennis George  |General Secretary     |PBC             |
|Mr. Len Verwey     |Budget Manager        |IDASA           |

The written submissions by the above-mentioned organisations  are  available
on request from the Committee Secretariat.
13. References

BUSA, (2010), Medium Term  Budget  Policy  Statement:  Presentation  to  the
portfolio Committee on Finance, Cape Town, 10 November 2010.

COSATU, (2010),  COSATU  Expectations  on  the  Medium  Term  Budget  policy
Statement, Cape Town, dated 10 November, 2010.

George, D. (2010),  Powerpoint  presentation  on  FEDUSA  2010  Medium  Term
Budget Policy Statement Comments. The Joint Portfolio Committee on  Finance,
dated 11 November 2010.

George, D. (2010), FEDUSA Submission on the 2010 Medium Term  Budget  Policy
Statement, Cape Town, 11 November 2010.

Gordhan, P. (2010), Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement  2010’s  Speech,
Parliament of RSA, Cape Town, 27 October 2010.

IDASA, (2010), Perspectives on  the  2010  MTBPS.   A  Presentation  to  the
Finance Committees, Cape Town, 11 November 2010.

Mondi, L. (2010), Impact of  reforming  exchange  rate  system  on  economic
policy & broader policies: Some thoughts. A  presentation  to  the  Standing
Committee on Finance and Select Committee  on  Finance,  dated  10  November
2010.

National Treasury, (2010) Medium Term  Budget  Policy  Statement,  Pretoria:
Government Printers.
National  Treasury,   (2010),   Medium   Term   Budget   Policy   Statement:
Presentation to Parliament, Cape Town, 28 October 2010.

NUMSA, (2010), Submission to the Joint Meeting of the Standing Committee  on
Finance & Select Committee  on  Finance,  (National  Assembly  and  National
Council of Provinces): The Treasury and  SARB  are  failing  to  manage  our
economy to promote growth and  development-  we  need  much  lower  interest
rates and tighter exchange controls!

PBC, (2010), Submission of the Peoples  Budget  Coalition  to  the  Standing
Committee on Finance and Select Committee on  Finance  on  the  Medium  Term
Budget Policy Statement, dated 10 November 2010.

Roodt, D. (2010), The new Keynesian world and the MTBPS. A  Presentation  to
the Standing Committee on Finance and Select Committee on Finance, dated  10
November 2010.

Verwey, L.; T. Dlamini, S. Durham, J Sylvester, and M. Zamisa,  (2010),  The
2010 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement:  Determining  the  limits  of  the
possible: A closer look at the 2010 MTBPS. PIMS Budget paper 8, Idasa.

Report to be considered.

                          FRIDAY, 19 NOVEMBER 2010

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1. Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the  Higher
   Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 24B– 2010], dated 18 November 2010

   The Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having  considered  the
   subject of the Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill  [  B  24B-  2010]  ,
   referred to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section
   75 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


   Report to be considered

2. Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the  Skills
   Development Levies Amendment Bill [B 25– 2010], dated 18 November 2010

   The Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having  considered  the
   subject of the Skills Development Levies Amendment  Bill  [B  25–  2010],
   referred to it, and classified  by  the  Joint  Tagging  Mechanism  as  a
   section 75 Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


   Report to be considered

3. Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the  Higher
   Education and Training Laws  Amendment  Bill  [B  26B–  2010],  dated  18
   November 2010

   The Select Committee on Education and Recreation, having  considered  the
   Higher Education and Training Laws Amendment Bill [B 26B– 2010], referred
   to it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill,
   reports that it has agreed to the Bill.


   Report to be considered


