---
title: 'National Assembly - 04 November 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-11-04
---

THURSDAY, 4 NOVEMBER 2010
                                    ____


                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                              NOTICES OF MOTION


Mr V B NDLOVU: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House, I shall move:

    That the House debates the unacceptably high level of corruption and
    crime in the country, including the hijacking of cars, buildings and now
    companies, by criminals.

Ms A C MASHISHI: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House, I shall move:

    That the House debates the development and distribution of adequate
    learning and teaching materials to schools for 2011.

Mr M E GEORGE: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House, I shall move on behalf of Cope:

    That the House debates the failure by the SA Police Service in allowing
    the firearms registry to degenerate to the point that corrupt practices
    in the issuing of gun licences can take place.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, on behalf of the ACDP, I give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House, I shall move:

  That the House debates the desirability of holding the official opening
  of Parliament ceremony in the morning as has been the tradition of
  Parliament for many years, rather than in the evening, as the majority
  party is now proposing, with particular reference to the personal safety
  of parliamentary staff, transportation and all associated costs.

Mr C T FROLICK: Hon Speaker, I have a point of order.

The SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

Mr C T FROLICK: There is an agreed format in which motions for debate are
submitted in the House. The hon Mike Ellis has raised it on previous
occasions. It is quite clear that what the hon member is currently reading
is in violation of the agreement amongst the political parties.

The SPEAKER: Objection sustained.

Mr J F SMALLE: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House, I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates the funding of state public entities and
  recommendations on how best to achieve good governance, accountability
  and efficiency.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, before you speak, wait for me to point you out.
Hon Dexter, you have the floor.

Mr P D DEXTER: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House, I shall move on behalf of Cope:

    That the House debates the rapid depletion of our smaller than hitherto
    estimated coal resources, and the failure of the government to factor
    this in.

Mr M W RABOTAPI: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House, I shall move on behalf of the DA:

    That the House debates the means by which Public Works engages in lease
    agreements with landlords, and measures to ensure that the taxpayer gets
    value for money from property leased by the government.

Mr E J MARAIS: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House, I shall move on behalf of the DA:

    That the House debates the performance of the Namaqualand Diamond Trust
    Fund, including the spending on travel and accommodation by its
    trustees, and measures to improve accountability and internal
    governance.

Mr H P MALULEKA: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

    That the House debates the expansion of resources devoted to our
    capacity for knowledge production and expanding the resources devoted to
    innovation and research, including through an innovation management
    framework.

Mr G P D MACKENZIE: Hon Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House, I shall move on behalf of Cope:

    That the House debates the seriousness and consequences of the failure
    by the SA Police Service for allowing the Firearms Registry to
    degenerate to the point that corrupt practices in the issuing of gun
    licences can take place, and that this needs urgent investigation and
    appropriate intervention.

                  CELEBRATION OF DIWALI, FESTIVAL OF LIGHTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —


     1) notes that on 5 November Hindus worldwide will be celebrating one
        of the biggest events on the Hindu calendar, Diwali, the festival
        of lights;


     2) further notes that Diwali marks the beginning of the Hindu New Year
        and is celebrated to promote and cherish peace, harmony and the
        triumph of light over darkness;


     3) recognises that the festival of Diwali symbolises the reaffirmation
        of hope, calls for a renewed commitment to friendship and goodwill
        and is a celebration of all the myriad joys of life;


     4) wishes all Hindus a happy and prosperous new year; and


     5) extends its best wishes to the Hindu community over this auspicious
        period.

Agreed to.

          HANSARD CELEBRATES CENTENARY IN SOUTH AFRICAN PARLIAMENT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr P J C PRETORIUS: Mr Speaker, as a former Hansard reporter in this House,
it gives me great pleasure to move the following motion without notice:

   That the House, in view of the fact that today marks the centenary of
   Hansard in the South African Parliament —


     1) recognises with appreciation the indispensable role played by
        Hansard in recording and translating the debates of Parliament
        since 1910;


     2) further recognises with appreciation the specific role played by
        Hansard reporters, translators and administrative staff over the
        past 100 years;


     3) notes the challenges with which Hansard was confronted at the
        advent of democracy in 1994, particularly with the introduction of
        11 languages, and the way in which these were overcome;


     4) further notes the ongoing challenges that face Hansard, not least
        of all that members’ speeches often require considerable editing
        and correction prior to publication and that it is through the
        tireless work of Hansard staff that a professional end product is
        produced;


     5) cognisant of the important role Hansard played in recording the
        history of our country and Parliament as an institution, expresses
        its appreciation to Dr At van Wyk, author of a momentous new book
        on Hansard, titled: Hoor! Hoor! Hansard Honderd jaar debat 1910-
        2010: and


     6) resolves to wish the Secretary to Parliament and Hansard staff all
        success in ensuring the continued success of Hansard as a critical
        and indispensable service to our country and institution.

Agreed to.

       MODJADJI DYNASTY CELEBRATES RAIN-MAKING CEREMONY AT MAPUNGUBWE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —


   (1)      notes that on October 29 the Modjadji dynasty celebrated their
        annual rain-making ceremony at Mapungubwe;


   (2)      further notes that the festival was attended by King Victor
        Thulare Sekhukhune, Thovhela Vho Tony Mphephu Ramabulane and Prince
        Mpapatla Bakhoma Modjadji, the Department of Environmental Affairs,
        the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs,
        the National Heritage Council, the Vhembe and the Mopani District
        Municipalities;


     3) recognises that the successful ceremony, which was preceded and
        followed by rain, provides ample evidence that co-ordination and
        collaboration among all three spheres of government and civil
        society can speed up service delivery, as well as bring about
        effective ways of water and environmental conservation; and


     4) congratulates the Modjadji dynasty, the Department of Water
        Affairs, the Department of Environmental Affairs, the Department of
        Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, the SanPARKS and
        others for hosting this successful event and observing this
        important month on the indigenous African calendar.

Agreed to.

         FIRST SATURDAY OF NOVEMBER DECLARED NATIONAL CHILDREN’S DAY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House —

     1) notes that the Government of the Republic of South Africa declared
        the first Saturday of November National Children’s Day and that the
        aim of the National Children’s Day celebration is to highlight
        progress being made towards the realisation and promotion of the
        rights of children;


  (2) further notes that this year, the National Children’s Day takes place
        on 6 November at the Civic Centre in Rustenburg, North West, and
        the theme is “Act for the survival of all children”; and


  (3) supports all interventions by the government and various players that
        enhance conditions that encourage child survival.

Agreed to.

  SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1) TO CONDUCT SECOND READING DEBATE OF DIVISION OF
                           REVENUE AMENDMENT BILL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

  That the House suspends Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the
  debate on the Second Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least
  three working days have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled,
  for the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate today on the
  Division of Revenue Amendment Bill [B35 - 2010] (National Assembly – sec
  76(1)).


  Agreed to.

              PRODUCTION OF VEGETABLE GARDENS AT RURAL SCHOOLS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms N GINA (ANC): Mr Speaker, the ANC is committed to creating an
environment that ensures that there is adequate food available, that we
grow our own food and protect the poor communities from the rising food
prices, and that we eradicate hunger.

Therefore, the ANC welcomes the initiative by the Mpumalanga department of
agriculture, rural development and land administration to call on more
people to grow vegetables in unused open fields, especially at rural
schools. Through this project, which was initiated in 2000, more than 200
schools have already managed to establish vegetable gardens, whose produce
is either sold to their local communities or used in the feeding scheme for
the poor pupils.

The ANC supports these programmes as they add value to the ANC’s clarion
call to expand access to food production schemes in rural and peri-urban
areas so as to enable rural people to grow their own food. I thank you.
[Applause.]

            MEASURERS TO ADDRESS SHORTAGE OF HEALTH CARE WORKERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms E MORE (DA): Speaker, the DA welcomes the inclusion in Finance Minister
Pravin Gordhan’s Budget last week of a proposal to allow private hospitals
to help with the training of doctors, but ad hoc interventions such as
these are not going to make a real difference to South Africa’s medical
worker shortage, unless they form part of a comprehensive strategy.

The DA believes that the moratorium on the employment of medical staff from
other Southern African Development Community, SADC, countries should be
lifted. Secondly, we believe that the quota which applies to the number of
nurses that private hospitals can train, should be scrapped. Thirdly,
medical personnel should be added to the Home Affairs scarce skills
database. Fourthly, we need to launch an international recruitment
programme. South Africa has many advantages as a destination for medical
staff from all over the world. These advantages have not been exploited
fully.

Finally, there should be a requirement for private sector doctors to
perform a certain number of hours of service in public health facilities in
order to maintain their registration. It is wrong that in the face of a
shortage of 12 000 doctors and 46 000 nurses in the public sector, the
national Health department does not have a human resource plan for health
care. We need a comprehensive plan of this nature to help to address the
fundamental breakdown in our public health care system. I thank you.

                  FOOD SECURITY IN SOUTH AFRICA IN JEOPARDY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L S NGONYAMA (Cope): Hon Speaker, the future of agriculture in South
Africa is in serious jeopardy. Highly skilled South African farmers are
leaving in droves to establish farms in Mozambique, Zambia, the Congo,
Nigeria and even Russia.

South Africa must pursue a win-win policy of achieving transformation and
retaining scarce skills in agriculture. The department, however, seems to
have learnt nothing and forgotten nothing. Any government that fails to
give priority to the issue of food security will plunge the country into
chaos. President Zuma admitted that food security “is nothing less than a
fierce challenge” for government.

Dispensing with skilled educators, doctors and engineers has crippled
education, health and municipal service delivery. The collapse of
agriculture will lead to a dangerous situation for our country. South
Africa needs to guarantee both food security and transformation. The lack
of vision is astonishing and its strategic failure is alarming.

Cope demands that government act as though food security is nothing less
than a fierce challenge. Anything less will be the ultimate betrayal of the
people of South Africa. I thank you. [Applause.]

                NATIONAL GOLDEN GAMES CELEBRATE ACTIVE AGEING

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M V MAFOLO (ANC): Speaker, the ANC believes that sport and recreation
are an integral part of reconstructing and developing a healthier society.
Sport and recreation should cut across all developmental programmes and be
accessible and affordable for all South Africans, including those in rural
areas, the young and the elderly.

The ANC is fully behind the National Golden Games, which celebrate active
ageing. They took place from 26 to 27 October at the uMhlathuze Sports
Complex in Richards Bay. The National Golden Games are part of a programme
run in residential care centres for older people with the aim of keeping
them healthier.

The ANC supports initiatives geared at facilitating and mobilising
resources in both the public and private sector to redress inequality and
enhance this vital aspect of our society. I thank you. [Applause.]

                  FRAUDULENT TEACHERS UNDERMINING EDUCATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms H N MAKHUBA (IFP): Hon Speaker, our education system is under siege and
is being destroyed from within by the cancer of fraudulent teachers who are
currently walking the corridors of schools and teaching our children in
this country. Hundreds of teachers in KwaZulu-Natal alone have been found
to have fraudulently misrepresented their teaching qualifications to the
department of education. This also raises very serious questions as to the
scrutiny carried out by the department in the employment of such teaching
staff.

In light of these controversies, the IFP urges the Department of Basic
Education and the Department of Higher Education and Training to conduct a
national audit of both their screening processes of prospective new
teachers, and their current national teaching staff complement in order to
ensure that the best possible teachers are available to assist our learners
with their studies. I thank you.

        STUDY PAINTS WORRYING PICTURE OF SOUTH AFRICA’S COAL RESERVES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L W GREYLING (ID): Hon Speaker, the recently released independent study
by Umvoto Africa paints a very worrying picture of South Africa’s future
coal reserves. Instead of the much-touted 50 gigatons of coal reserves that
was previously estimated, this study claims that we in fact only have 15
gigatons of coal left in the ground.

This figure brings into doubt the overreliance that the recently drafted 20-
year energy plan places on coal-fired generation. Even if one discounts
this study’s estimates, one thing is certain: The price of coal, in terms
of both its extraction and its environmental pollution, will rise
exponentially over the next 20 years.

Another thing that is certain is that the price of renewable energy will
continue to fall over the same period, a fact which is not being captured
in the department’s 20-year energy plan. In fact, it is explicitly stated
that the same cost curve will be used for renewable energy throughout this
20-year period. This defies logic as well as the market experience of the
last decade in which the price of all renewable energies has been rapidly
decreasing, with the result that it is now one of the fastest growing
industries in the world.

The ID firmly believes that we need to rapidly wean ourselves off our
dependence on fossil fuels and devise an energy plan that can see us lead
the world in the field of renewable energy. I thank you.

                SOUTH AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIP AGENCY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms K R MAGAU (ANC): Speaker, the ANC welcomes the announcement by Minister
Maite Nkoana-Mashabane that South Africa is set to create a United States-
style development aid agency, as it seeks to play a more prominent role as
a major donor country in Africa.

The South African Development Partnership Agency, which has already been
approved by Cabinet, will operate along the same lines as the United States
Agency for International Development, USAid, an initiative that provides
developing countries with funding for economic and humanitarian projects,
as part of the United States’ foreign policy objectives.

The planned agency will not only enhance our contribution to institutional
and capacity-building on the continent, but will also ensure that our post
conflict reconstruction and development efforts are centrally co-ordinated.

Through the multimillion-rand African Renaissance Fund, managed by the
Department of International Relations and Co-operation, South Africa is one
of the largest development aid providers in Africa and all its activities
will eventually be absorbed by the new aid agency, which will reduce
bureaucracy and duplication. We applaud the ANC-led government’s commitment
to continually provide aid in Africa.

Motsamaisi wa dipuisano, ke a leboha. [Mahofi.] [Thank you, Speaker.]
[Applause.]]

                        RAPE OF MEDICAL STAFF ON DUTY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Speaker, the ACDP is shocked and outraged by
reports of the rape of a doctor at the Pelonomi Hospital in Bloemfontein.
What is even more shocking is that a 16-year-old boy took part in the rape
with two other men, aged 24 and 29. The report says the doctor was on duty
when she was overpowered by three men in a ward at the hospital early on
Saturday morning. One of the men allegedly hit her over the head with a
brick and then the three men gang-raped her while she was unconscious.

In 2007, a Wits medical student was raped at the Chris Hani Baragwanath
Hospital in Soweto while walking to the facility’s blood bank. In May this
year, a female paramedic was gang-raped by three armed men when she and her
colleague went to rescue an injured toddler in Durban Deep in Johannesburg.

The violent rape of women in our country is a major concern for the ACDP
and it demands government’s urgent intervention. It is government’s
responsibility to ensure that citizens are safe from criminals,
particularly when they are in their homes and at work.

The ACDP wishes the traumatised and violated doctor at the Pelonomi
Hospital a speedy recovery and commends her for her commitment to saving
lives. Thank you.

  MINISTER REFUSES TO HAND OVER INTERIM REPORTS OF INTERIM NATIONAL DEFENCE
                          FORCE SERVICE COMMISSION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D J MAYNIER (DA): Speaker, the Defence Force and the men and women who
serve in the Defence Force are in deep trouble. But rather than sharing
information about the Defence Force with the people’s representatives,
information about the Defence Force has been hidden from the people’s
representatives.

The hon Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, Lindiwe Sisulu, has
refused point-blank to hand over the interim reports of the Interim
National Defence Force Service Commission, and there is now no prospect, in
my view, that the Minister will hand over the interim reports.

So, I have decided to do the right thing and begin to read extracts from
one of these reports in this Parliament. And just so we know how serious
things have become, let me begin by quoting from the conclusion of this
report, which reads: “There is a clear need for a wide variety of matters
to be attended to. Some of these matters, if not addressed immediately, are
likely to further affect the morale of troops and could even threaten state
security.”

Now, how is it that we are in a situation in which the military itself
could threaten state security? Using successive members’ statements, I will
read extracts from the interim report, and these extracts will show not
only that the Defence Force is in deep trouble but that the Minister misled
the Speaker, misled this Parliament and misled the people of South Africa.
[Interjections.] The fact is that these interim reports should never have
been hidden and I will not allow them to be hidden. [Time expired.]
[Interjections.]

                              OPERATION HLASELA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L P KHOARAI (ANC): Speaker, on 15 to 17 September 2010, the Premier of
the Free State, the hon Sekgobelo “Ace” Magashule, officially opened 104
houses, paved streets and the Unico Clothing Company that makes medicines
and bandages in my constituency, under the theme Operation Hlasela.

The ANC-led government will continue to bring hope to the lives of South
Africans, especially the people of the Free State. We would like to
congratulate the Premier of the Free State and his cabinet on bringing
about change and giving hope to the people of South Africa. Working
together, with all the people of South Africa, we can do more. Hlasela Ace
Magashule, Hlasela! [Attack, Ace Magashule, attack!] I thank you.
[Applause.]

                   KWAMANDLANGAMPISI PROTECTED ENVIRONMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs H S MSWELI (IFP): Hon Speaker, in what is a first for South Africa,
hectares of privately owned farmland were declared a protected environment
earlier this month. The KwaMandlangampisi Protected Environment, which
extends from Wakkerstroom to Luneburg in Mpumalanga, encompasses high-
altitude grasslands, wetlands and indigenous forests, and is home to
numerous threatened endemic plant, bird and animal species.

This catchment area, inclusive of the headwaters of the Pongola and Assegai
Rivers, is critical in terms of its national power generation. In this
regard, the IFP calls on the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs
to protect and conserve these kinds of environments, and to spread through
this initiative to the rest of South Africa the need for conservation and
the protection of our precious future water supplies. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                      FEMALE DOCTOR RAPED WHILE ON DUTY
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D A KGANARE (Cope): Speaker, it is clear to us that security is a
serious problem in state hospitals. The rape of a female doctor while on
duty outraged everyone in society. Such an incident, furthermore, is bound
to negatively affect the provision of health care services. What female
doctor, after what happened to the unfortunate doctor who was raped, will
now be willing to work at night?

The provision of security for staff at any workplace is the sole
responsibility of the employer. The use of private security does not
exonerate the government in any way. The liability rests squarely with
government. Private security companies have contractual obligations. If
they cannot meet their given obligations in full, they should be fired.

When security is compromised in the way it was in Bloemfontein at the
Pelonomi Hospital, dire consequences must follow for those who miserably
failed the doctor. Let me make it clear that the state was not the victim;
the only victim was the doctor. The state must therefore not attempt to
detract from its culpability by making out that it too was a victim. If
staff can be attacked by criminals in hospitals, what about the poor
patients who can do nothing to protect themselves? Personal security in
South Africa is a matter on the minds of South Africans every day.
It is insufficient for the government to issue a condemnation, as if they
were just bystanders. Government must act with resolve to address the
personal safety of all South Africans wherever they are. The failure of
government in respect of hospital security is inexcusable and unforgivable.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

                 SUPPORT FOR KWAZULU-NATAL EMERGING FARMERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M E MBILI (ANC): Speaker, the ANC welcomes the support given to emerging
farmers in the Drakensberg area of KwaZulu-Natal to supply yellow maize to
South African Breweries, SAB. This initiative came about as a result of a
partnership between the KwaZulu-Natal department of agriculture,
environmental affairs and rural development and SA Breweries.

The farmers will supply 180 000 tons of yellow maize. SAB is prepared to
buy 5 000 tons in the first year of the project, and the quantity will
gradually increase over time. This is a milestone for emerging farmers in
the province as this will transform their communities and advance the
entrepreneurial skills of emerging farmers.

This programme is in line with the ANC strategy of implementing large-scale
programmes to establish new smallholders and improve the productivity of
existing small-scale and subsistence farmers, as well as integrating
smallhold farmers into a formal value chain and linking them with markets.

The ANC, therefore, calls on all big companies to emulate this initiative
as a means of ensuring food security and combating hunger.

Yiyona-kelento edala ukuthi sisebenzele u-ANC, yiyo lento edala ukuthi
singalali emakhaya. Siyabonga. [Ihlombe.] [That is why we work for the ANC
and leave the luxury of our homes. Thank you. [Applause.]]

                        DROUGHT IN NELSON MANDELA BAY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D C SMILES (DA): Speaker, Nelson Mandela Bay is experiencing its worst
drought since 1989. Dams are at 31% of capacity and are predicted to run
dry by August next year, 10 months away. There are projects on the table
that will take between 10 and 16 months to complete, but there is no money
available to allow these projects to start. An urgent application for
funding assistance has hit the wall of co-operative governance at its
bureaucratic red tape worst.

An amount of R1,6 billion in drought relief funding was requested in May
this year. The request was ratified by the provincial local government
department in July before being passed on to Minister Shiceka’s department
for consideration. The latter department is now insisting on details of how
other drought relief funding made available in the Eastern Cape has been
spent, before it forwards the Nelson Mandela Bay application to the
Minister for his signature.

The national department’s mistrust of the Eastern Cape government is
understandable. But why should the Nelson Mandela Bay funding be based on
the way other municipalities have spent or misspent their funds? The
Eastern Cape government has failed to provide the requested details. The
municipality itself has yet to make any effort to speed up the process. The
mayor is only putting together a high-level delegation to approach national
government. All spheres of government are guilty of failure ... [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

             SOUTH AFRICA TO HOST PRESTIGIOUS GYM FOR LIFE EVENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs V BAM-MUGWANYA (ANC): Hon Speaker, since the year 2004, the Department
of Health has prioritised the promotion of healthy lifestyles as one of the
critical programmes that need to be advocated throughout the country.

The Healthy Lifestyles Programme was launched to promote health and
wellbeing among individuals, communities and populations, enabling them to
address the broad determinations of health and to identify risk factors.
The critical aspect of the programme is to address the onset and the
prevalence of noncommunicable diseases, the dangers of obesity, unhealthy
diet and physical inactiveness ...

... eyenza abantu babe yizidudla, bakhuluphale ... [... causes obesity in
people ...]

... successful ageing and mental health, and the contribution of alcohol
abuse to non-natural deaths.

Therefore, we welcome the Gym for Life initiative and the honour that has
been bestowed on South Africa to host this prestigious event which will be
held in Cape Town from 10 to 11 July 2013. This event on the international
gymnastics calendar will attract between 3 000 and 5 000 participating
gymnasts.

Furthermore, it is worth noting that this event will open doors for South
Africa to host the World Gymnaestrada, the greatest gymnastic event in the
world. This demonstrates the confidence gained by the international
community in South Africa’s ability to host world-class events after we
hosted a very successful Fifa Soccer World Cup. This will be another
tourism opportunity gained, promoting South Africa as a tourist
destination. I thank you. [Applause.]
                  FRAUDULENT TEACHERS UNDERMINING EDUCATION

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Hon Speaker, we support the view of
the hon member of the IFP. Presenting false or forged qualifications is a
serious matter. Teaching is a serious profession and discipline, and we do
believe that people who present false or forged qualifications are guilty
of the crime of forgery and uttering and fraud and the appropriate criminal
action must be taken.

We do support the view that we have to be vigilant, and the SA Council for
Educators must ensure that they screen educators properly in terms of their
qualifications.

Furthermore, we would certainly raise the matter within the Council of
Education Ministers meeting to ensure that all departments are aware of the
threat of false qualifications. Therefore we will do whatever is necessary
to protect and safeguard our learners and the profession as a whole. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

             MEASURES TO ADDRESS SHORTAGE OF HEALTH CARE WORKERS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Hon Speaker, we welcome the statement by
the member of the DA regarding the Minister’s statement on allowing doctors
to train at public hospitals. However, I do not agree with the member that
that is an ad hoc intervention.

Therefore, the call for a comprehensive health plan is misplaced, because
there already is a 10-point plan from the Department of Health that is
currently being implemented which encompasses the improvement of primary
health care. Amongst other things, there is the hospital revitalisation
plan that steps up the building of infrastructure in health facilities in
preparation for the implementation of the National Health Insurance system
that will extend universal health care to all South Africans. Thank you.

                  FOOD SECURITY IN SOUTH AFRICA IN JEOPARDY

                            (Minister’s Response)

Die ADJUNKMINISTER VAN LANDBOU, BOSBOU EN VISSERYE: Agb Speaker, die agb
lid van Cope het verwys na voedselsekuriteit en hy is tegnies reg. Op die
oomblik is dit wêreldwyd ’n baie belangrike agendapunt. Dit was die
agendapunt by die G8. Dit was by die G20 bespreek en by die Afrika-unie was
dit een van die hoofpunte.

In Afrika en in Suid-Afrika se geval is bestaansboere baie belangrik. Dit
bring politieke stabiliteit en dit moet in Suid-Afrika bevorder word. Die
werklikheid is dat bestaansboere hoofsaaklik kos vir hulself en miskien vir
die omgewing produseer  maar daar is nie genoeg produksie om vir 70% van
die mense in stedelike gebiede ook daarvan te voorsien nie.

Die Departement van Landbou, Bosbou en Visserye onderskei vir die eerste
keer, u kan gaan kyk, tussen drie kategorieë boere: bestaansboere,
kleinboere en kommersiële boere. As u my toesprake die afgelope jaar gevolg
het, dan het ek deurlopend oor die drie kategorieë gepraat en die klem gelê
en gesê enigiemand wat in Suid-Afrika oor voedselsekerheid wil praat en die
kommersiële boere ignoreer, weet nie waarvan hy praat nie.

Dit is dus wel belangrik dat ons kennis neem dat 22 lande in Afrika reeds
vir boere van Suid-Afrika gevra het. Dit wys hoe gesog hulle is en ons moet
moeite doen om hul hier te behou, want enige kundigheid wat die land
verlaat, is tot ons almal se nadeel. (Translation of Afrikaans Minister’s
response follows.)

[The DEPUTY MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Hon Speaker,
the hon member from Cope referred to food security and he is correct,
technically. It is currently a very important point on agendas across the
globe. It was on the G8’s agenda. It was discussed at the G20, and was one
of the main points at the African Union.

In the case of Africa and South Africa, subsistence farmers are very
important. It leads to political stability and must be promoted in South
Africa. The reality is that subsistence farmers mainly produce food for
themselves and perhaps for the surrounding area, but there is not enough
production to also supply 70% of the people in urban areas.

For the first time, you can go and check for yourselves, the Department of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries differentiates between three categories
of farmers: subsistence farmers, small farmers and commercial farmers. If
you followed my speeches throughout the year, you’ll recall that I
continuously spoke about these three categories and emphasised that anybody
who wants to talk about food security in South Africa and ignores the
commercial farmers, does not know what he is talking about.

It is therefore important to note that 22 countries in Africa have already
requested farmers from South Africa. This is a clear indication of how
sought-after they are and we must make an effort to keep them here, as we
are all disadvantaged when any skills leave the country.]

                  FOOD SECURITY IN SOUTH AFRICA IN JEOPARDY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Thank you, hon Speaker.
I just want to add a few things to what the hon Deputy Minister of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries said on food security.

Government has set aside R900 million this year for recapitalising and
developing the farms which have been acquired since 1994. That programme
has started, and we are working with commercial farmers. We are partnering
commercial farmers with emerging farmers, so that we can reach a point at
which, perhaps very soon, we can be assured of food security.

Lastly, that money is also going to recapitalise the irrigation schemes in
the former homelands. We have identified five provinces for that purpose.
We are working on a plan right now that is going to be implemented soon,
and it focuses on food security. Thank you. [Applause.]

                        RAPE OF MEDICAL STAFF ON DUTY
                      FEMALE DOCTOR RAPED WHILE ON DUTY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Thank you,
hon Speaker. I want to say ...

...ukuba ukudlwengulwa nokuxhatshazwa koomama nabantwana zizenzo
ezingamkelekanga kakhulu kubantu baseMzantsi Afrika nakurhulumente wethu.
Kungoko ke sakhe imithetho eliqela, ukususela ngo-1994, yokukhusela oomama
nabantwana. NoMgaqo-siseko wethu ukwamele ukukhusela amalungelo oomama.
Kungoko amasebe ahlukeneyo karhulumente esenza unakonako wokuba oomama
bakhuseleke; ndibala iSebe lezamaPolisa, kunye neSebe lezoMthetho.

Kungoko, kwakhona, kuvuselelwa iinkundla ezifana neenkundla zemiba
yasemakhaya, kunye namacandelo okukhusela abantwana emapoliseni.
Siyabambisana ke nalo iSebe loHlaliso loLuntu, apho kwakhiwa khona izindlu
namakhaya okhuseleko kusakhelwa amakhosikazi nabantwana abaphatheke kakubi.

Xa ndiza kuhlala phantsi ndifuna ukuthi urhulumente akanakho ukuwubamba
yedwa lo mthwalo. Lo mthwalo ufuna siphathisane ngokubanzi nesizwe, oomama
nootata, ikakhulu. Ndifuna ukuthi nabefundisi bethu sifuna ukubabona
bedlala indima ebalulekileyo kulo mba. Sifuna ukuva uMfundisi uMeshoe,
ngecawa xa eshumayela, ethetha ngalo mcimbi. [Kwaqhwatywa.]

Siza kumisela i-16 Days of Activism for no Violence against Women and
Children. Njengoko besitshilo ngaphambili, sithi asiyiyo eyamakhosikazi
kuphela le nto; yeyoomama nootata nesizwe siphela. Ngoko ke siyathemba
ukuba abefundisi bethu, iinkokheli zethu zoluntu nabo bonke ootata
abazinikezeleyo baza kuba behamba nathi kweli phulo lingaka, esithi makube
liphulo leentsuku ezingama-365, unyaka wonke uphela. Ndiyabulela.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... that rape and abuse against women and children are not acceptable in
the eyes of the people of South Africa and to our government. That is why
we have promulgated a long list of laws to protect women and children,
since 1994. Even our Constitution protects the rights of women. That is why
different government departments ensure that women are protected and I am
referring to departments such as the Department of Police and the
Department of Justice and Constitutional Development.

That is why, again, we have revived courts in the Police Service that
protect children like civil courts, and units. We work together with the
Department of Human Settlements, which builds houses and homes of safety
for women and children who are abused.

In conclusion, I want to say government cannot take on this responsibility
all by itself. This responsibility needs us to work together with the
nation at large, especially men and women. I want to appeal to our
religious leaders to play an important role in this regard. We want to hear
Rev Meshoe preaching on Sundays against the abuse of women and children.
[Applause.]

We are going to launch the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence against
Women and Children. As we have mentioned before, it is not for women alone;
it involves women, men and the nation at large. We hope that our religious
leaders and community leaders, together with all men who are dedicated to
this campaign, will support us in this massive campaign which we hope to
drive for 365 days, the whole year. I thank you. [Applause.]]

        STUDY PAINTS WORRYING PICTURE OF SOUTH AFRICA’S COAL RESERVES
  MINISTER REFUSES TO HAND OVER INTERIM REPORTS OF INTERIM NATIONAL DEFENCE
                          FORCE SERVICE COMMISSION

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY — PERFORMANCE MONITORING, EVALUATION, AND
ADMINISTRATION: Mr Speaker, let me quickly respond to two issues which have
been raised. The first issue relates to the coal reserves that we have and
the energy problems that we are likely to face in the future. Obviously, we
are mindful of the fact that coal is a finite resource. But, again, I think
we need to admit that, in South Africa, we do not have sufficient capacity
for hydroelectricity, which could be one of the most sustainable ways to
power our economy.

As we battle to grow our economy, we have to supply energy in the meantime.
You would know that we have launched a programme for solar energy — one of
the biggest on the continent, if not in the world - to try to address
specifically what you are raising. So, we are mindful of that issue and we
think that, going into the future, we will be able to merge the renewable
energy needs of our economy and industry.

The second point I want to address relates to the issue of the report from
the Department of Defence and Military Veterans. It is amazing that the hon
member is looking for a report that he has, which even some of us, as
members of Cabinet, do not have. He keeps calling on the Minister to
deliver the report. Reasons have been given as to why it has not been
delivered, and I think those reasons have been accepted by Parliament. The
DA might not have accepted them, but Parliament has accepted them.
Fortunately, he has the report, so what does he want? Thank you.
[Applause.]


                     DIVISION OF REVENUE AMENDMENT BILL


                          (Consideration of Report)

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move:

    That the report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.


                     DIVISION OF REVENUE AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Hon Speaker and hon members, section 214 of
our Constitution requires that government ensures a transparent and
equitable system to divide nationally raised revenue between the three
spheres of government. The main Budget, as we all know, announces
government spending for the next financial year and preliminary allocations
for the two subsequent years. In the middle of each year, the adjustments
process provides an opportunity to revise the main Budget in response to
changes that have affected planned government spending for that particular
year.

The latest Bill passed in 2009, which is the Money Bills Amendment
Procedure and Related Matters Act, requires that the Minister of Finance
table a Division of Revenue Amendment Bill with the revised fiscal
framework if the adjustments budget effects changes in the Division of
Revenue Act, which we passed earlier in the year.

The Division of Revenue Amendment Bill tabled in this House, together with
the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement and the Adjustments Appropriation
Bill on 27 October, will, for the first time, be processed in terms of the
Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matter Act, Act No 9 of 2009.
The Division of Revenue Amendment Bill and its underlying allocations are
the culmination of extensive consultation processes between national,
provincial and local government.

This year’s Division of Revenue Act covers, in detail, all transfers to be
made to provinces and municipalities over the next three years. The
schedules attached to the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill replace the
schedules of the 2010 Division of Revenue Act, which we tabled earlier this
year, so as to reflect the updated allocations that take account of
adjustments made through the adjustments budget process, and to account for
shifts, virements and corrections in the schedules of transfers tabled with
the Division of Revenue earlier. The transfers for the two outer years of
the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, are not changed and
preliminary adjustments to those transfers and the transfers for 2013-14
are shown in the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, MTBPS.

The Division of Revenue Amendment Bill is tabled in the face of ongoing
global economic uncertainty. Even with the benefit of higher than forecast
government revenues, there is still a significant need for prudence, the
introduction of austerity measures or the strengthening of existing
austerity plans. Members are reminded that levels of government expenditure
before the 2008 financial crisis have been maintained, but this was made
possible through increased debt.

The adjustments budget makes provision for an additional R7,2 billion to
the 2010 Budget. This consists of rollovers, unforeseeable and unavoidable
expenditure, higher-than-expected personnel remuneration costs, self-
financing expenditure and a saving made in the state debt costs. A
R6 billion contingency reserve that was set aside and a projected saving of
R3,6 billion at the national level means total expenditure decreases by
R2,5 billion. National departments will therefore receive an additional
R2,6 billion, provinces R6,1 billion, and municipalities R493 million.

With regard to increased allocations for a range of provincial functions,
we have adjusted provincial transfers to cater for a limited number of the
many spending pressures that exist in provincial budgets. These are listed
hereunder. I will not bore the House with them, because they are there in
the adjustments Bill.


Lastly, we also know that in the 2010 Budget the Minister of Finance
announced an increase of R10,1 billion to the local government fiscal
framework. This adjustment for local government covers, amongst other
things, the R391 million added to the local government equitable share to
allow the rollover of funds previously held back due to unspent conditional
grants. An amount of R92 million was added to disaster relief grants for
drought relief for the Mossel Bay Municipality. Ten million rand in
rollovers was also added to the water services operating subsidy grants.

Hon Speaker, allow me to express my appreciation to the Minister for his
sound leadership, the National Treasury, the entire team for the sterling
work that has been put together to produce this Bill, and to the Standing
Committee on Appropriations under the steady hand of hon Mshiyeni Sogoni
for the contributions to the process of this Division of Revenue Amendment
Bill. It is clear that the allocations contained in this year’s Division of
Revenue Amendment Bill should put government in a better position to deal
with the additional pressures placed on the 2010 Budget that were not known
when the 2010 Budget was presented. Thank you. [Applause.]


Mr E M SOGONI: Igama lethu sonke! [It’s our name!]

Hon Speaker, hon members, comrades and distinguished guests — oh, there are
no guests — the Budget is a financial instrument which the majority parties
the whole world over use to ensure that their policy programmes are brought
into effect through the provision of the necessary financial resources.
Given that the programmes of the ANC government are targeted towards the
poor, service delivery and the Budget are mutually reinforcing elements of
a common objective, hence amendments to the Division of Revenue Bill are
critical in ensuring that the fiscus does meet the priorities that the ANC
has set government in terms of delivery in the different spheres of
government.

The spending priorities are budgeted for through an adjustment to already-
agreed-upon programmes or where an emergency may have arisen or there is a
shift in the programme or responsibilities. These priorities of the ANC
government, as set out in the ANC’s 2009 manifesto framework document, are
also reflected in the 2010 state of the nation address. Amongst other
things, these are: expanding employment and safeguarding social security;
improving the quality of education and skills development; enhancing the
quality of health care; rolling out a comprehensive rural strategy;
creating a built environment and human settlements to support economic
growth; having programmes directed towards combating crime and corruption;
and prioritising local government challenges.

With respect to the political rationale for an amendment to the Division of
Revenue Bill, the key question that arises in this debate is whether the
amendments in the Bill address the priorities and challenges that have
arisen since the tabling of the Division of Revenue Bill in February, and
whether the amendments retain the overall character of the Division of
Revenue Bill as being equitable.

The Deputy Minister has also referred to section 214(1) of the Constitution
of South Africa, which requires that every year a Division of Revenue Act
determines the equitable division of nationally raised revenue between the
three spheres of government. The Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act
prescribes the process for determining the equitable sharing and the
allocation of revenue raised nationally.

The resolve to create a better life for all and eradicate poverty through
focusing on the ANC’s seven priority areas obviously has an impact upon the
decision to amend the Division of Revenue Bill. It follows that the
certainty of meeting a priority is strengthened or weakened by the quality
or quantity of resource allocation towards its realisation.

We are very mindful of the fact that there are intense and healthy
discussions taking place around the intergovernmental fiscal relations and
the need for change. This would be obvious since it is only in practice
that shortcomings are revealed and the need for change is therefore
recommended.

Changes to the local equitable share formula are necessary and we need to
examine the SA Local Government Association, Salga, and the Financial and
Fiscal Commission, FFC, proposals in this regard.

At the September 2010 national general council of the ANC these concerns
were raised and the process of addressing them at our policy conference in
2012 will happen. Concerns over formulas and related matters governing and
regulating transfers are part of these ongoing healthy debates.

Whilst this amending Bill cannot address certain critical issues since that
falls outside the ambit of this Bill, it is worth mentioning, however,
going forward that there are critical issues for the local sphere of
government that remain unresolved like the replacement of the Regional
Services Council levy.

During the committee public hearings into the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement, MTBPS, a number of issues have been raised which going forward
would need to be discussed as they have a direct bearing upon the division
of revenue and subsequent amendments. Many of these relate to local
government and the view of the department that additional funding to the
baseline would be necessary in defined areas going forward.

The SA Local Government Association, Salga, for instance, had this to say
to the committee:

   There should be a systematic review of baselines to ensure that the
   revenue allocations to local government as a whole are congruent with its
   full range of developmental and service delivery responsibilities and the
   vertical share of local government meets the increasing demand for
   municipal services.

   The magnitude of the funding should be such that it will enable
   municipalities to appoint the relevant skilled personnel to manage their
   finances, human resources, service delivery functions, and core
   administration. This will address one of the key priorities of the local
   government turnaround strategy that municipalities are currently
   implementing.


   Availability of credible data on key variables relating to the
   socioeconomic, demographic and spatial profiles of municipalities needs
   to be addressed not only to update the data underpinning the formula, but
   also a more fundamental review of the structure of the formula itself.

The SPEAKER: Hon members on my right: Please reduce the volume of the
noise; let the speaker be heard.

Mr E M SOGONI: Hon Speaker, if the hon members on the left could do the
same ... [Interjections.] The HRSC ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, could we ask the person at the podium ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, please take your seat. Allow the speaker to be
heard. Is it a point of something? [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: I’m not really sure how I would describe it, Mr Speaker. But
I was just, you know ... it doesn’t matter. [Laughter.]
Mr E M SOGONI: Hon Speaker, the Human Sciences Research Council, the HSRC,
which was also at the hearings, had this to say about the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement:

   Employment is clearly stated as the government’s top priority; it takes
   into account the scale of the challenges faced in the areas of poverty,
   education, and health; it recognises cities as engines of growth
   requiring more investment in infrastructure to address bottlenecks and
   backlogs; it recognises that the expanding informal settlements need
   investment; it provides for faster growth in municipal spending than
   provincial and national expenditure; it recognises that investment in
   transport can improve living standards for workers, cut transport costs
   and increase productivity; and it gives due attention to rural
   development, youth employment, the Industrial Policy Action Plan, and the
   Community Works Programme.

I think that the Deputy Minister did mention the issue of the money Bills
Act. Clearly, Parliament has been seized with the implications of this. A
number of workshops have been held to capacitate members with the
obligations of these workshops. But, clearly, I know that some members will
raise the fact that there is no parliamentary budget office, but I can say
without fear of contradiction that the process for the establishment of a
parliamentary budget office is on as – I think that this morning - some
documents were delivered to members of the committee.
Finally, no committee has approached the Standing Committee on
Appropriations to propose amendments after the budget review reports
process. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister, the
Deputy Minister, National Treasury staff and colleagues of the Standing
Committee on Appropriations who really dedicated their time - even after
hours – to ensure that the report was passed, and today this amending Bill
is being adopted. The ANC supports the passing of the Division of Revenue
Amendment Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M SWART: Deputy Speaker, the primary objective of the division of
revenue to the various spheres of government should be focused on service
delivery to the poor and the marginalised. Such service delivery should
therefore take place at the level closest to the people and that is, in
other words, local government.

National government must, however, ensure that municipalities have both the
finances and the human capacity to perform proper service delivery. The
millions of rands paid by national government to municipalities annually in
the form of grants to augment their income are therefore welcome. The
average annual growth over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, in
respect of conditional grants to municipalities is 11,6%.

Unfortunately, control over expenditure of the grant leaves much to be
desired. Municipalities often use grants to offset overdrafts at banks or
for purposes totally unrelated to the priority objectives for which the
grants were made available in the first place. Worse still, is when these
grants are simply not spent due to human capacity constraints at
municipalities. A major cause of these capacity constraints often lies in
the field of cadre deployment and the resultant appointment of employees
and managers in local government who are totally unfit for purpose, but who
have the right political connections.

A case in point is the devolution of property rates grants. These grants
are made available by the Department of Public Works to provinces.
Provinces, in turn, pay the grants over to municipalities, for municipal
rates and taxes due by government for government buildings, but only after
receipt by provinces of specified accounts submitted by municipalities.

As at 30 September this year, R862 million or 79% of the allocated budget
for property rates devolution, had already been paid over to provinces by
the Department of Public Works. The balance of the allocated budget will be
paid over during October. Unfortunately, when one looks at the onward
payments to municipalities thus far, a sorry tale unfolds. At the end of
August 2010 an amount of R435 million had not yet been transferred or paid
over to municipalities and sits in the bank accounts of provinces.

Payments effected to municipalities by KwaZulu-Natal province, for
instance, amounted to 35% of monies received; the Eastern Cape 14%; the
North West 9%; the Northern Cape 2%; Gauteng 1%; and Mpumalanga 0%. The
Free State performed well with a 97% payout. The Western Cape payout
amounted to 146% of the budget allocation and was based on proper accounts
submitted by Western Cape municipalities

The reasons mainly advanced for the poor payouts to municipalities are
delays in issuing of invoices by municipalities, inaccurate billing
systems, inaccurate verification and reconciliation of invoices from other
municipalities, the new Property Rates Act and unreasonable interest
charges. All these reasons point to a serious lack of human capacity at
local government level. The result is obviously a shortage of funds which
hampers service delivery where it is most needed.

Provinces cannot be blamed for the poor payouts as the fault lies with
local government. Despite this, provinces are requesting additional funds
for the devolution of property rates. It is questionable whether any funds
should be made available until such time as municipalities get their house
in order.

To improve capacity, the solution lies in the appointment of the right
people at local government level. Such capacity must be at the coalface.
The appointment of additional Deputy Ministers will increase government
expenditure tremendously, but will not improve service delivery to poverty-
stricken communities one iota.

Get rid of underperforming officials and replace them with appointees
appointed on merit and not based on political connections. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Deputy Speaker, from Cope’s side we want to state upfront
that we will support the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill. However, we
want to raise the following concerns.

Firstly, we agree that the Budget remains a tool for government for service
delivery, but when the tool is not used appropriately to deliver service,
we must raise our concerns. One of the issues that we have been dealing
with is the issue of rollovers - rollovers versus service delivery. In
considering this Bill, we must continue to emphasise service delivery,
service delivery and, once more, service delivery in terms of the Budget
that we are passing, including the Bill itself.

Our second concern is that in terms of the amending money Bill, we get
given a particular period of time to consider this Bill to be able to apply
our minds in order for us to be able to amend it. We are worried that the
steamrolling of the process and the cutting of the time are aimed at
ensuring that we do not read the fine print of the Act or the Bill itself,
so that we do not see the exact amount of money that continues to bloat the
top-heavy executive. We can see that this Bill will continue to put money
into the executive, which is in fact going to have a negative impact on
service delivery.

Thirdly, we are concerned that this Parliament will remain a rubber stamp
for executive capacity. This must be addressed in order for committees to
amend the Budget itself. Unless that is addressed, we will end up sounding
like a broken record every time we raise this matter.

When the Budget is referred to the committee and the committee is not given
appropriate capacity to consider the Budget and to make a meaningful
contribution and intervention, we can say that we have the Bill but having
the appropriate capacity will remain a distant dream. From our side we
believe that the capacity of the committee must be put in place so that we
can deal with the issue of service delivery and appropriate service
delivery so that as this Parliament we pass this Act.

Having said that, the issue that has been raised, including the issue of
spending capacity, remains a concern for the committee. Municipal and
provincial government capacity to implement the capacity to deliver has to
do with skills. Maybe when we deal with a Public Service that is
integrated, we will be able to address this particular concern, but
otherwise we will be supporting the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]
Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the importance of this Bill
lies not so much in what it says but, rather, in the fact that it is
developing one of the most important powers of a democratic Parliament,
namely that we are now enabled to amend the Budget and other money Bills.

After 16 years of democracy, Parliament is now exercising the important
power embodied in the following statement: “There shall be no taxation
before representation.” We have the power to amend not only Bills which
change or raise new revenues, but also those which authorise the state to
spend money so raised. We should not forego this power by not using it.

One must also welcome the fact that the process of allocating revenues
amongst the various spheres is based on a five-year programme. We welcome
the fact that more money is given to the lower spheres of government in an
overall shift of resources equal to approximately 10%, as that shows our
government is placing greater emphasis on delivery. The lower the
allocation of money to the people, the greater the benefit the money will
have for the people.

The IFP supports the Bill because it is also good for democracy and it is
good for good governance. Thank you.

Mr J P GELDERBLOM: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members, comrades and guests,
the ANC welcomes the introduction of this amending Bill and supports its
passing by the House today. An important element of this Bill deals with
allocations to local government and rural development - Mr Ellis, it is not
a statement today; do not worry! – and land reform and agriculture. I will
focus on these aspects of the Bill.

The ANC’s approach to democratic governance is that local government is not
only important for exercising individual autonomy and liberty in a
functioning, democratic dispensation, but it is also a central feature of a
developmental state that gives priority to the people in terms of the
provision of public goods.

The central role of local government in development and service delivery is
well articulated in the Constitution of the Republic. Chapter 7 section 153
states that:


   A municipality must —


        a) structure and manage its administration and budgeting and
           planning processes to give priority to the basic needs of the
           community, and to promote the social and economic development of
           the community; and


        b) participate in national and provincial development programmes.

In recognition of the realities of uneven development in our country and
the terrible legacy of previous apartheid spatial planning, the
Constitution further promotes a redistributive approach to financing in our
governance system. Chapter 13, section 227 stipulates that:


   (1)      Local government and each province —


         a) is entitled to an equitable share of revenue raised nationally
            to enable it to provide basic services and perform the
            functions allocated to it; and


         b) may receive other allocations from national government revenue,
            either conditionally or unconditionally.

The Bill proposes adjustments for certain areas of local government. We
need to acknowledge the fact that without capacity, local government will
not meet its constitutional obligations. In this regard, the municipal
systems improvement grant, the purpose of which is to assist municipalities
in building in-house capacity to perform their functions and stabilise
institutional and governance systems, will receive R212 million this
financial year. This will grow to R224 720 million in 2011-12, and up to
R235 million for 2012-2013.

The local government financial management grant, the purpose of which is to
promote and support reforms in financial management by building capacity in
municipalities to implement the Financial Management Act, is allocated
R364 589 million for 2010-11, R384 641 million for 2011-12, and
R403 873 million for 2012-13.

The revised allocations and the increase in the total baseline allocations
to local government have to be welcomed. This is particularly significant
in the sense that additional allocations are focused on infrastructure and
areas of maximum economic development potential.

Water services and infrastructure are critical for the achievement of our
goals for rural development, land reform and food security. They are
consistent with our development priorities as stated in the ANC election
manifesto which commits government to implementing a comprehensive rural
and agricultural development and land reform programme. Food security for
the most vulnerable rural sectors receives a grant allocation to assist
farming communities to achieve an increase in agricultural production and
to enhance a sustainable conservation of natural resources through a
community-based priority approach. Coupled with this, job opportunities are
created through the Expanded Public Works Programme, which will generate
much-needed revenue opportunities.

Ons is ook baie dankbaar vir die R50 miljoen wat vir die Wes-Kaap bewillig
is om te kyk na die droogte-geteisterde gebiede. In die verlede is hierdie
geld aangewend by die plekke waar die behoefte die grootste is. In ’n groot
mate het die bystand van Agri Wes-Kaap ’n groot rol gespeel by insette
rondom die identifisering van hierdie droogte-geteisterde gebiede. Ek wil
graag die Minister versoek om op ’n gereelde basis hierdie proses to
monitor sodat die werklike droogte-geteisterde gebiede nie oorgeslaan word
ten gunste van politieke gewin nie. Ons moet nooit die armste van die armes
op die landbou-akker vergeet nie.

Dieselfde behandeling is ook van toepassing op kommersiële boere en
opkomende boere wat finansieël baie swaar kry. Ek pleit dus dat die
toedeling van hierdie fondse te alle tye op ’n regverdige, eerbare en
wetenskaplike wyse sal plaasvind. Minister, ek laat dit in u bekwame hande.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[We are also very grateful for the R50 million which has been allocated to
the Western Cape for use in drought-stricken areas. In the past, this money
was utilised in places where the need was the greatest. To a large extent
the contribution of Agri Western Cape played a big role with inputs around
the identification of these drought-stricken areas. I would like to request
the Minister to monitor this process regularly, to prevent the real drought-
stricken areas from being overlooked in favour of political gain. We must
never forget the poor people who are working the land.

The same treatment can also be applicable to commercial farmers and
emerging farmers who are struggling financially. Therefore, I want to urge
that the allocation of these funds must at all times take place in an
equitable, honourable and scientific manner. Minister, I leave it in your
capable hands.]

Water infrastructure in the development of agriculture forms a critical
part of the government’s Comprehensive Rural Development Programme.
Although this programme is led by the Department of Rural Development and
Land Reform, its ultimate implementation and achievement is dependent on
local government and its capacity to deliver. The role of local government
in building and developing an agricultural economy in our country should
not be underestimated and, therefore, building water infrastructure must be
given priority.

The additional allocations in this adjustment address a critical area of
water infrastructure in local government and the equitable share, which is
important for the development of our agricultural economy. On this basis,
the ANC supports the amending Bill.

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!] [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Hon Deputy Speaker, as a consequence of the adjustments
Budget, we are gathered here today to make consequential changes to the
division of revenue. As I said when we debated the division of revenue in
March, the division of revenue is a vital instrument that provides the
first step in the process of service delivery.

It is necessary and logical that a large proportion of the revenue should
be channelled towards the provinces and municipalities. These two tiers of
government have constitutional service delivery mandates. What is more,
they are, by virtue of proximity, supposedly better placed to deliver. We
are nonetheless faced with a contrary, but incontrovertible reality that
these spheres of government have a dismal track record.

It is a matter of deep concern that provinces and councils, usually those
that are responsible for the poorest regions of our country, are incapable
of properly spending the funds allocated to them. Some provinces, such as
the Eastern Cape, are repeat offenders when it comes to the failure to
spend vital funding. The political leadership of these administrations are
quick to rebuff any criticism or complaint about lack of service delivery,
but year in and year out they are guilty of not spending billions of rand.

Thus we look upon this Division of Revenue Bill with trepidation. We cannot
disagree with it, yet we have serious reservations about the ability of
this division to result in the same proportion of delivery. Conditional
grants do not resolve this problem. At the heart of the matter is a severe
lack of skills, coupled with an institutional culture that celebrates
ineptitude and turns a blind eye to cronyism and tender fraud.

National government will simply have to improve its ability to monitor the
spending of provincial and local governments. One of the leading causes of
delivery failures and one the key reasons why the division of revenue does
not produce the intended results is the countless vacancies at provincial
and municipal levels in critical areas such as financial management and
engineering.

As the UDM has indicated before, government is missing an opportunity. It
could improve service delivery by providing jobs for qualified skilled
professionals, whilst reducing reliance on expensive consultants. It will
require political will to ensure that these positions are filled, because
by their nature such positions will put the brakes on the gravy train. The
UDM supports the Bill. Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker.

Mr S N SWART: Deputy Speaker, section 12(4) of the money bills amendment
Act requires that the Minister of Finance must table a Division of Revenue
Amendment Bill with the revised fiscal framework, if the adjustments Budget
effects changes to the Division of Revenue Act for the relevant year, and
that is to enable us as Parliament to exercise our powers and to
investigate fully those amendments.

In this case, we’ve seen the adjustments for 2010 which concern the
Division of Revenue Act and hence this Bill. So we’ve seen that the revised
provincial allocations include R4,2 billion being added, which includes
R3,8 billion for higher salary and housing allowance costs; R350 million to
cover the costs of occupation-specific dispensation agreements in health;
R769 million towards the devolution of the property rate funds grant to
provinces; and there are a number of other figures for provincial
allocations.

What is crucial is for us as parliamentarians to fully interrogate those
figures against the background of what the Minister of Finance has said.
There are also additional allocations of R1,8 billion to the local
government equitable share, including R92 million for drought relief in
Mossel Bay, which the ACDP welcomes.

In exercising our oversight functions, we need to ensure that these
additional allocations are spent on the purposes for which they’ve been
appropriated. Of great concern to us is that, according to the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement, capital expenditure continues to underperform in
terms of the budgeted amounts, with an estimated R12,9 billion in capital
underspending by provincial and local governments for the past financial
year.

We as parliamentarians must ensure that both provinces and municipalities
have the capacity to spend these vast sums of money allocated and that such
rollovers do not happen again, particularly in view of the new powers we
have in terms of the money bills amendment Act. Notwithstanding this,
however, the ACDP will support this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr P J RABIE: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, hon Deputy Ministers, hon
members, this Bill was tabled in Parliament on 27 October 2010 by the
Minister of Finance. The Bill in essence contains a number of clauses that
allow unconditional and conditional allocations to provinces and
municipalities.

The Appropriations committee was fortunate to have public engagements with
the National Treasury and various other public research institutions and
civil society organisations. Two issues can be regarded as top priority:
one, the lack of employment in rural and urban areas; two, the lack of
delivery regarding sanitation, education, water, health and housing, which
requires that the private and the public sectors admit that we have a
delivery crisis of major proportions and provide solutions timeously.

Allow me to refer briefly to health and local government as another two
pressing issues. According to the Human Sciences Research Council in their
submissions to the Appropriations committee, five and a half million people
in South Africa are HIV-positive, and women aged between 15 and 29 record
levels of HIV of up to 33%. These figures have wide ramifications for our
future growth.
Of the 237 local municipalities, 26 or 11% can be classified as high-
capacity municipalities. One hundred and twenty, or 51%, of all the
municipalities in our country can be classified as medium-capacity
municipalities, and 91 or 38% can be classified as low capacity.

The municipal infrastructure grant, MIG, expenditure will be
R12,529 billion by 2011, and will grow to R18 billion by 2012-13. Studies,
however, show that the quality of infrastructure being delivered is not up
to standard and the maintenance of existing infrastructure leaves a lot to
be desired. A survey conducted by the Department of Co-operative Governance
and Traditional Affairs showed that 48% of the MIG projects experienced
problems, for example contractor quality was poor, design failure was
common and there were a number of other pressing issues.

What is clear is that Parliament and the Appropriations committee will have
to play a greater role in future regarding the expenditure of government.
Parliament approved the money bills amendment Act in April 2009. This Act
provides for the formation of a budget office to assist the Finance and
Appropriations committees in their deliberations about budgets. It is a
deplorable state of affairs that after nearly two years the budget office
has not been established despite promises by the Speaker to this effect.
Madam Deputy Speaker, this is really long overdue.

The Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act further
prescribes certain procedures and timeframes to be followed when approving
the Division of Revenue Bill. For example, it prescribes that a period of
nine parliamentary days should elapse after approval of the fiscal
framework before the Division of Revenue Bill is approved. The purpose of
this is to give the Appropriations committee the opportunity to liaise with
portfolio committees and other stakeholders regarding the division of
revenue. In this case, the procedure was not followed as only three days
have elapsed after approval of the fiscal framework, and we are, strictly
speaking, not legally compliant in approving the Division of Revenue
Amendment Bill today.

Another factor to be considered is the necessity for the skills within our
present municipalities to be upgraded or insourced, and this was mentioned
by quite a number of other speakers. It is my considered opinion that it is
a myth that we have a human capacity crisis. There are many technically
competent officials in South Africa. The solution is to appoint people on
merit, and not on race or other variables. This is why municipalities such
as Theewaterskloof and Overstrand are well run. The DA supports the
Division of Revenue Amendment Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms R J MASHIGO: Hon Deputy Speaker, Ministers and hon Members of
Parliament, a government that cares about and serves its people should
characterise itself by the persistent practice of not only assessing the
needs of the people, but also seeking to divide its revenue in a manner
that best suits such needs.

At the apex of the ANC-led government’s priorities is education, along
with, inter alia, health and human settlements. This prioritisation has led
us to gather here today to divide the revenue, and let us do so with the
full consciousness that South Africa is not a federal state but a united
Republic.

We find that section 41 of the Constitution clearly states that all spheres
of government and all organs of state within each sphere must preserve the
peace, national unity and indivisibility of the Republic, and must secure
the wellbeing of the Republic. We are one nation, hon members, despite the
fact that we have nine provinces.

South Africa is a developmental state and this sets the national agenda
that informs how revenue is divided among its three spheres of government.
This ensures that provinces and municipalities are in collaboration so that
the priorities which we have set for ourselves are met and so that our
people are equitably served in a manner that reinforces their fundamental
right to human dignity.

As I have already mentioned, education is our apex priority and the
division of revenue should reflect that as South Africans we have resolved
to build an appropriately skilled people that fits like a cog into the
wheels of our economy.
It pleases us that, when considering Millennium Development Goal 2,
universal primary education, South Africa is likely to achieve a 95%
literacy rate for the 15 to 24-year-old age group in 2015. This is a good
achievement.

However, we realise that this is a quantitative figure, and having achieved
that quantitative figure, we ought also to be motivated to turn the
quantity into requisite quality. We at all times need to have a gendered
approach to our community and our development, this notwithstanding the
fact that our country has been patriarchally directed.

Millennium Development Goal 3 promotes gender equality and women
empowerment. By adopting a gendered approach to education we find that our
education system is intertwined with the Millennium Development Goals,
MDGs. Thus, from the ANC’s point of view, social transformation and the
MDGs are addressed through this division of revenue.

We go further by saying that we welcome the allocation of R4,2 billion to
Basic Education with the keen realisation that the bulk of it will go
towards the National School Nutrition Programme. We appreciate that,
because we know that no child can be taught on an empty stomach.

Through this allocation, this division of revenue also addresses MDG 1,
which is concerned with the eradication of poverty. However, we wish to
state that we hope that more is being allocated towards the upskilling and
training of teachers so that they can improve the quality of education.
This is the core business of education. We want to see it in the thorough
training of children, starting from their entrance into the schooling
system. This will show that admission standards are high, but will require
the involvement of teachers with better qualifications.

Still, we feel that this only concentrates on two components, namely the
learner component and the teacher component. We have left out the parent
component of the school governing bodies, SGBs, especially those in the
underdeveloped communities. This means that they have lagged behind.

We hope that, when dealing with this, the Ministries dealing with education
will make sure that the parent component is empowered and educated to
perform the governance part of their involvement. This will enable us to
see better qualifications all round and allow us to say that we have
achieved the overall intention of the MDGs.

We welcome the R3,8 billion grant allocated to FET colleges. It will act as
a stimulus that will serve to increase the capacity of FET colleges and
thus render them centres of first choice for school leavers as they would
offer market-related skills. This will address the skills deficit.

Our other commitments, hon members, are MDG 4, which is concerned with
child mortality; MDG 5, which is concerned with maternal health; and MDG 6,
which is concerned with the combating of HIV and Aids, tuberculosis and
other diseases. As a result, we welcome the R9,1 billion that has been set
aside for Health. We remain convinced that a country that cares about the
health of its people is a country bound for greater heights. Section 27 of
our Constitution outlines how important health promotion is. We also
believe that health is a fundamental human right and that the two cannot be
separated.

Our Constitution tells us about the dignity of the people. Our people were
dehumanised, denied citizenship rights and denied ownership of property in
South Africa. In this regard, we welcome the R15 billion set aside to fund
the creation of sustainable human settlements. We, however, want to add
that we need to learn from past mistakes at the contractor and
subcontractor level that tended to hobble the process of the creation of
human settlements.

We applaud the Minister of Human Settlements for the action he has taken
against people who really undermined the dignity of our people by building
them dehumanising types of houses.

I further wish to call upon all of us to protect the poor beneficiaries who
lose their houses to unscrupulous forces who take advantage of their dire
economic straits and buy their properties from them for a song.

In conclusion, I would like to say that the ANC remains the only legitimate
hope, leader, and liberator of our people from the legacy of inequality,
deprivation, poverty, disease, and indignity. Therefore the ANC shall never
fail to build and sustain a skilled, healthy society with dignified,
united, nonsexist, nonracial, and prosperous people. We should all vote for
the ANC.

I would like to thank the Speaker, the hon Max Sisulu, for publishing the
report on the money Bills. He especially calls on the four committees to
look into that report and move forward on how we address the money Bills.
What is lacking? We know our powers are there. As the four committees of
Finance, supported by other committees, let’s work towards getting the
budget office. It will really help us and it will help us to get the IFP to
come and join us in our meetings so that they will know what they are
doing. The ANC supports the Bill. Thank you very much. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. And thank you to
all members for supporting this important piece of legislation. As we have
indicated, this is consequential to us having made adjustments to the
Adjustments Appropriation. However, several pertinent points have been
raised by members.

Mr Sogoni, the chairperson, raised the matter of the review of the
equitable share. Indeed, there is a process under way to reform the formula
and it deals with challenges in both urban and rural areas.

Also, the issue of the baseline share is not the only challenge that
municipalities face. They also face the issue of being required to improve
their own revenue collection.

The issue of the funding of district municipalities also needs to be
informed by the functions that they need to perform. The roles and
responsibilities between the local and district municipalities remain a
challenge at the moment.

Mr Swart, I agree with you that all steps must be taken to ensure that
conditional grants are correctly spent. National transferring officers
responsible for grants should use the mechanisms provided for in the
Division of Revenue Act, including starting with the building of capacity
in municipalities to spend the funds efficiently and effectively.

However, there could also be a need to delay and withhold the allocations,
as we have done in the past, in order to ensure that funds are only
transferred as and when that should be done.
Mr Ramatlakane raised the issue of the devolution of the property rates
fund grant that goes to provinces to allow them to pay municipal rates and
services, which were formerly paid by the Department of Public Works. This
grant will remain in place until the required level of funding is fully
understood. It is not meant to deal with the inefficiencies of property
rates collection by municipalities.

The issue of rollovers versus spending was raised. Rollovers are dealt with
through a very rigorous process. We do not just allow for there to be
rollovers. Steps are taken to ensure that monies are spent in the year
allocated. Should there be a need for rollovers, they go through a process
in which we actually ensure that it is only funds that have been committed
and that have not been spent and that there were good reasons for those
funds not being spent. It is only then that they are approved.

Mr Ntapane raised the issue of municipalities and provinces having a dismal
track record. Hon member, government is committed to ensuring improved
service delivery. Targets set in the outcomes will also go a long way
towards dealing with the issue of improving service delivery.

The Minister, on tabling the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, also
tabled some drastic steps that we have put in place and that we are
considering in order to address corruption, even though much has been done
to get clean and accountable government.

I think it would be appropriate just to thank the members for giving their
support. As Mr Van der Merwe indicated, Ke batla ho tsamaya [I want to go].
[Laughter.] Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Deputy Minister. I can see that the hon Van
der Merwe is intimidated because you have finished early.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

     CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF THE
 PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM ON PERFORMANCE OF
 DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2009-10

  CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF PORTFOLIO
 COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION ON PERFORMANCE OF DEPARTMENT
       OF PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2009-10

  CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF PORTFOLIO
 COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS ON PERFORMANCE OF DEPARTMENT OF
          DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2009-10

    CONSIDERATION OF JOINT BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF
  PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION AND PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER
 EDUCATION AND TRAINING ON BASIC EDUCATION AND HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING

  CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF PORTFOLIO
  COMMITTEE ON WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS ON PERFORMANCE OF DEPARTMENT
        OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS FOR 2009-10 FINANCIAL YEAR

  CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF PORTFOLIO
 COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS ON PERFORMANCE OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS FOR
                         THE 2009-10 FINANCIAL YEAR

  CONSIDERATION OF BUDGETARY REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT OF PORTFOLIO
 COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION ON PERFORMANCE OF THE
   DEPARTMENT OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION FOR THE 2009-10
                               FINANCIAL YEAR

There was no debate.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson I move:


  That the reports be adopted.


Motion agreed to.

Budgetary Review and Recommendation Report on Performance of Department of
Rural Development and Land Reform for financial year 2009-10 accordingly
adopted.

Budgetary Review and Recommendation Report on Performance of Department of
Public Service and Administration for financial year 2009-10 accordingly
adopted.

Budgetary Review and Recommendation Report on Performance of Department of
Defence and Military Veterans for financial year 2009-10 accordingly
adopted.

Joint Budgetary Review and Recommendation Report on Basic Education and
Higher Education and Training accordingly adopted.

Budgetary Review and Recommendation Report on Performance of Department of
Water and Environmental Affairs for 2009-10 financial year accordingly
adopted.

Budgetary Review and Recommendation Report on Performance of Department of
Public Works for the 2009-10 financial year accordingly adopted.

Budgetary Review and Recommendation Report on Performance of the Department
of International Relations and Co-operation for the 2009-10 financial year
accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 15:44.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

 1. Membership of Committees

     1) The following members have been nominated by their parties to serve
        on the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Code of Judicial Conduct and
        Regulations on Judges’ Disclosure of Registrable Interests:

           African National Congress


           Sibanyoni, Mr JS
           Jeffery, Mr JH
           Ndabandaba, Mr LBG
           Sithole, Ms SCN
           Landers, Mr LT
           Malale, Mr MI
           Nelson, Mr WJ
           Ngwenya-Mabila, Ms PC


           Democratic Alliance
           Smuts, Ms D
           Schmidt, Adv. H
           Congress of the People
           Koornhof, Mr N
           Inkatha Freedom Party
           Van der Merwe, Mr JH
     2) The following changes to Committee membership have been made by the
        ID:
           Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology
           Discharge:  Greyling, Mr L
           Portfolio Committee on Trade & Industry
           Discharge:  Greyling, Mr L
           Portfolio Committee on Economic Development
           Discharge:  Greyling, Mr L
           Portfolio Committee on Mining
           Discharge:  Greyling, Mr L
           Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs
           Appointed:  Greyling, Mr L (Alternate)
           Portfolio Committee on  Police
           Discharge:  Hoosen, Mr H
           Portfolio Committee on Basic Education
           Discharge:  Hoosen, Mr H
           Appointed:  Hoosen, Mr H (Alternate)
           Portfolio Committee on  Home Affairs
           Discharge:  Mcgluwa, Mr J
           Appointed:  Mcgluwa, Mr J (Alternate)
           Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional
        Affairs
           Appointed:  Mcgluwa, Mr J
           Portfolio Committee on Social Development
           Appointed:  Paulse, Ms S
           Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation
           Appointed:  Paulse, Ms S (Alternate)

 2. Vacancy in Icasa

     1) A letter dated 22 October 2010 has been received from the Minister
        of Communications –
          a) informing the Assembly that the term of office of Dr M Socikwa,
             a councillor of the Independent Communications Authority of
             South Africa (Icasa), will expire on 31 March 2011; and
          b) requesting the Assembly to commence with the process of filling
             the vacancy in terms of section 5 of the Independent
             Communications Authority of South Africa Act, 2000 (Act No 13
             of 2000).

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications for
        consideration and report.


 3. Referral to Committees of papers tabled
   (1)      The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Human
        Settlements:


        (a)      Letter from the Minister of Human Settlements, dated 20
             October 2010, to the Speaker of the National Assembly,
             explaining the delay in the submission of the Annual Report of
             Servcon Housing Solutions (Pty) Ltd (Servcon) for 2009-10.

     2) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        International Relations and Cooperation for consideration and
        report. The report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information is referred to the Committee
        on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the African Renaissance
             and International Co-operation Fund for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.

   (3)      The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        International Relations and Cooperation:


        (a)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the
             establishment of a Joint Commission of Cooperation, tabled in
             terms of section 231(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of
             South Africa, 1996.
        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Republic of Uganda for the establishment of a Joint
             Commission of Cooperation.

   (4)      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Correctional Services for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Judicial
             Inspectorate for Correctional Services for 2009-10 [RP260-
             2010].

     5) The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance and to the Committee on Public Accounts:

        (a)      Consolidated Financial Information for the year ended 31
             March 2010 [RP265-2010], tabled in accordance with section 8 of
             the Public Finance Management Act, 1999 (Act No 1 of 1999).

     6) The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report. The report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
        a) Report and Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and
           Development Programme (RDP) Fund for 2009-10, including the
           Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
           Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP264-2010].

     7) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Police for consideration and report. The report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Private Security
             Industry Regulatory Authority for 2009-10, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP205-2010].

     8) The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Higher Education and Training for consideration and report. The
        report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information is referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector
             Education and Training Authority (Services-Seta) for 2009-10,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP114-
             2010].

   (9)      The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Service and Administration for consideration:

        (a)      Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the State
            of the Public Service for 2010 [RP262-2010].

COMMITTEE REPORTS


National Assembly


This report replaces the Report of the Standing Committee on Appropriations
on the 2010 Division of Revenue Amendment Bill that was published on 3
November 2010.

1. Report of the Standing Committee on Appropriations  on  the  Division  of
   Revenue Amendment Bill, dated 02 November 2010

   HAVING CONSIDERED THE DIVISION OF REVENUE AMENDMENT BILL [B35-2010],  THE
   STANDING COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS, REPORTS AS FOLLOWS:

   1. BACKGROUND
Section 12 of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related  Matters  Act,
No. 9 of 2009 (the Act) requires  the  Minister  of  Finance  to  table  the
Division  of  Revenue  Amendment  Bill  together  with  the  revised  Fiscal
Framework if the adjustments budget  effects  changes  to  the  Division  of
Revenue Act (DoRA) for the 2010/11  financial  year.  This  is  intended  to
foster transparency  and  ensure  smooth  intergovernmental  relations.  The
Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act (1997)  prescribes  the  process  for
determining  the  equitable  sharing  and  allocation  of   revenue   raised
nationally. Sections 9 and 10 (4)  of  the  Act  set  out  the  consultation
process to be followed with  the  Financial  and  Fiscal  Commission  (FFC),
including the process of considering recommendations  made  with  regard  to
the equitable division of nationally raised revenue.

In enforcing section 77 of  the  Constitution,  the  Money  Bills  Amendment
Procedures and Related Matters Act, No. 9 of 2009 was enacted.  This  budget
reform empowers Parliament to amend  the  government  budget  and  therefore
plays a greater role in  ensuring  that  the  most  urgent  needs  of  South
Africans are addressed. It provides Parliament  with  necessary  instruments
to oversee government actions and monitor its fiscal discipline. While  this
reform is widely welcomed, the Standing  Committee  on  Appropriations  (the
Committee) is mindful that this legislation  will  be  phased  in  over  the
years. The Committee’s concern and focus is  on  the  establishment  of  the
Parliamentary Budget Office that will provide more  support  to  enable  the
Committees  on  Finance  and  Appropriations  to  fulfil  their  legislative
responsibilities.

The Division of Revenue Amendment  Bill  was  tabled  in  Parliament  on  27
October 2010 by the Minister  of  Finance  during  the  submission  of  2010
Medium Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS).

Clause  1  (the  focus  of  this  brief)  of  the  Bill  provides  for   the
substitution of Schedules 1 to 8 of  the  Division  of  Revenue  (DoRA)  for
Schedules 1 to 8 of  the  Bill.  The  Schedules  to  the  Bill  address  the
following matters:
    • Additional unconditional and conditional allocations to provinces  and
      municipalities;
    • The allocation of unallocated conditional allocations to provinces and
      municipalities;
    • The re-allocation of conditional allocations in terms of section 18 of
      the DoRA;
    • Roll-overs of conditional allocations to provinces and  municipalities
      not transferred by national departments during the  2009/10  financial
      year;
    • Increases to a conditional allocation to a  province  or  municipality
      through virements under section 43 of the  Public  Finance  Management
      Act, 1999 (Act No. 1  of  1999)  or  section  28(2)(d)  of  the  Local
      Government: Municipal Finance Management Act,  2003  (Act  No.  56  of
      2003), as the case may be; and
    • The re-allocation of conditional allocations that were  not  correctly
      reflected in the Schedules to the DoRA.

2. Equitable division of revenue raised  nationally  among  the  spheres  of
government
Table 1: Schedule 1
|               |Column A         |Column B        |Column C    |
|Sphere of      |                 |                |            |
|Government     |                 |                |            |
|               |2010/11          |2010/11         |Amount      |
|               |allocation       |adjustments     |adjusted    |
|               |                 |                |            |
|               |R’000            |R’000           |R’000       |
|               |                 |                |            |
|National       |                 |                |            |
|               |                 |                |            |
|               |527 001 492      |519 980 624     |7020868     |
|Provincial     |260973745        |265139448       |-4165703    |
|Local          |30167706         |30558566        |-390860     |
|Total          |818142943        |815678638       |2464305     |


National Treasury (2010) [adapted]

The adjustments ended  up  in  a  net  reduction  of  R2.4  billion  whereby
expenditure  estimates  levels  decreased  from  R818.1  billion  to  R815.7
billion. The total allocations to national  departments  decreased  by  R7.0
billion, allocation to provinces increased by R4.1 billion  and  allocations
to local government  increased  by  R0.3  billion.  In  effect  the  general
decrease will not impact on provincial and local spheres of government  like
on the national sphere of government where allocations were reduced.  It  is
clear the reduced  allocations  are  due  to  shortfall  in  the  unexpected
revenue collected. Budget  spending  projections  also  make  provision  for
about R3.6  billion  in  under  spending  at  a  national  level  (including
declared savings). Offsetting  this  R9.6  billion  available  on  the  main
budget against the  R7.2  billion  in  the  adjustments  budget,  the  total
estimated level of spending decreases to R2.5 billion. In terms  of  section
6(1) of the DoRA if actual revenue  raised  nationally  in  respect  of  the
financial year falls short of the anticipated revenue set  out  in  Schedule
1, the national government bears the shortfall and in terms of section  6(2)
of the DoRA if actual revenue raised nationally in respect of the  financial
year exceeds the anticipated revenue set  out  in  Schedule  1,  the  excess
accrues to the national government, subject to subsection (3).

3.    Determination of each province’s equitable  share  of  the  provincial
sphere’s share of revenue raised nationally

Table 2: Schedule 2
|           |Column A        |Column B         |Column C      |
|Province   |                |                 |              |
|           |2010/11         |2010/11          |Amount        |
|           |allocation      |adjustments      |adjusted      |
|           |                |                 |              |
|           |R’000           |R’000            |R’000         |
|           |                |                 |              |
|Eastern    |                |                 |              |
|Cape       |                |                 |              |
|           |40134424        |40789918         |-655494       |
|Free State |15959310        |16217212         |-257902       |
|Gauteng    |45134335        |45869090         |-734755       |
|KwaZulu    |56742834        |57632201         |-889367       |
|Natal      |                |                 |              |
|Limpopo    |33237814        |33766574         |-528760       |
|Mpumalanga |21323198        |21640037         |-316839       |
|Northern   |7101615         |7201470          |-99855        |
|Cape       |                |                 |              |
|North West |17314124        |17567122         |-252998       |
|Western    |24026091        |24455824         |-429733       |
|Cape       |                |                 |              |
|Total      |260973745       |265139448        |-4165703      |


National Treasury (2010) [adapted]

The current adjustments resulted  in  the  expenditure  level  estimates  in
provinces increasing  from  R260.9  billion  to  R265.1  billion  with  each
province,  KwaZulu  Natal  increased  by  R0.889  billion,  Gauteng   R0.734
billion, Eastern Cape by R0.655 billion, Limpopo by R0.528 billion,  Western
Cape by R0.429 billion, Mpumalanga by R0.316 billion, North West  by  R0.252
billion and Northern Cape by R0.099 billion respectively.

4.    Roll Overs held back due to the unspent conditional  grants  by  local
government sphere
Table 3: Schedule 3
|               |Column A        |Column B         |Column C      |
|Province       |                |                 |              |
|               |2010/11         |2010/11          |Amount        |
|               |allocation      |adjustments      |adjusted      |
|               |                |                 |              |
|               |R’000           |R’000            |R’000         |
|Eastern Cape   |4450185         |4453126          |-2941         |
|Free State     |2805978         |2831056          |-25078        |
|Gauteng        |5445197         |5445197          |0             |
|KwaZulu-Natal  |5533344         |5712667          |-179323       |
|Limpopo        |3666434         |3678434          |-12000        |
|Mpumalanga     |2803310         |2909548          |-106238       |
|Northern Cape  |909198          |929810           |-20612        |
|North West     |2563886         |2599921          |-36035        |
|Western Cape   |30167706        |30558566         |-390860       |
|Total          |58345238        |59118325         |-773087       |


National Treasury (2010) [adapted]

Except for Gauteng, all provinces experienced roll overs due to the  unspent
conditional grants by  local  municipalities.  Although  the  Committee  has
noted the rolling over of funds; there is still a need for more  clarity  to
further  explain  the  circumstances  leading  to  such  under   expenditure
especially with regard to funds that are supposed to support  the  extension
of free basic service to the indigents. On the  other  hand,  the  Committee
need to ensure that these funds target critical  needs  such  as  indigents,
repairs and maintenance of ageing infrastructure.
In  Eastern  Cape,  four  municipalities  received  increased   allocations-
Sunday’s River  Valley  Municipality  received  increased  allocations  from
R25.7 million to R26.1 million,  Nxuba  Municipality  increased  allocations
from R16.2 million to R16.3 million, Inxuba Yethemba  Municipality  received
increased  allocations  from  R32.8  million   to   R34.2   million,   Senqu
Municipality received increased allocations  from  R66.4  million  to  R66.8
million.

In  Free  State,  five  municipalities  received  increased  allocations   –
Kopanong an increase from  R72.7  million  to  R78.0  million,  Mantsopa  an
increase from R53.9 million to R55.1 million, Motheo  District  an  increase
from R 152.3 million to R152.7 million, Phumelela  an  increase  from  R44.2
million to R45.1 million and Metsimaholo an increase from R79.0  million  to
R143.9 million.

In KwaZulu-Natal, seven municipalities  received  additional  allocations  –
Vulamehlo an increase from R24.5 million to R25.6 million,  uMuziwabantu  an
increase from R30.3 million to R31.3 million, Zululand District an  increase
from R198.6 million  to  R215.4  million,  Jozini  an  increase  from  R48.5
million to R54.1 million, Hlabisa  from  R39.2  million  to  R43.7  million,
KwaDukuza an increase from R50.9 million, and Ubuhlebezwe an  increase  from
R35.4 million to R42.3 million.

Limpopo’s total allocations increased from  R3.6  billion  to  R3.7  billion
where three municipalities received additional allocations –  Makhuduthamaga
received an increase from R107.3 million  to  R111.8  million,  Molemole  an
increase from R57.0 million to R61.3  million  and  Thabazimbi  an  increase
from R45.1 million to R48.2 million.

In Mpumalanga, municipalities  received  additional  allocations  from  R2.8
billion to R2.9 billion  whereby  four  municipalities  received  additional
allocations as follows – Mkhondo an increase from  R73.3  million  to  R80.8
million, Thabachweu  an  increase  from  R59.5  million  to  R62.6  million,
Mbombela  an  increase  from  R247.6   million   to   R295.9   million   and
Bushbuckridge an increase from R339.7 million to R387.1 million.

Northern  Cape  received   an   additional   R612   million   whereby   five
municipalities  received  additional  allocations  –  Hantam   received   an
increase from R15.6 million to R17.4 million,  Karoo  Hoogland  received  an
increase from R10.1 million to R12.1 million, Ubuntu  received  an  increase
from R13.9 million to R16.7 million, //Khara Hais received an increase  from
R40.5 million to R45.4 million, and Sol Plaatjie received an  increase  from
R121.7 million to R130.9 million.

North  West   received   an   additional   R360.3   million   whereby   five
municipalities received additional allocations – Moses  Kotane  received  an
increase from  R179.2  million  to  R186.4  million,  Mafikeng  received  an
increase  from  R96.3  million  to  R102.4  million,  Kagisano  received  an
increase from R42.8  million  to  R49.4  million,  Ventersdorp  received  an
increase from  R35.2  million  to  R37.6  million  and  Tlokwe  received  an
increase from R69.0 million to R82.8 million.

Western  Cape  received  an   additional   R390.8   million   whereby   four
municipalities received  additional  allocations  –  Matzikama  received  an
increase from  R27.1  million  to  R31.3  million,  Bergrivier  received  an
increase from  R18.7  million  to  R20.9  million,  Overstrand  received  an
increase from  R26.9  million  to  R28.0  million  and  George  received  an
increase from R58.2 million to R59.3 million.

5.    Allocations to provinces to supplement the funding  of  programmes  or
functions funded from provincial budgets

This Schedule comprises of a number  of  conditional  grants  and  the  only
grant that has changed is the Further Education and Training Colleges  Grant
which received an additional R31.2 million  during  the  adjustment  period.
According to the National Treasury 2010/11 First  Quarterly  Reports,  there
was no spending for Further Education and Training  grants  as  at  30  June
2010. While the Committee welcomes the increase, the  Committee  is  concern
that less expenditure in the first quarter would negatively  impact  on  the
second quarter expenditure projections.

6.    Specific purpose allocations to provinces: Schedule 5 Grants

Out of approximately nineteen grants in this  category,  only  three  grants
received additional allocations – Comprehensive HIV and  Aids  Grant,  Human
Settlements Development Grant, and Devolution of Property Rate Funds Grant.

The purpose of the Comprehensive HIV and Aids Grant is to enable the  health
sector to develop an effective response to HIV  and  Aids,  to  support  the
implementation of the National Operational Plan for  Comprehensive  HIV  and
Aids  treatment  and  care,  and  to  subsidise  in-part  funding  for   the
antiretroviral treatment programme. This Grant was  allocated  R6.0  billion
for the baseline, during the adjustment the  grant  received  an  additional
amount of R40 million.

The purpose of  the  Human  Settlements  Development  Grant  is  to  provide
funding for the creation of  sustainable  human  settlements.  Although,  in
total, this Grant received additional allocations of R15  000  million  only
Gauteng received an increase from R3.7 billion to R3.8 billion  while  North
West had its allocations reduced from R1.2 billion to  R1.1  billion.  There
were no changes in allocations to other provinces.

The purpose of the Devolution of Property Rate Fund Grant is  to  facilitate
the transfer of property rates expenditure responsibility to provinces,  and
to enable provincial accounting officers to be fully accountable  for  their
expenditure and payment of provincial property rates. The grant received  an
increase from R1.0 billion to R1.8 billion. The  Public  Work  report  shows
that 49 per cent of the allocation was spent as at the  30  August  2010  in
this regard. This grant could be the main source of revenue  generation  for
municipalities  and  can  also  reduce  the  current  debt   by   government
departments to municipalities. While the Committee welcomes the increase  in
this  grant,  there  is  a  need  for  the  relevant  Committees  and  other
stakeholders to ensure that there are systems and plans in place  that  will
enable  provinces  to  spend  the  additional  allocations  efficiently  and
economically. This will assist the government to be able achieve  value  for
money in such expenditure and required outcomes.

7.    Schedule 6 Grants: Specific purpose allocations to municipalities

Two grants in this category received additional  allocations  and  they  are
the Water Services Operating Subsidy  Grant  and  Municipal  Drought  Relief
Grant.

The purpose of the Water Services Operating Subsidy Grant  is  to  subsidise
water schemes owned and/or operated by the Department of  Water  Affairs  or
by other agencies on behalf of the Department. An amount of  rollovers,  R10
billion is added in the water services operating subsidy grants, where  R8.4
million is added to the Schedule 6 Grant and R1.3 million is  added  to  the
Schedule 7 Grant: Grants-in-kind.

However, it  will  be  important  to  provide  a  detailed  explanation  for
allocations to specific projects to the Committee so  that  the  expenditure
of these additional funds can be effectively monitored.

The purpose of the Municipal Drought Relief  Grant  is  to  provide  capital
finance for basic water supply  in  municipal  infrastructure  for  affected
households, micro enterprises and social institutions.  The  grant  received
an additional allocation of R92 million which is specifically  allocated  to
the Mossel Bay Municipality for drought relief.

8.    Conclusion

In conclusion, the Standing Committee on  Appropriations  will  monitor  the
utilisation of  these  additional  grant  allocations  through  the  in-year
monitoring process which forms part of Parliamentary  oversight.  This  will
enable the Committee to be able  to  check  whether  financial  legislations
such as Division of  Revenue  Act  (DoRA),  Public  Finance  Management  Act
(PFMA) and Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA) are  adhered  to  by  the
spheres of government. The Committee will also  monitor  the  efficiency  of
administration  in  compiling  and  spending  various  schedules   so   that
schedules are not incorrectly  recorded,  classified  or  misplaced  in  the
process. This will assist the Committee to identify challenges and,  enhance
the level of accuracy and compliance in all  levels  of  government  through
making relevant recommendations during the in-year monitoring process.

9.    Sources
The following source documents were used by the Committee  when  considering
the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill:
    • National Treasury (2010). Division of Revenue Bill [B4 – 2010]
    • National Treasury (2010). Division of Revenue Amendment  Bill  [B35  –
      2010]
    • National Treasury (2010). Press Release. Provincial  Budgets:  2010/11
      Financial Year.  First  Quarter  Provincial  Budgets  and  Expenditure
      Report. 11 August 2010

10.   Recommendation
The Standing Committee on Appropriations, having considered the Division  of
Revenue Amendment Bill [B 35 – 2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec  76),
recommends to the House that it be adopted (without amendments).

Report to be considered.

2. Budgetary Review and Recommendation Report of the Portfolio Committee on
   Science and Technology, dated 3 November 2010

   The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology (the Committee), having
   assessed the performance of the Department of Science and Technology (the
   Department), reports as follows:

1.    Introduction

The purpose of the report is to provide an analysis of  the  performance  of
the Department of Science and Technology against  predetermined  objectives.
The report attempts to provide an assessment of  the  financial  performance
of the department and entities for the financial year 2009/10. In the  final
analysis,  the   report   provides   for   observations,   conclusions   and
recommendations from the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology.

1. Mandate of the Committee, including provision of Section 5 of  the  Money
   Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act, No 9 of 2009

    The Committee oversees the activities of the Department of Science  and
    Technology as well as the entities reporting to it. A  key  element  of
    its oversight function includes scrutinizing  the  annual  reports  and
    expenditure of the Department and its entities.


    The recently promulgated Money Bills  Procedures  and  Related  Matters
    Amendment Act, provides for Parliament to make recommendations  to  the
    Minister of Finance to amend the budget of a national  department.  The
    Committee must submit an annual  Budgetary  Review  and  Recommendation
    Report (BRRR) for the Department,  which  may  contain  recommendations
    relating to funding allocations. This annual  review  and  analyses  of
    performance includes both financial and non-financial indicators.


    The Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology considered the Budget
    of the Department of Science and  Technology  on  14  April  2010.  The
    Committee considered the  Department’s  Annual  Report  2009/10  on  13
    October 2010. Engagements with entities such as the  National  Research
    Foundation  (NRF),  Council  for  Scientific  and  Industrial  Research
    (CSIR), Human  Sciences  Research  Council  (HSRC),  National  Advisory
    Council on Innovation (NACI), Africa Institute of South Africa  (AISA),
    Academy of Science of South Africa (ASSAF) and  Tshumisano  Trust  also
    took place during the period of review.

2.    Department’s Strategic Priorities and Measurable Objectives

The aim of the Department of Science and Technology (DST or the  Department)
is to realise the full potential of science and  technology  in  social  and
economic development, through the development of human  resources,  research
and innovation. The principal goals of the Department  are  to  develop  the
innovation capacity of the science system and contribute  to  socio-economic
development, develop appropriate human  capital  for  research,  development
and innovation (RDI), build excellent  RDI  infrastructure,  position  South
Africa as a strategic international RDI partner and develop  South  Africa’s
knowledge-generation capacity. The DST has  a  number  of  key  deliverables
under  each  of  these  goals.  These  include  the  development  of  strong
innovation chains in biotechnology, nanotechnology,  the  hydrogen  economy,
space  science,  information  technology   and   manufacturing.   Additional
deliverables include the development of technologies to address poverty  and
the poor quality of life of so many South Africans and the development of  a
healthy and diverse flux of young people  seeking  and  finding  careers  in
science  and  engineering.  Finally,  the  Department  hopes  to  accomplish
notable successes in turning  trends  in  global  science  to  the  national
advantage, for example in astronomy and space science.

The 2009 – 2014 Medium Term Strategic Framework (MTSF)  seeks  to  build  on
the current strategies and  programmes  already  supporting  innovation  and
research and development  in  the  private  and  public  sectors.  The  MTSF
identifies technology  innovation  as  one  of  the  critical  policy  areas
required to speed up growth and transform the economy to create decent  work
and sustainable livelihoods. During the current reporting period, the  MTSF,
the 2002 National Research and Development Strategy (NRDS) and the 2007 Ten-
Year Innovation Plan (TYIP) guided and informed the strategic priorities  of
the Department of Science and Technology.  Furthermore,  the  2007  National
Industrial  Policy  Framework  assisted  the   Department   in   identifying
research, development and innovation activities that  were  needed  to  grow
and increase the competitiveness of  strategic  economic  sectors.  In  this
context, the continued implementation of the TYIP is crucial. The  objective
of keeping South Africa  on  par  with  global  technology  trends  will  be
realised by further developing and/or implementing the following actions:

  • Operationalising the Technology Innovation Agency (TIA),  the  National
    Space Agency and the National Intellectual Property  Management  Office
    (NIPMO). These agencies represent the institutional  arrangements  that
    will help foster the funding and support partnerships that are required
    for the development of cutting-edge science and technology capabilities
    in the country.  They  are  also  the  primary  drivers  to  create  an
    innovation-enabling environment.

  • Establishing the Centres of Competence (CoCs) and Technology  Platforms
    in  the  titanium,  downstream  flourochemicals,  battery   technology,
    alternative energy, information security,  bio-composites  and  medical
    devices sectors. These CoCs aim to build a  competitive  South  African
    technology base.

  • Developing and implementing the commercialisation  strategy  for  South
    Africa’s electric vehicle industry.

  • Continuing with the investment to ensure South Africa wins  the  Square
    Kilometre Array (SKA) bid and builds the Karoo Array  Telescope,  which
    will serve as a demonstration  of  South  Africa’s  skills  and  design
    capabilities in radio astronomy.

3.    Analysis of Expenditure
The Department’s total expenditure was R4.18 billion (98.2 per cent) of  the
final appropriation of R4.26 billion. This equates to  a  R77.8  million  or
1.8 per cent (under-spent R18.2 million in 2008/09)  under-spending  of  the
Department’s 2009/10 budget appropriation. Transfer payments, including  the
transfer of parliamentary grants  to  the  public  entities,  accounted  for
R3.89  billion  (93  per  cent),  while  administration  expenditure;  which
comprised goods and services, expenditure on assets  (current  and  capital)
and compensation of employees; accounted for R293 million  (6.87  per  cent)
of the total appropriation.

4.    Overview of the Department’s Annual Report
All five of the Department’s  Programmes  under-spent  on  their  respective
allocations,   namely,   Programmes   1   (Administration),   Programme    3
(International Resources and Co-operation) and Programme  5  (Socio-Economic
Partnerships)  under-spent  by  R20.5  million,  R14.9  million  and   R27.5
million, respectively. The Department’s Accounting Officer states  that  the
under-spending did not affect performance and service delivery and that  the
factors contributing to the under-spending of the allocation included  goods
delivered but not  paid  for,  delays  in  finalising  the  roll-out  of  an
information management system and the project to establish  the  secretariat
function for the Regional Initiative for Capacity Development (RICAD).
In  addition,  staff  turnover  and  the  slow  uptake   of   transfers   by
implementing agencies were also  factors  that  contributed  to  the  under-
spending of the allocation. Virements amounted to  R16.7  million  (0.4  per
cent of the total appropriation) and were approved by National Treasury  and
the Accounting Officer. Of  the  R16.7  million,  R11.7  million  was  moved
between  programmes  and  R5  million  was  moved  within  programmes.   The
Department has an overall vacancy rate of 12.3 per cent,  with  the  Skilled
and Senior Management salary bands constituting 65.5 per cent and  20.7  per
cent, respectively, of  the  overall  vacancy  rate.  During  the  reporting
period, Internal Audit Services performed audits on the RICAD and the  Solar
distillers  and  geysers  for  sustainable   environment   (Northern   Cape)
projects. The results of these audits were:

  • RICAD - During September 2009, the Department  cancelled  its  contract
    with Brentlana for the management of the RICAD project as a  result  of
    Brentlana’s alleged failure to perform. The Department also  claimed  a
    refund of all monies  (amounting  to  R2.3  million)  already  paid  to
    Brentlana under the contract. Brentlana disputed  the  cancellation  of
    the contract and referred the matter to  arbitration.  The  arbitration
    proceedings commenced, but has not been  finalised  and,  therefore,  a
    contingent liability cannot yet be determined.

  • Solar distillers and  geysers  for  sustainable  environment  (Northern
    Cape) - The  project  to  provide  solar  distillers  and  geysers  for
    sustainable environment in the  Northern  Cape  was  terminated.  Solar
    geysers were installed, but the manufacturing and uptake of the project
    did not prove sustainable. The Department’s Management  terminated  the
    project with legal action to recoup  funds.  The  implementing  agency,
    Nawasan, refunded the Department R289 590, which  was  the  balance  of
    (unspent) funds and the project was closed.

The public entities that were funded through the DST’s vote in  2009/10  are
the Human Sciences Research Council (R166.2 million), the National  Research
Foundation (R692.1 million), the Africa Institute  of  South  Africa  (R29.3
million), the Council for Science and Industrial Research (R599.4  million),
the Tshumisano Trust (R36.4 million) and the Academy  of  Science  of  South
Africa (R4.6 million).

5.    Findings of the Auditor-General
The Auditor General (AG) gave the Department an  unqualified  audit  opinion
for the 2009/10 financial year  since  the  financial  statements  presented
fairly, in all material aspects, the financial position  of  the  Department
as at 31 March 2010. However, the AG states  that  the  Department  had  not
reported completely on all  its  predetermined  objectives,  indicators  and
targets. The AG found that the actual achievement regarding 56 per  cent  of
the Department’s planned activities for the 2009/10 financial year were  not
fully reported in their  current  annual  performance  report.  Furthermore,
with reference to the Department’s  financial  and  performance  management,
the AG states that the Department’s manual  controls  are  not  designed  to
ensure that all transactions  and  performance  information  are  completely
recorded and accurately classified.

6.    Programme Performance

The key operational activities of the Department continue to be carried  out
by five main Programmes. The five Programmes are:

6.1    Programme  1:  Corporate   Services   and   Governance   (now   named
Administration)

The  Administration  Programme,  consisting  of   six   sub-programmes,   is
responsible for the overall management of the Department, and  ensures  that
the organisations funded, comply with good corporate  governance  practices,
and align their activities with the national system of innovation (NSI).  It
is also responsible for monitoring and evaluating  the  performance  of  the
science councils. This  programme  received  R179.6  million  of  the  total
appropriation and under-spent  by  R20.5  million.  Here,  approximately  R5
million saved on the compensation of employees (vacancies / staff  turnover)
was used to augment goods and services to fund IT-related expenditure.

6.2   Programme 2: Research, Development and Innovation

The Research, Development and Innovation Programme, consisting of four  sub-
programmes, provide  policy  leadership  in  long  term  and  cross  cutting
research and innovation in the NSI. This programme received R1.1 billion  of
the total appropriation  and  under-spent  by  R7.2  million.  Some  of  the
outputs reported for this programme in the 2009/10 Annual Report are:

  • The launch of SumbandilaSAT.
  • The completion of the seven-dish Karoo  Array  Telescope  (KAT-7),  the
    precursor for the MeerKAT precursor array.
  • The development of the Hydrogen and Fuel  Cell  Technologies  Research,
    Development and Innovation Strategy (HySA) objectives, namely the  HySA
    Catalysis and HySA Systems centres of competence.
  • The design and building of a hydrogen-powered bicycle.
  • The launch of the South African HIV and Aids  Research  and  Innovation
    Platform (SHARP) in July 2009.  SHARP  will  serve  as  a  centre  that
    provides strategic leadership to enhance, consolidate and direct  basic
    and applied research related to HIV prevention and treatment  in  South
    Africa.
  • The appointment of the Technology  Innovation  Agency  (TIA)  Board  of
    Directors and the incorporation of existing innovation instruments into
    this Agency.
  • The regulations under the Intellectual Property  Rights  from  Publicly
    Financed Research and Development Act, 2008, were  signed  in  December
    2009.

6.3   Programme 3: International Co-operation and Resources

The International Co-operation and Resources Programme, consisting of  three
sub-programmes, aims to  develop  and  service  bilateral  and  multilateral
relationships and agreements  in  science  and  technology.  This  programme
received R131.9 million of the total appropriation and under-spent by  R14.9
million. Some of the outputs reported for  this  programme  in  the  2009/10
Annual Report are:
  • During South Africa’s SADC  leadership  in  2009  −  South  Africa  was
    mandated to lead in the four regional projects. These are the  science,
    technology and innovation (STI) policy management training and capacity
    building project, the SADC Women in Science, Engineering and Technology
    (SET)  programme  (in  consultation  with  member  states),  hosting  a
    workshop on intellectual property rights and developing modalities  for
    the implementation and launch of the 2009 SADC SET Week.
  • The 2009/10 financial year also saw the long-awaited implementation  of
    the Africa, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) S&T Programme,  jointly  funded
    through the European Development  Fund  and  the  European  Union  (EU)
    Development Co-operation Instrument for South Africa.
  • The 2009/10 financial year was another good year for South Africa’s S&T
    co-operation  with  the  EU.  Building  on  the  success  of   existing
    partnerships, such as South Africa’s impressive  participation  in  the
    EU’s  Seventh  Framework  Programme  for  Research  and   Technological
    Development (FP7), several new co-operation initiatives were launched.
  • Various joint research projects were completed  in  2009/10,  including
    those within the India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA)  framework  in  areas
    such as  nanotechnology,  biotechnology  and  polar  and  oceanographic
    research.
  • The DST successfully leveraged R178  million  in  official  development
    assistance funding from partners like Canada, the EU, Finland, Germany,
    Japan and the United States of America,  with  a  further  R11  million
    leveraged for human capital development (HCD) initiatives from partners
    including Australia, Canada, France, Germany and Japan.

6.4   Programme 4: Human Capital and Knowledge Systems

The Human Capital and Knowledge Systems Programme, consisting of three  sub-
programmes, aims to develop and implement  national  programmes  to  produce
knowledge and develop  human  capital  and  the  associated  infrastructure,
equipment  and  public  research  services.  This  programme  received  R1.6
billion of the total appropriation and under-spent by R7.6 million. Some  of
the outputs reported for this programme in the 2009/10 Annual Report are:
  • The National Science Week attracted 204 950 participants, exceeding the
    target of 200 000.
  • South Africa, through the South African Mathematics Foundation,  hosted
    the Pan African Mathematics Olympiad in  April  2009.  This  DST-funded
    event saw a record number of 12 countries entering  and  participating.
    South Africa was the second overall winner.
  • The Department placed  320  unemployed  SET  graduates  in  SET-related
    institutions.
  • In the 2009/10 financial year, the DST’s comprehensive  bursary  scheme
    supported 287 students at honours or honours equivalent level  (87  per
    cent black, 23 per cent white, 58 per  cent  female  and  42  per  cent
    male). At masters level, a total of 140 new and continuing students (74
    per cent black and 55 per cent female) were supported.
  • The South African Research Chairs Initiative (SARChI) increased from 72
    to 82. The number of students and postdoctoral fellows supported  under
    the research chair grants grew from 392 in 2007 to 514 in 2009.
  • On 11 November 2009, under the  DST-funded  African  Origins  Platform,
    researchers at the University  of  the  Witwatersrand’s  Bernard  Price
    Institute of Palaeontology announced the discovery of a new species  of
    dinosaur. Scientists also described and named a new species of hominid,
    Australopithecus sediba,  almost  two  million  years  old,  which  was
    discovered in the Cradle of Humankind World Heritage Site in 2008.
  • The 2009/10 financial year saw the finalisation  and  approval  of  the
    Nanotechnology Public Engagement  Plan,  the  implementation  of  which
    commenced during the reporting year. The Nanotechnology Research  Plan,
    which focuses  on  nanotechnology  research  in  the  country  for  the
    delivery  of  strategic  goals,  was  also  finalised  and  distributed
    nationally at workshops.
  • The National Photonics Strategy was approved  in  the  reporting  year,
    paving the way for the commencement of the development of this area  of
    science in 2010/11.
  • The third SADC workshop on Indigenous Knowledge  Systems  (IKS)  policy
    development and regional cooperation was hosted from 22 to 24 June 2009
    in the Republic of Seychelles. The primary aim of  the  third  workshop
    was  the  development  of  a  Plan  of  Action  (2009-2010)   for   the
    establishment of a regional framework for the protection of IKS.
  • The DST, in partnership with the Office  of  the  Premier  of  Limpopo,
    hosted the 2009 IKS Expo from 3 to 6 November 2009 in Polokwane.

6.5   Programme 5: Socio-Economic Partnerships

The  Socioeconomics  Partnerships  Programme,  consisting  of   three   sub-
programmes, aims to serve as a strategic partner within government and  with
industry, contributing to South Africa’s transition to a knowledge  economy.
This programme received R1.2 billion of the total appropriation  and  under-
spent by R27.5 million. Some of the outputs reported for this  programme  in
the 2009/10 Annual Report are:

  •  The  funding  support  for  a  multi-purpose  fluorination  plant  was
    finalised.
  • The formalisation of the titanium centre of competence is in  progress;
    to date 60 students have been involved in this programme.
  •  The  DST  is  contributing  to   Government’s   Competitive   Supplier
    Development programme. Twenty-eight companies were selected to  receive
    technology assistance packages from the Department.
  • Programme 5 is currently piloting the Community-University  Partnership
    Programme  (CUPP)  at  four  rurally  based  universities   (i.e.   the
    Universities of Fort Hare, Limpopo, Zululand and Venda) over  a  period
    of three years (2009/10 to 2011/12). CUPP is a key outcome of the Human
    and Social Dynamics Grand Challenge and seeks to act as a catalyst  for
    solving problems, facilitating development, sharing lessons, generating
    knowledge and adopting new  techniques  and  innovations.  Universities
    based in poor and underdeveloped rural and urban communities can play a
    pivotal role in helping residents to contribute information to decision-
    making, as well as  contributing  to  a  better  understanding  of  the
    issues, choices and concerns in the community.
  • The DST supports a number of technology transfer initiatives to address
    the challenges of poverty  reduction  from  the  perspective  of  using
    science  and  technology  for  creating  sustainable  livelihoods.  The
    initiatives are organised under three thrust areas, i.e.  demonstration
    agronomy  science  (including  bioprospecting  in  essential  oils  and
    scientifically proven indigenous medicinal plants), aquaculture and the
    diversified post-harvest beneficiation of natural resources.

7.    Committee’s Observations

The Committee found it difficult to work within the limited  time  available
between receipt of the reports and engaging  with  the  entities.  This  was
aggravated this year by the fact that most reports were  tabled  during  the
September recess. This put extreme pressure on the members who  had  limited
time to read and analyse the reports before  the  entities  appeared  before
them.

In undertaking oversight of the programmes and projects of  the  Department,
the Committee noted the strengths and weaknesses  of  the  work  during  the
2009/10 financial year.

Although the  Department  attained  an  unqualified  report,  the  Committee
expressed reservations on the incompleteness of reporting on more than  half
of their targets/activities.

This further reflected in the change of format of the annual report for  the
year under review.  Members  found  it  difficult  to  monitor  and  compare
outcomes to targets attained from the strategic plan to the annual report.

The Committee found it difficult to proffer comprehensive  insights  on  the
performance of the Department due to the limitations posed by the  presented
information in the annual report.

Furthermore, the lack of information within source documents compounded  the
matter  and  confused  members  about  whether   underreporting   could   be
attributed to the Department being under resourced, weaknesses in  reporting
systems or lack  of  skilled  staff  in  capturing  performance  information
accurately.

The Committee noted that high-level posts within the Department have been
vacant for an extended period. The Committee also noted from the AG’s
findings that an updated and approved HR plan for the 2009/10 medium-term
expenditure framework period was lacking.

The Committee observed that the targets set for PhD production, the South
African Research Chairs Initiative and the percentage of Gross Domestic
Product expenditure on research & development (R&D), as encapsulated in the
10-year Innovation Plan, are unlikely to be met. In light of the above, the
Committee questioned whether these targets needed to be reviewed.

The  Committee  had  raised  its  concern  with  the  Department  about  the
feasibility of the Department’s request for entities to cut  their  budgets,
given the enormity of the mandate of entities such as the NRF and CSIR.

The Committee noted the important role that agencies such as the  Technology
Innovation Agency (TIA), South African National  Space  Agency  (SANSA)  and
the National Intellectual Property Management Office (NIPMO)  have  to  play
in facilitating the  development  of  cutting-edge  science  and  technology
capabilities in the country. The Committee therefore  urged  the  Department
to support these agencies to become  fully  operational  and  advance  their
mandates to the fullest extent. The Committee expressed  its  concern  about
the lengthy period of time it took to establish TIA.

The Committee commented on some general areas  where  it  foresaw  that  DST
could to make a more meaningful input and impact:

Members encouraged the Department to play a much more visible  role  in  the
country’s Climate Change agenda, this in the light that South  Africa  would
host the COP17 Conference in 2011. Related to this is a  continued  advisory
role that the Department should play towards South Africa’s commitment of  a
40% emission  reduction  versus  Eskom’s  Build  Programme,  which  includes
building fossil fuel based power stations.

The Committee recognizes that science  and  technology  is  a  cross-cutting
discipline and therefore encourages  that  the  Department  strengthens  its
interaction  with   its   national   departmental   counterparts.   Specific
references  were  made  to  Education,  Health,  Environment,   Energy   and
Agriculture.

With regard to the Department of Energy, the  Department  should  strengthen
its role and support in the advancement of renewable forms of energy.  Based
on oversight activities embarked upon, the Committee’s view is that much  of
the research done  in  the  area  of  renewable  energy  technologies  seems
uncoordinated, limited and could do with more funds.

Members  are  keen  to  see  the  Department,  with  its  counterpart,   the
Department of Trade and Industry  clarify  their  respective  roles  in  the
forthcoming International Astronautical Congress, which  South  Africa  will
host in 2011.

8.    Recommendations

   1. The Committee recommends that the Department make concerted efforts to
      correct the shortcomings of incomplete reporting as highlighted by the
      Auditor-General.

   2. The Committee advises that the  Department  reverts  to  the  previous
      format of reporting, in tabular form, illustrating clear  targets  and
      achievements and ensures that the annual report is  aligned  with  the
      Corporate Strategy.

   3. The Committee recommends that the Department ensures that systems  and
      proper resources are in place to facilitate that there is  a  complete
      report on the achievement of targets as set out in its strategic plan.
   4. The Department should  strengthen  its  oversight  function  over  the
      Africa Institute of South Africa (AISA) to ensure  that  reporting  of
      information by this entity is  consistent  and  that  their  financial
      operations are within the confines of  Treasury  Regulations  and  the
      PFMA. AISA’s  role  within  the  science  system  also  needed  to  be
      clarified.

   5. The Department should brief the Committee  on  its  vacant  posts  and
      their overall HR plans. Vacancies should be filled within a reasonable
      amount of time and that the Committee is updated about the  challenges
      experienced in filling the posts.

   6. The Committee recommends that a workshop be held with the  Department,
      inclusive of all relevant stakeholders, on the PhD  programme  and  on
      percentage of GDP expenditure on R&D to discuss the challenges and  to
      work towards formulating a way forward.

   7. The Department should brief the Committee on the roles and mandates of
      the Space Council, SA National Space Agency and explain how this links
      to the  Space  Agency  legislation  and  fits  into  the  Science  and
      Technology fold.

   8. The Committee recommends that the Department keep it informed  of  the
      programmes and  activities  of  the  Department.  This  would  improve
      communication and facilitate alignment of the Committee programme with
      some of the key activities of the Department and its entities.

9.    Conclusion

The Annual Report, as well as briefings by the Department and  its  entities
show that the  Department  is  progressing  in  the  implementation  of  its
priority areas. The Committee is confident that the Department  is  able  to
correct the challenges experienced in its  final  reporting  of  performance
targets.

The Committee took cognisance  of  the  fact  that  DST  is  not  a  service
delivery department.

The Department pointed out its area of delivery  shortfalls  and  attributed
this to a range of reasons, some of  which  comprised  inadequate  financial
resources, inherent delays of the legislative process  and  the  framing  of
multi-year activities as a  single  performance  event  and/or  output.  The
Committee, however is still of the view that the identified  shortfalls  can
be corrected.
The Committee, having assessed  the  work  of  the  Department  through  the
annual report as well as expenditure patterns through the  mid-term  review,
commended it for attaining an  unqualified  audit  opinion  in  the  2009/10
financial year, and for spending 98% of its budget.

Report to be considered.

