---
title: 'National Assembly - 03 March 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-03-03
---

WEDNESDAY, 3 MARCH 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT:

The SPEAKER: Hon Members, I have been informed that the “to talk” button is
faulty and members must please indicate by raising their hands – it doesn’t
matter which one, left or right – if they wish to ask a supplementary
question. I will be assisted by the Table staff to identify members. I
would also like to remind members that a maximum of four supplementary
questions is allowed. The member who put the original question gets the
first opportunity to ask a supplementary question. The first question has
been asked by the hon A J Williams. I recognise the hon Deputy President.
[Applause.]
             Findings and outcomes of Public Participation Week

1.    Mr A J Williams (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


      (a)   What are the key findings and outcomes of the government Public
            Participation Week which took place from 9 to 15 November 2009
            and (b) how will issues raised by communities at these events be
            addressed to ensure that our people’s quality of life is
            improved?        NO384E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Mr Speaker and hon members, 85 events were held
during the government Public Participation Week, which took place from 9 to
15 November 2009. Apart from Ministers and Deputy Ministers, provincial and
local executive members in all provinces actively participated during this
period, over and above their usual planned public engagements.

There was, unfortunately, less participation from members of Cabinet than
usual, as the week had to be postponed from the last week of October, and
many Ministers had already incurred prior engagements. Issues raised
included service delivery challenges, crime, allegations of corruption,
unemployment, drug abuse and the state of the roads. A number of events
were planned, taking into account matters raised at previous public
engagements and complaints logged with the presidential hotline.

A particular highlight of the week was the extent to which issues were
solved on the spot, as service delivery drives of government took place
together with the events. It was clear that government programmes to
address concerns in these areas are not being implemented as swiftly as
expected, hence the need for constant feedback and ongoing public
participation processes of this kind. There is also a need to improve co-
ordination between the provincial and national spheres regarding matters of
concurrent jurisdiction.



A number of issues raised by communities were attended to on the spot, as
some research had been conducted before the events to identify the issues
that communities were likely to raise. Those issues not attended to or
resolved on the spot were documented for further action. This process is
being overseen by intergovernmental structures and action taken by the
relevant departments is being monitored through monitoring and evaluation
units in the Offices of the Premiers. Overall, provincial directors-general
are responsible for monitoring the feedback and resolution of issues raised
during public participation events and taking up the matters with the
appropriate departments where necessary.



Over and above the strengthening of intergovernmental relations and public
liaison structures in all departments and spheres, the Minister in the
Presidency responsible for performance monitoring and evaluation will also
add impetus to our efforts. This is a direct response to lessons learnt
from this and previous public engagements. Government is also emphasising
the need to give regular feedback to communities on all issues, whether
resolved or still being processed. I thank you. [Applause.]


Mr A J WILLIAMS: Thank you, Deputy President. Bearing your comprehensive
response in mind, what is the executive doing when local governments fail
to implement the Constitution in general and the Bill of Rights in
particular? An example of this is that in the recent public hearings on
service delivery it came to light on two occasions that the trickle system
used to deliver water to the poorest of the poor leads, at times, to a
situation where there is no water for the Muslim community to perform their
ritual washing before prayers.

This community is situated in Mitchells Plain, and it is here where the
City of Cape Town puts more emphasis on their income than on the people’s
right to pray. This is a clear violation of Muslim people’s human rights
and a violation of the South African Constitution. By doing this, the City
of Cape Town has knowingly taken away the rights of the Muslim people.
Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Mr Speaker and hon A J Williams, I am sure that I am
not expected to answer, because it was more of a declaration.
[Interjections.] So, I can only thank the hon A J Williams, because I am
really unaware of this happening. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M WENGER: Mr Speaker, numerous demonstrations have rocked the country
due to government’s failure to deliver. In light of this, the ruling party
has committed itself to a year of action. Will timeframes be set in each of
the cases to ensure that concerns raised will be attended to, especially in
Mpumalanga, Limpopo and the Eastern Cape, and how will such progress be
communicated to the affected communities? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, the response I gave the hon A J Williams
covers this question, because the public participation week processes
highlight delays in the implementation of government programmes. That is
why I made the point that we need to improve on co-ordination between the
spheres of national, provincial and local government, and also to ensure
that where concerns have been raised, the evaluation and monitoring point
persons in the premiers’ offices are charged – that is apart from the
directors-general – with the responsibility to ensure that nothing should
fall through the cracks, and that where commitments to address concerns are
still being processed, such communities should be kept posted at all times.
There should be feedback on that. I thank you.

Mr N SINGH: Mr Speaker and hon Deputy President, one cannot fault the
response that you have given on how one is going to deal with this matter.
However, it is common knowledge that especially during times of election,
just before an election, Ministers and politicians cannot resist the
temptation of making promises to the people on the ground. What follows is
that the promises are not kept. Now, we are glad that you have said that
the offices of the premiers would follow this and also the Ministry in the
Presidency on performance monitoring and evaluation.

What I would like to know is the following: Is the Ministry in the
Presidency already working out mechanisms to deal with regular feedback and
ensuring that we do not lead people up the garden path when we make
promises, especially like the one made in the area of Jozini, where last
year people were promised water and electricity, which is still manna from
heaven for them. Thank you, Mr Deputy President.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, yes, the Minister in the Presidency
responsible for performance monitoring and evaluation has been given the
mandate by the President to ensure that the implementation of the
programmes of action is given effect to without any further delay. The hon
member wants to know whether the mechanisms have been developed. I can say
that the performance audits are meant to throw up and reveal any delays or
challenges in terms of implementation and that is the responsibility of the
Minister in the Presidency responsible for performance monitoring and
evaluation.

Mr D A KGANARE: Mr Speaker and hon Deputy President, in the light of
serious large-scale service delivery protests, characterised by violence,
what has been the role of the different intelligence-gathering agencies in
helping government to understand the nature of the problem and, thereby,
helping it to be proactive in seeking a solution? Furthermore, are these
protests not in themselves sufficient to let government know what it is
that it needs to do, rather than to have these public participation weeks,
which seem unnecessary?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Mr Speaker and hon member, most of the causes of
these demonstrations are well known. Intelligence structures are not really
required to gather that information. For instance, in Orange Farm, with
regard to the latest protest that happened a few days ago, a section of
that community had been identified for the installation of a sewerage
system. The work was then allocated to an engineering company, which
installed the main pipes as well as the toilets and the systems, but
without connecting the households to the main pipes.

This means that that community is still without a sewerage system. That
community is well aware that other sections, which had been identified much
later and the work allocated to different engineering companies, had their
sewerage system installed and it was working. So, whereas they were first
in the queue, they are still waiting for the connections to be completed.
What really riles is that they know the company that did this shoddy work,
and that, since then, it has been given a contract to do similar work in
another section of the same community. It doesn’t really need an
intelligence agency to dig up the information. The community knows and it
is willing to share that information with government. Thank you.
[Applause.]

        Proposed sanctions on Ministers failing to reply to questions

2.    Mr M J Ellis (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      Whether, with reference to his reply to oral Question 16 on 4 November
      2009, he proposed any sanctions to Cabinet on Ministers who failed to
      reply to questions in the National Assembly in 2009?
                             NO386E


The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Mr Speaker, hon members, a large number of
parliamentary questions were unfortunately not answered before the
deadlines set by Parliament last year. As far as I am aware, replies to
most if not all the questions were finally compiled, but the parliamentary
Rules, as we all know, do not provide for any late answering at the end of
the year.

So even if replies were submitted, if that happened after the deadline,
they would be reflected as unanswered, and therefore Parliament will not
accept the reply. I have taken the initiative to write to all Ministers who
had unanswered questions and request an explanation for each unanswered
question. I also asked which steps they were taking to ensure that they
answer all parliamentary questions submitted to them this year.

I will then report to Cabinet, where further discussions on the matter will
take place. Feedback to this House will be given through the Speaker, hon
Sisulu. As I indicated in my reply to oral Question 16 last year, it is
also up to this House to discuss the matter and decide if they want to
institute sanctions against Cabinet Ministers who do not answer
parliamentary questions. Thank you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Deputy President very much
indeed for, again, a very positive response. You will know, sir, that this
is the third time we have raised this matter in the House and it is really
one of great concern. However, Mr Deputy President, there are still 100
unanswered questions from last year. A backlog of some 500 questions this
year is now building up, and the matter is becoming more serious.

We have proposed before that making Ministers apologise is one way of
dealing with it. We have proposed this to the Rules Committee, but
regrettably it hasn’t met for so long that we have not had the opportunity
to push this matter further, and I would like to ask the Deputy President
if he would take that matter up as well.

Mr Deputy President, if some of your Cabinet colleagues continue to refuse
to carry out your instructions, surely you must start to wonder whether, in
fact, they take you and your position seriously, sir. And isn’t it,
therefore, time for you to consider taking real action against these
Ministers - these serial offenders - and even consider firing them if they
continue to hold you in contempt? [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Can I just indicate that the Deputy President does not answer
on behalf of the Rules Committee.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Mr Speaker, hon Mr Ellis, I am heartened by the
response I received from some of the Ministers to the letter that I
dispatched once I became aware that there were all these questions that
remained unanswered. As I said, I intend to share that with the House
through the Speaker, and it may be helpful for us to have a meeting with
presiding officers and the Chief Whips to look at this issue in more
detail. I thank you.

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Let me thank you, hon Deputy President, for your
response, but going forward, how do you propose to deepen the culture of
accountability, openness and transparency amongst the executive members?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, one way of ensuring that there is
accountability is really to respond to questions, as posed by members of
this august House. As I proposed, I believe it would be useful for us to
have a meeting, and I would write to the Speaker and the Chief Whips to
convene a meeting where we look at this issue and at what steps can be
taken to ensure that questions are responded to so that there is
transparency and accountability. However, as I said, the responses that I
received from some of the Ministers have actually heartened me. Indeed,
this is a problem that we can resolve without resorting to any draconian
measures. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, the ACDP appreciates the
steps you are taking to address this issue, but clearly unanswered
questions remain a problem. Given the importance that has been given to
performance delivery agreements, and should the steps you have suggested
not bear fruit, should consideration nor be given to making this issue part
of the performance delivery agreements entered into by the President and
Cabinet Ministers? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, I think we should throw that suggestion
into the basket and look at it. I am quite open to it. Thank you.

Mr C D KEKANA: Mr Speaker, and hon Deputy President, section 95 of the
Constitution reads as follows:


   Before the Deputy President, Ministers and any Deputy Ministers begin to
   perform their functions, they must swear or affirm faithfulness to the
   Republic and obedience to the Constitution, in accordance with Schedule
   2.

Section 92 subsection 2 of the same Constitution reads as follows:

   Members of the Cabinet are accountable collectively and individually to
   Parliament for the exercise of their powers and the performance of their
   functions.

Notwithstanding the above, Deputy President, it has been reported that some
116 questions in 2009 have not been replied to. Would you agree that
Ministers who have failed and continue to fail to heed your formal request,
that by 15 December 2009 all questions should have been replied to, are in
fact in contempt of their own oath of obedience to the Constitution, as
well as section 92, subsection 2 of the Constitution?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, yes, indeed, we agree that that is the
constitutional obligation under which we operate and that we are in fact
obliged to respond to questions. That is why we are not ducking and diving
about it and, as I said, I’ve requested explanations of why these questions
had not been answered. I will share those responses with the Speaker so
that the House can be informed.

There are instances where the responses or explanations are cogent, but the
system is just not working properly. We would also be able to identify that
and deal with it. Once again, my proposal is that we should have a meeting
with presiding officers and Whips to look at this issue. I am quite
confident that even from the Cabinet’s side we will be able to correct this
slackness. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: We thank the hon Deputy President. This is certainly an
important matter, and I would like to thank hon members and welcome their
suggestions, which shall be noted by the Office of the Deputy President, as
will the Deputy President’s keenness to attend to the matter. I would like
to remind members that the oversight model at Parliament is being worked on
and also has this as an item. Indeed, the independent panel of experts, who
still have to be considered, also has recommendations to this effect.

 Position of Cabinet on adoption of a lifestyle audit and on closer scrutiny
                 and transparency in awarding state tenders

3.    Mrs J D Kilian (Cope) asked the Deputy President:

    (1)    Whether the Cabinet will adopt a lifestyle audit to include
          assets and business interests including an audit of (a) spouses,
          (b) children and (c) personal business partners; if not, why not;
          if so, what are the relevant details;


    (2)    whether Cabinet has taken any decision on closer scrutiny and
          transparency with the awarding of state tenders; if not, why not;
          if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        NO390E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Mr Speaker, if I may ask for your indulgence. My
response to this question is a bit long. If you’ll allow me, I’ll race
through it.

The SPEAKER: How long is long, Deputy President? Continue, hon Deputy
President.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members should remember that there are indeed
measures already in place that both regulate what Cabinet members can do
and require them to disclose their assets and business interests: Firstly,
Cabinet members and Deputy Ministers who are members of the National
Assembly are required to disclose particulars of their financial interests,
assets and gifts in terms of the Rules of Parliament. This also applies to
Members of Parliament and their spouses or permanent companions and
dependent children. I must add that the Ministers and Deputy Minister who
are not members of Parliament have made a voluntary disclosure to
Parliament in this regard.

Secondly, the executive ethics code requires all Cabinet members, in
addition, to disclose their liabilities. This code also stipulates that a
Minister must declare any financial or business interests that he or she
may have in a matter that is before Cabinet, or in relation to which the
Minister is required to take a decision as a Member of Cabinet. Where the
Minister holds a business interest in a company that may give rise to a
conflict of interest in the execution of his or her duty as a Member of
Cabinet, he or she must either dispose of the interest or place the
administration of the interest under the control of an independent person
or agency. The same code stipulates that Ministers may not receive
remuneration for any work or service other than for the performance of
their functions as members of Cabinet.

With regard to monitoring compliance with these provisions, details of
Ministers’ assets are available on the parliamentary website along with
those of all other Members of Parliament. Violations of the parliamentary
code are dealt with by Parliament and have been dealt with effectively in
the past. Complaints against violations of the executive ethics code can
also be dealt with by the Public Protector.

Let me also remind hon members that the SA Revenue Service conducts
investigations into people who appear to be living beyond their means.
These investigations start on the basis of information obtained from
various sources, including the Sars anticorruption and fraud hotline,
income tax returns submitted by a taxpayer to Sars and reports of
suspicious activity from members of the public.
A lifestyle questionnaire is one method of obtaining information from a
taxpayer and, together with other information sources, assists Sars in
matching the lifestyle trends, income streams and asset base of a taxpayer
to what has been declared in an income tax return. The accumulated wealth
has to be explained by the taxpayer for tax purposes. Any unexplained
wealth is taxed. The compliance and risk unit within Sars conducts the risk
analysis of taxpayer information. If there is a mismatch between what the
taxpayer has declared and what Sars has found, the case is referred to an
audit.

If it is confirmed that the taxpayer has evaded tax, penalties are levied,
interest is charged and additional tax of up to 200% of the evaded tax is
charged. Depending on the circumstances, the case may then be handed to the
criminal investigation division of Sars, which then engages the SA Police
Service and a specialised tax unit for criminal prosecution within the
National Prosecuting Authority. More than 10 000 such audits have been
conducted by Sars over the past two years.

The Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act of 2003 also
provides for an investigation into a person who appears to own property
disproportionate to their income. This is in addition to strict Financial
Intelligence Centre Act, Fica, requirements, which compel individuals to
disclose sources of income when they make big financial transactions.
In light of the above, Cabinet has not considered lifestyle audits, as it
is clear that all these measures are already in place.

The Inter-Ministerial Committee on Corruption that the President referred
to in his state of the nation address is considering ways in which to
improve scrutiny and transparency in the awarding of state tenders. The
committee is supported by multidisciplinary task teams on issues of
government procurement. One team focuses on compliance in respect of
tenders, while the other team focuses on systems improvement in respect of
government supply chain management. The task teams comprise officials from
the Department of National Treasury, the SA Police Service, Public Service
and Administration, South African Revenue Service, the Auditor-General, the
Financial Intelligence Centre and the Special Investigating Unit. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mrs J D KILIAN: Mr Speaker, thank you to the Deputy President. It is
interesting to note what he has quoted; what we have in place in terms of a
regulatory framework. However, the Auditor-General recently reported on an
increase in instances of insider trading involving senior officials trading
with government departments and other public entities. On this side of the
House, we believe, as Cope, that political leaders should lead by example
and should stop this trend.

Does the Deputy President agree that the apparent irregular awarding of
tenders in Limpopo to Mr Julius Malema of the ANC, as well as the shares
that the governing party holds in the company that will supply boilers to
the new Eskom power stations, is setting the wrong trend, and does he not
believe it could border on promoting corrupt activities? Thank you.
[Applause.] [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Mr Speaker, hon member, my belief is that we have in
place all measures necessary to stamp out crooked ways of adjudicating over
tenders and so on. However, as we know, human beings are difficult animals.
There are rules, very simple rules, and life would be easy if we all
followed them. You find traffic lights on street corners, yet many fatal
accidents happen simply because we do not observe them. So, I will not get
into the matter of Mr Julius Malema and tenders and so on, because I
suppose it is a matter that is being attended to elsewhere. I’m not
familiar with those facts.

It is a moot question whether or not Chancellor House and the stake it
holds in the company contracted to construct power stations could lead to,
or borders on, sending a negative or wrong message to the public. The
reason is simple: As I understand it, once a corporate company is
incorporated, it is free to pursue any opportunity. If there is a conflict
of interest, then we must say so, and I will be the first one to say there
is a conflict of interest here and this matter stinks to high heaven. That
is, if there is. I’ve heard arguments to the effect that even the National
Energy Regulator of South Africa, Nersa, determined tariffs ... [Time
expired.]

Dr D T GEORGE: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the hon Deputy President for
clarifying the position relating to members of Cabinet and Parliament.
However, the issue of other politicians must be addressed, because
positions are being abused. We are seeing evidence of that in the tender
process and there is also growing support from various organisations,
including Cosatu and nongovernmental organisations, for the DA’s call for
lifestyle audits to be conducted on politicians who are not Members of
Parliament or Cabinet who are awarded state tenders.

Can the Deputy President please confirm whether or not these politicians
will be identified and whether or not they will be subjected to the
appropriate lifestyle audits and tender scrutiny processes to ensure that
they are not receiving preferential treatment and/or evading the tax they
are legally obligated to pay? Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Mr Speaker, my sincerest apologies, because of the
murmurings I missed the first part of the question.

The SPEAKER: Start with the second part you heard, hon Deputy President.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Well, the second part I heard was when he was saying,
“Will these politicians be identified?” I don’t know which politicians.
That’s my difficulty, otherwise I would have responded to the question.

The SPEAKER: Briefly, hon member.

Dr D T GEORGE: Mr Speaker, I’m closer to the microphone now. There are
politicians who have been awarded state tenders and we know the process is
being abused. So, the question is quite simply whether these politicians
who have been awarded state tenders, who might not be Members of Parliament
or Cabinet, are being or will be investigated. Will they go through this
lifestyle audit process, because they are evading the tax they’re supposed
to be paying and taking advantage of the positions they have?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon member, the difficulty with this question is that
I have indicated what laws are in place and what structures are properly
authorised to investigate anybody. Sars, for instance, has a hotline where
a whistle-blower can indicate suspicious activities which would then be
investigated immediately by the units authorised to follow up on those
matters.

So, if the hon member is of the view that these measures are inadequate,
and that the House would like to come up with legislation to target
politicians specifically, outside of what already exists, then that’s a
matter that this House can take forward, I suppose. For now, the whole
tender system, in my view, is not foolproof. It’s not a system that cannot
be undermined, unless there’s rotation in the application structures or in
the tender boards themselves, or something like that. I don’t know. My
sense is the system is not foolproof. I’ve just shared with this august
House the basis of the demonstrations in Orange Farm, because there was a
company that should have failed being awarded a second tender. That in
itself is inexplicable. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Mr Speaker, Deputy President, the reported overwhelming
evidence of corruption in the processing and awarding of state tenders -
this whole tendering process - demands closer scrutiny and transparency. To
make this tendering process foolproof, as the Deputy President has
suggested, the ACDP believes it should be depoliticised in order to benefit
all our people and not just a few privileged and well-connected members of
the ruling party.

We want to know why millions of rands are being paid to companies that won
state tenders without any checking of the quality of their work. Does this
mean that those people who award tenders are inefficient themselves, or are
they just doing their comrades a favour by paying for shoddy work?

We believe all tender applications should be closely scrutinised by an
independent, apolitical and objective panel of experts, one that does not
just comprise members of the ruling party. Politicians and civil servants
or their relatives should not be on the panel that processes the
applications. This, we believe, will restore the credibility of the
tendering process. If the Deputy President agrees with what I’ve just
suggested, when is the earliest that we can expect a response from him?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Speaker, hon members, indeed, I agree that
there’s a need to bring about better efficiency in the manner in which
tenders are adjudicated. That part I agree with unreservedly and I think
that it’s absolutely necessary. However, I think it is being a bit too
liberal with the truth to suggest that tender boards consist of members of
the ruling party. [Applause.]

Because this is a serious matter, I think we should resist the temptation
to do that, so that we can deal with the problem. After all, once a tender
is awarded to people with no capacity to deliver, it is the people who
suffer in the end. We must seriously find ways of resolving this problem.

I had a discussion with the President on Monday about the need to have a
way of independently monitoring tenders after they have been awarded. If,
for instance, it’s the installation of a sewage system, government must
have an adjudication process in which the Ministry of Human Settlements and
local government, for example, can appoint persons who go out there on a
monthly basis and check whether the work is being done according to
specifications. This will mean we don’t become aware of the problem only
when all the money has been spent, yet the quality of the product borders
on the criminal. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Mr Speaker, colleagues, the IFP is very worried about
perceptions of corruption in this country, and I think it’s fair to say
that perhaps, although Cabinet per se is not the problem, the issue here is
perception. We think Cabinet needs to send a strong signal to the country
that it’s serious about addressing the issue. In that light, a lifestyle
audit would be appropriate. The broader issue is clearly one of state
tenders being a major problem, throughout the country, frankly.

At local level, corruption is rife. At provincial level, it’s also rife. I
must say I’m a little surprised by the Deputy President’s comments on
Chancellor House and Eskom. In our view, it is morally wrong for the ruling
party to rake in R5 billion or so in profits from an Eskom price increase
for the rebuild programme. It sets the wrong example and should not happen.

My question to the Deputy President, then, is this, and I say this without
impugning the integrity of anyone in this House: What is government going
to do to combat perceptions by more and more people – ordinary people
outside this House – that South Africa increasingly resembles a cleptocracy
run by crooks? Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Mr Speaker, hon members, perceptions are a reality
and there’s only one way to correct them; that’s by taking steps to ensure
that the basis of such perceptions is corrected. Cabinet must lead by
example and I’ve said that the inter-ministerial committee that will focus
on anticorruption measures has been established.

I’ve also tried to explain, at length, how Sars conducts lifestyle audits,
because it’s a term that is in vogue now. However, if the mechanisms to
conduct such lifestyle audits are not in place, we can create other
difficulties, and public representatives are already subjected to all those
measures.

Where we are aware, or if a member of the public is aware of an individual
or group of individuals with ill-gotten wealth, the measures are there, the
agencies are there, there’s even an Asset Forfeiture Unit that can seize or
impound such ill-gotten wealth.

The point I’m making is that the measures are in place. What is required is
the resolve to implement them and to act in a concerted manner that would
send the right message. If anyone, and it shouldn’t matter whether that
person comes from this or that party, is found to have stepped on the wrong
side of procedures, the law must take its course. They should be brought to
book, and I don’t see why we should not follow that route to deal with such
problems. Thank you. [Applause.]

  Position regarding the composition, mandate, focus and action plan of the
                 Anti-Corruption Inter-Ministerial Committee

4.    Ms S C N Sithole (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      What (a) is the (i) composition, (ii) mandate and (iii) focus of the
      Anti-Corruption Inter-Ministerial Committee that was announced by
      Cabinet in November 2009, (b) action plan has been identified by the
      committee and (c) will be its relationship with law-enforcement
      agencies?                         NO383E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Mr Speaker, unfortunately this question also deals
with the Anti-Corruption Inter-Ministerial Committee, but I’ll answer it.

The Anti-Corruption Inter-Ministerial Committee is co-ordinated by the
Minister in the Presidency responsible for performance monitoring and
evaluation, and comprises the Ministers of Home Affairs, Justice and
Constitutional Development, Public Service and Administration, State
Security, Police, Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Finance,
and Social Development.

The mandate of this committee is to ensure co-ordinated anticorruption
efforts; promote policy coherence and alignment on cross-cutting
anticorruption programmes of government; develop and enhance technical
measures to curb corruption in both the public and private sectors; review
procurement practices; address weaknesses in the criminal justice system to
ensure that efficient prosecution takes place; and ensure political co-
ordination of anticorruption efforts in the international arena.

The focus of the Anti-Corruption Inter-Ministerial Committee is to ensure a
co-ordinated and efficient fight against corruption. The committee is
finalising an action plan. Broadly, the action plan will deal with role
clarification between departments, co-ordinating efforts and ensuring that
structural and policy alignment take place for heightened impact on both
the public and private sectors.

As I have already said, the Ministers of State Security, Justice and
Constitutional Development, and Police are part of the committee. This will
ensure that the law-enforcement agencies play an active and integral part
in the co-ordinated fight against corruption. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S C N SITHOLE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Deputy President, often
corruption is detected by government itself. This leads to the suspension
of alleged corrupt officials ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, maybe there is too much noise in the House. We
can’t hear you. Could you raise your voice, please?

Ms S C N SITHOLE: Certainly. Often corruption is detected by government
itself. This leads to the suspension of alleged corrupt officials with full
pay. These cases take years to finalise, while the suspended officials earn
their full salary.

Also, one finds that officials resign just before disciplinary processes
commence. What means is the interministerial committee considering to
address this problem? [Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the hon member for
the points she raised. We have the recent example of the former CEO of the
SA Social Security Agency, who attempted to resign instead of facing the
music. The Minister has declined the resignation in order to ensure that
... [Applause.] ... the said person indeed answers to that case. That is an
example of how such resignations could be handled in a manner that does not
undermine accountability.

Ms A M DREYER: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since July last year, numerous task
teams have been established to probe service delivery at the SABC and
Sentech. There was also the Caster Semenya support task team. None produced
results. However, there are numerous laws, rules and regulations applicable
to the Public Service dealing with corruption, and Ministers already have
executive powers to appoint and dismiss directors-general. By simply
exercising these powers they will send a clear message that corruption is
not tolerated. For example, nine months after taking office in the Western
Cape, the DA is already implementing anticorruption measures. It is clear
that the root problem related to corruption is the nonimplementation of
existing laws.

Now, Mr Deputy President, when – in what year – will you stop planning more
meetings of yet another interministerial committee and simply begin to
apply the law? [Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon member, I
couldn’t agree with you more. I think we should apply the law. That is the
point I have been trying to convey throughout. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon Deputy President, what if some
members of the interministerial committee, or one of their relatives, are
involved? What will happen? That is the first question.

The second question is: Will the Minister recuse himself or herself if he
or she is involved?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon member. Yes, I believe that if a
Minister or any of the Ministers is conflicted, they should really recuse
themselves from participating in an investigation and/or the handling of
any matter. Yes, I agree with you. Thank you.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Deputy President, the Anti-
Corruption Inter-Ministerial Committee is not new. There have been previous
interministerial committees similar to this one. What is not clear is what
has been done in terms of the continuation of the work on fighting
corruption.

Secondly, what would you say, Deputy President, if South Africans, given
what I have just indicated, say that nothing has been reported in terms of
what action has been taken; what has been done. The action plan and the
anticorruption strategy exist as a plan for government to implement, but
what has been happening before now? And what would you say if South
Africans say that this is another PR exercise by this committee, given that
even the Scorpions, which South Africans believed dealt with corruption
without fear or favour, have been dissolved? [Time expired.]
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon member. If, indeed, as the saying
goes, practice is more powerful than precept, the only way to address
perceptions is through practice. I believe the time will come and the day
will come when we’ll assess the work of this committee on the basis of what
it has done. If we are still here, you’ll have the opportunity to say, “But
this is what you said, and look at what this committee has done.” So, all I
am saying is that we have to take it all in good faith. And if it doesn’t
work, we will have the opportunity to say so. Thank you.

                             PEACE AND SECURITY
                                  Cluster 1

MINISTERS:

 Position regarding declaration on the magisterial jurisdiction of Ekangala
                    and opening of new magistrate’s court

20.   Mr J B Sibanyoni (ANC) asked the Minister of Justice and
      Constitutional Development:


      When will (a) he make a declaration on the magisterial jurisdiction of
      Ekangala and (b) the new Ekangala magistrates’ court be officially
      opened?                                 NO357E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Mr Speaker,
I want to thank the hon member for raising this question as it speaks to
one of the core mandates of the department, namely providing an accessible
and transformed justice service, committed to the promotion of
constitutional values for all. One of the injustices of the past is the
fact that branch courts, which were not equipped to provide essential
services such as child maintenance, protection orders, deceased estates,
adoption orders and legal remedies in civil disputes, were established in
townships and rural areas. This resulted in many people, mostly the poor,
travelling vast distances to main courts where these services were
provided.

One of the projects the department initiated to make access to justice for
all a reality is the redesignation of these branch courts as full-service
courts. Ekangala is one of the 15 areas that the Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Development has proclaimed as a separate magisterial
district with effect from 11 August 2009. This effectively means that the
area has, with effect from that date, been excised from the Mkobola
magisterial district, under which it fell before the proclamation, and made
into a full-service court. Prior to the proclamation, the people of
Ekangala had to travel to Mkobola for some of the services.

This government is promoting access to justice by bringing courts closer to
the people. It must also be noted that Ekangala is less than 10 km from
Bronkhorstspruit and forms part of the Mkobola magisterial district solely
on the basis that it was part of the old KwaNdebele homeland in the
apartheid era. The proclamation also seeks to correct this anomaly.

It is also important to mention that Ekangala is currently a circuit of the
regional court, which sits in Mpumalanga. This implies that the regional
magistrates from the Nelspruit or Mbombela court must travel from Nelspruit
to a court in Ekangala.

I have been informed that the department is in the process of finalising
the consultation process with the view to changing this position, with
effect from June 2010. The regional division of Gauteng will then have
jurisdiction over Ekangala. This will further increase access to justice
for the communities in that area.

I have been informed that the building of the new court will be completed
by 31 March 2010, after which a date for the official opening of the court
will be determined in liaison with the Department of Public Works. I thank
you.

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Thank you, Deputy Minister, for your valuable answer. I
would like to point out that Ekangala became part of Mkobola magisterial
district in 1985, when it was incorporated by the apartheid government into
the KwaNdebele homeland, despite resistance and opposition from the
residents. When new provincial boundaries were drawn, Ekangala was
mistakenly demarcated into the then Eastern Transvaal province, which is
now Mpumalanga.

My follow-up question is: How will the Ministry or the department inform
the Ekangala residents about the proclamation that was gazetted on 11
August 2009, to assure them that Ekangala is now part of Gauteng,
notwithstanding the presence of the Mkobola and Witbank court officials at
the Ekangala court? Due to literacy levels, the Government Gazette does not
reach the majority of the residents. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Deputy
Speaker, the government notices giving effect to this development will be
published in the first week of April 2010. This will be followed by an
extensive awareness campaign. The opening of the court will, in fact, mark
the launch of this awareness campaign. On the day of the opening of courts,
pamphlets will be distributed, the SABC will be invited to televise the
event and national and community radio and print media will be used to
communicate these changes. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs N W A MICHAEL: Madam Deputy Speaker, we have been informed by the
Department of Justice acting directors-general and the present director-
general that there is a severe backlog in the appointment of magistrates.
The situation was so dire that in the response to a parliamentary question
that I asked, I was told that the number of cases abandoned or dropped in
2008-09, due to various reasons, but including the shortfall of
magistrates, amounted to 286 837.

The implementation of the Children’s Act, which comes into effect on 1
April 2010, requires an additional 20 magistrates. Can the Deputy Minister
please inform us how many magistrates will be employed at the Ekangala
magistrate’s court and how will these magistrates be sought? If they are
sought from other magistrates’ courts, will they be replaced or will they
leave a vacuum in those courts?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Deputy
Speaker, a big part of the question the hon Michael has posed is in fact a
new question. Let me try to clarify. It is true that the process of
appointing magistrates is a very lengthy one. We have raised that with the
Magistrates’ Commission. We are happy to say the process is speeding up. In
fact, the last meeting of the Magistrates’ Commission made recommendations
in respect of many of the outstanding vacancies.

What’s important to clarify is that even where there is a vacant
magistrate’s position, it does not mean there is no warm body sitting in
that position. Those positions are all filled by the appointment of acting
magistrates. There is no single position that is vacant in the true sense
of word, where someone is not sitting there and hearing cases.

In the case of the Ekangala court, it’s also important to point out that it
is indeed a functioning court. There are magistrates sitting there. Where
there are vacancies, there are acting magistrates and, should the need
arise for additional posts, those will be filled on recommendation of the
Magistrates’ Commission.

Mr D A KGANARE: Madam Deputy Speaker, we all know that the Minister of
Justice and Constitutional Development has the power to appoint acting
magistrates. Can the Deputy Minister give this House a solemn undertaking
that the Minister has not used, and will never use, that power to appoint
individuals as acting magistrates simply as a payback for the misuse of a
Public Service office to benefit the ANC, as happened with acting Judge
Mpshe?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Madam Deputy
Speaker, again I think that is a very different question. Should the member
wish to pose that, he can do so. Let me clarify to him and the House that
the power of appointing acting magistrates does rest with the Minister, but
he has delegated that power to the Deputy Minister. I can give the member
the assurance that acting magistrates are appointed in terms of the
provisions set out in the law, most often on the recommendation of chief or
senior magistrates. Thank you. [Applause.]

 Particulars regarding investigation into conduct of VIP Protection Unit in
                      relation to arrest of UCT student


21.   Mr T W Coetzee (DA) asked the Minister of Police:


      Whether he has launched an investigation into the conduct of the VIP
      Protection Unit with regard to the arrest of a certain University of
      Cape Town student (name furnished); if not, why not; if so, what are
      the relevant details?             NO358E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the answer to the
question is that we are unable to comment on this matter, as the individual
has stated that he has launched a civil claim against the department and we
regard the issue as sub judice. Thank you.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on behalf of hon Coetzee.
The Minister was quoted as having said that the young man concerned had
apologised and so the matter should thus be considered to be closed and
yet, what we saw here was reminiscent of apartheid-era policing.

Mr Maxwele was allegedly arrested at gunpoint, had a bag pulled over his
head, was then subjected to a torrent of insults and intimidation from
police and intelligence officials over a 24-hour period and NIA officers
raided his house.

These are the tactics of a police state, not a democracy, and the so-called
apology was released a week after the incident, but was part of his initial
coerced statement. This is reminiscent of Robert Mugabe’s Zimbabwe, which
of course the ANC is increasingly trying to emulate.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, what is the question?

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: I’m asking it now, Madam Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, okay.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: As much as the Minister might wish it away, there’s no
way on earth one might consider this matter closed. So, I’d like to know
how far the investigation is into this shameful event and I would like an
assurance to this House that the Minister will apologise to this young man
personally at the conclusion thereof. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, as I said, we can only
comment on this particular matter once the court processes have been
concluded. [Interjections.] Any comment before that is pre-empting the
conclusion of the matter, which is sub judice. Our comments will come after
that process. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Madam Deputy Speaker, while the ACDP does not condone the
actions of the UCT student who was arrested by the VIP Protection Unit, we
nevertheless deplore the conduct of the police officers who arrested him.
The student’s right to be protected against torture was violated by the
members of the VIP Protection Unit, who acted like they were trained by the
apartheid security branch. [Interjections.]

Regardless of their claims that the student resisted arrest, there can be
no justification for suffocating a person by putting a plastic bag over
their head. This is evil and one of the worst forms of torture any person
can suffer.

My question to the hon Deputy Minister is: After the court proceedings have
been exhausted internally, is there anything that the department will do as
an assurance to the public that, in future, no such activity will be
tolerated from the VIP Protection Unit? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a daily basis, any
case of abuse by any individual not for political purposes is investigated.
So, once this particular process comes to a conclusion, it will be
subjected to the normal procedural processes within the SA Police Service
and the Ministry, and they will be in a position to give a report on this.

At the present moment the matter is sub judice. This is the rule of law.
[Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of
order: I just need clarity as far as the sub judice rule is concerned. A
sub judice rule applies before a court of law. I am not aware that this is
at present before a court of law. It may be an internal inquiry. The sub
judice rule does not apply to an inquiry, but only to a court of law.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, as I have explained,
the individual concerned has stated that he has launched a civil claim
against the department. So, in this particular instance, what the sub
judice rule means – and I am not a lawyer and will be unable to explain the
point fully – is that we must allow the due processes of law to be
concluded so that we are able to deal with the matter in its totality.
[Interjections.]

Ms M C DUBE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I’m sitting next to Mr Schneemann’s
microphone and maybe that’s why it registered his name. The VIP Protection
Unit was involved in a number of incidents that drew media attention and
criticisms. Will the Minister consider conducting an investigation to
determine whether there is a real problem, and if there is, what it might
be? If it is just a perception, how can it be corrected?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, as I explained earlier
on, we will be in a position, once the processes have been concluded, to
present the report and allow the processes to unfold.

It would be a mistake for us to undertake one process at the expense of
another. It is important to deal with the matter in its totality. Thank you
very much.
  Particulars regarding steps to be taken against police officers and other
     agents who infringed the constitutional rights of a certain student

34.   Mrs J D Kilian (Cope) asked the Minister of Police:

      Whether the public will be informed about steps (a) implemented to
      investigate the matter and (b) that will be taken against police
      officers and other agents who infringed the constitutional rights of a
      certain student (name furnished); if not, why not, if so, when, in
      each case?             NO375E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the question seems to
be the same. We are aware that the individual has decided to bring a civil
case against the police and we are therefore unable to comment on this
matter. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise again on a
point of order: I do request that the Table give us an accurate description
of what the sub judice rule is, because I don’t think the member is
actually indicating correctly what it is. We need clarity and a ruling from
yourself in that regard, because, otherwise, I’m afraid, much could be
hidden behind the sub judice rule when it actually doesn’t apply.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, any supplementary questions?
Mrs J D KILIAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, it is actually rather difficult now,
because if the hon Deputy Minister is again going to hide behind what he
calls a sub judice rule, which is not a sub judice rule, it means he will
refrain from responding to the questions.

Answer the simple questions. We have a problem with the conduct of the VIP
Protection Unit and we have a problem with the actions taken by the police
in this regard. There clearly is an intention, but as far as we know,
nothing has so far been filed. So, will the hon Deputy Minister please tell
us whether he agrees with the conduct in this instance, or does he agree
with the vice chancellor of UCT’s view, when he said: “We want you to use
your powers as a police force and not bully citizens that display their
frustration at government’s lack of response to their needs.” [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Before the Deputy Minister answers, can I appeal
to the House and those hon members who would like to ask questions, to take
the word of the Deputy Minister for now. I will then look at that
particular rule and come back with a response. I don’t have a response in
front of me now. So, I am saying we should take the word of the Deputy
Minister. Those people who would like to ask questions must ask questions,
but we cannot say that the Deputy Minister’s application of the sub judice
rule is wrong. Can we do that, until we have the interpretation of the rule
in front of us?

Mr J P CRONIN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order: In
addition to that, I thought that one of the rules of the questions to
Ministers mentions the fact that there should not be two questions that are
substantially the same on an Order Paper. That is part of the problem we
are confronting here.

The Minister of Police, through his deputy, has been asked to answer the
same substantial question twice. I also think that if we follow the
procedure you’re requesting – where we look over what is done –we will also
find a problem in the way the questions have been tabled. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Ngonyama, is yours a point of order too?

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker ...

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No ... Hon Ngonyama, I have a list in front of me. Hon
Kilian had a follow-up question, and if you would like to ask another
follow-up question, just raise your hand so that I can be made aware.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I address you on an issue?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, you have asked us to accept the word of
the Deputy Minister until the matter has been cleared. This matter is of
great importance in terms of the way in which the country generally sees
the role of the police protection units. I would like to recommend that
this question be held over until this time next week, so that we actually
have the opportunity to investigate the matter. The Deputy Minister could
be here and we could actually add this as an extra item for Question Time
during the course of next week. I urge you to consider that.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: What does that proposal mean - that the question must
not be put to the Minister now?

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, you are quite right. We should delay
the answering of the question today so that we could investigate the matter
and put it to the House next week.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I was consulting with the Table.
Now, the question has been put and there were some answers. If we stop the
question now and shelve it for next week, the cluster that was supposed to
be dealt with next week will suffer.

So, rather than adjourn the questioning now, so that we can repeat the same
questions next week, the recommendation is that we should continue with
this question. Hon members who are not satisfied can still ask
supplementary questions in the form of a letter.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, may I rise and
point out one thing? We have to be consistent in terms of our rulings. You
will recall some time ago there was a ghastly incident at the University of
the Free State. It involved the Reitz Four. An inquiry was instigated. It
didn’t stop this House debating at length what should have happened to
those individuals and the consequences thereof. We have to be consistent.
We must either say, if it’s an investigation, it is part of the sub judice
rule, or not. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of
order. You have consulted with the Table, and you have been advised. Their
advice is sensible and it offers all of us an opportunity to await that
determination. So, I think hon Davidson should not proceed with it.

Mr J P CRONIN: Madam Deputy Speaker, could I then also ask you ...
[Interjections.] The fact that they are unhappy with the responses provided
by the Deputy Minister is not material. [Interjections.] We have completed
the first question that relates to this matter. Could I ask you, Madam
Deputy Speaker, to rule on the other substantive point of order that I
brought, which is that this question is substantially the same as the
preceding question. [Interjections.]

It is against the procedures of Parliament to ask the same question twice
and to table them. Could I ask you for a ruling in that regard?

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on two points of
order. Firstly, if I understood you correctly, a point of order was raised
by the DA colleague and you ruled that you will respond to that point of
order once properly advised. I would like to point out that, in terms of
the Rules, you bear the responsibility of ruling on any point of order
which affects the conduct of the debate, as this one does. If this debate
is to continue, I submit to you that it is incumbent upon you to rule
whether or not it is legitimate for the Deputy Minister not to respond on
the basis of the matter being sub judice. So we cannot delay the debate.

The second point of order, Madam Speaker, is that you should not be able to
entertain the exception of a sub judice situation without you and the House
having been provided with specific information, whether the case is pending
or not; it is an affirmative defence. The burden is on the Deputy Minister
to tell us that it is pending. It is not sufficient to stop a parliamentary
debate on the mere possibility that the person might have announced that
civil action might be brought at a future time. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, the Chairperson cannot determine the
correctness or otherwise of any answer. The Deputy Minister has answered
here and has responded by saying that there is a lawsuit against the
police. Now, the response of the Deputy Minister is being questioned by hon
members who say that the sub judice rule does not apply in this instance. I
have ruled earlier that we should complete the question. In fact, I think
there are only one or two speakers who haven’t asked their questions.

We will look at what the sub judice rule is saying and clarify for
ourselves whether it applies to what the Deputy Minister is saying. I
really think we are going to delay this matter because the responses have
been given by the Minister already. There is no other response that he is
going to give on this matter. Moreover, because I am not able to rule now
and say that that particular rule is inapplicable and the Minister must
answer differently, I am really not able to help you in this instance.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, can I just seek
clarity here. If indeed the response from the Table, after getting legal
advice, is that this matter is not sub judice, what happens then? How do we
get the answers? What mechanism is there to get answers in this House?

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, if I can add to that, I think we are
placing the Deputy Minister in an invidious position. We are asking him to
answer a question to which he has been given certain advice. He has said to
us that it is sub judice. We are questioning whether it is sub judice. He –
and I am not pointing fingers at him – is in an invidious position. We are
trying to make it easy for all concerned.

If I look at Rule 109, for example, it states that if a Minister or a
Deputy Minister is absent on the day, 30 minutes can be added on to the
Question Time the following week. I know that nobody is absent today, but I
am saying that there are opportunities, if we create them ourselves as
Parliament, for this kind of thing to happen. I would really urge again
that you consider making time available before 3 o’clock next week, if
necessary, for us to deal with this matter. It is important.

Mr M S BOOI: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think there is a particular way in
which we should be cautioned about this matter. The purpose of this
exercise is for Members of Parliament to raise questions which have to be
responded to by the relevant answerers. They are not entitled to the kind
of answer they want. The Minister has chosen ... no, no ...
[Interjections.]

Can I finish? You don’t predetermine the answer. The hon Deputy Minister
has responded. If we allow this ruling to continue the way it is now, it
will not be sustainable, because, on a future occasion, somebody will say
that they are not happy with the answer given then. The Minister has given
a response and that’s the way he has chosen to respond.

Mr J P CRONIN: Madam Deputy Speaker, my colleague is exactly right. The
point is that they don’t agree with the responses that have been given by
the Deputy Minister. They are entitled to disagree with his responses but
that is not a point of order. That is a point of disagreement. Therefore,
they are completely out of order to raise a point of order around issues
with which they don’t agree.

Therefore, I really beg of you, Deputy Speaker, firstly, to move on, and
not to defer the matter and so on, because the hon Deputy Minister has
answered. They don’t like the answers, but he has answered.

Secondly, I really request once more for you to rule on the second issue,
the second point of order that I have brought, which is that the question
that we are now standing on is substantially the same as the preceding
question.

Therefore, can you please rule that, in fact, this question should fall
away at this point?

Mrs J D KILIAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, I will allow all your points of order, but
can I just remind you that the time for questions is running out.
Therefore, all the points of order that you are raising now are eating into
the time for other important questions that have been asked. So, just don’t
complain when the time expires.

From the Chair, I have made a ruling which states that whether this matter
is sub judice or not will be investigated, and we will come with a ruling
on that.

The second suggestion - that we should defer this matter to next week – I
will not be able to agree to because I am not a member of the programme
committee; I am a Chairperson of this session. The programme committee must
do that. You are putting me, as the Chairperson, in this difficult
position.

So, do I allow all the points of order to take the time of other questions?
Is that what you want?

Dr T S FARISANI: Madam Deputy Chair, I rise on a point of order!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it is a point of order, let me go according to ...

Mr J H DE LANGE: Madam Deputy Speaker, as the ANC, firstly, we strongly
support Deputy Minister Cronin on his point that the question has been
placed on the Order Paper twice. He is clearly correct. We will ask a
ruling that it be removed.

Secondly, I am absolutely amazed. This is obviously coming from what
happened last week. It is clearly an attempt to disrupt this House on every
single occasion and to put pressure on a presiding officer of this House to
make rulings because they want to play political games.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order ...

Mr J H DE LANGE: There is one person, hon Ellis, who has been in this
Parliament for so long, probably 30 years. He knows the Rules. He knows
exactly when we created these Rules and that there are three clusters that
rotate. The only occasion on which a question can be moved to the next
Question Time is when there is absence of an answer; not when the answer
has been given. You cannot do what the hon Ellis has done when he said:
Give us a week because we want to go and check what the case is here.

The Rules are clear: When you do not like a question ... No Minister is
entitled ... He can answer what he wants to. No Minister, once he has
answered the question, on the basis of not liking or wanting to get further
evidence ... There are other mechanisms to deal with it. If you are unhappy
with the answer in terms of its veracity, you bring a request to the House
to have an investigation. If you do not like the question, you can ask
another, either an oral question on the next occasion, or you can ask a
written question. Those are the mechanisms.

We would ask that, on both these issues, you please rule and do not allow
the House to be disrupted in the manner that the DA is doing, particularly
if those disrupting are senior members of the House. [Applause.]

Mrs J D KILIAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like to suggest the hon De
Lange first studies the Rules of this House before he speaks, because there
is nothing wrong. Maybe he can sit in this House for 30 years and he will
still not know the details.

As to Deputy Minister Cronin, there is nothing that prohibits... in fact, I
would suggest the hon Minister of Police should have argued that the two
questions are pretty much the same. For us to know that when we submit
questions is clearly impossible. So, these questions were submitted to the
Minister and he could have responded by saying that the matter is sub
judice. We would then have been alerted and could have placed other
questions higher up.

I believe this is nothing but a way of not responding. Therefore, today, we
know what the answer is: Hon Mbalula supports the bullying tactics of the
VIP Unit. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Dr T S FARISANI: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: The House
maintains an unequal hierarchy of authority. I speak from here and you,
Deputy Speaker, speak from where you are. It is not equal. In other words,
once you make a ruling, all of us, without exception, without fear or
favour, must accept that ruling. If we are unhappy about that ruling, it is
natural and human that we would find ways of challenging it.

In conclusion, you did not stifle any debate today. You only indicated that
you wanted to study that Rule and come back to us. So, be firm and
decisive, and close this issue until you come back to us.

If people are allowed to behave the way some people are behaving in this
honourable House, we will never make progress. Decide, and we shall obey.
[Applause.]

Mr H P CHAUKE: Madam Deputy Speaker, my point is that an hon member from
Cope referred to the Deputy Minister of Police as supporting the bullying
tactics of the police. That is not parliamentary. Can the member withdraw
that bullying tactic?

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would the hon member who said that like to say
something?

Mrs J D KILIAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, if it came across that I said he
supports it, I meant to say it appears that he supports it. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: What exactly did you say? Did you say he supported it?

Mrs J D KILIAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, it will be difficult for me now
because it was said in the course of debate. I cannot recall exactly what I
said.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Kilian, since you cannot recall, do you mind
withdrawing what you said?

Mrs J D KILIAN: I withdraw. [Interjections.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Kilian...

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Madam Deputy Speaker!

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I see you. I am still talking to the hon Kilian.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, as I’ve said, if I directly accused
him of supporting that, then I withdraw. But, if I have said ...
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no, thank you, hon Kilian, that’s all I wanted.
Thank you very much. What’s your point of order, hon Ambriosi?

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Madam Deputy Speaker, first of all, it’s
Ambrosini, I would appreciate you pronouncing it correctly.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ambrosini, yes. Sorry, that’s not my mother tongue.
[Laughter.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I am rising
because this is an important matter of freedom of speech in this House. I
remember what the hon member said and we all heard it. She said: “The
bullying tactics of the VIP Units - are they being supported by the
Minister?” [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Ambrosini, thank you very much. The hon member has
withdrawn already.

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Madam Deputy Speaker, she could not have withdrawn
what she did not say. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, can we proceed? By now, I’ve given
everybody a chance. In fact, I do not think we have a lot of time left for
questions. My ruling still stands that this question has been answered but
if there is any member who feels strongly that it must come back, that
member must definitely bring it back as an urgent question or motion. Then,
automatically, the programme committee will take it for next week. Can we
move to another Question, not question 34?

   Particulars regarding purpose of, and attendance at, police function in
                                Bloemfontein

15.   Mrs L S Chikunga (ANC) asked the Minister of Police:

      (a)   What was the purpose of the police function in Bloemfontein and
            (b) how many police officers attended the function?
                                              NO352E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the South African
Police Service Act, Act 68 of 1995, was promulgated on 27 January 1995.
Given the anniversary of the SA Police Service, SAPS, we should consider
the essential role it plays to provide safety and security for all people
in South Africa. In honour of the sacrifices members make in providing this
service, Cabinet declared 27 January, annually, the day to celebrate
National Police Day for South Africa.

The National Commissioner of Police, in consultation with his national and
provincial management, took a decision to celebrate National Police Day for
2010 on 29 January 2010. We hosted this day, among other considerations, to
thank members of the SA Police Service for their dedication and hard work.
We understand the kind of environment in which they work, especially those
members who served the country during the 2009 festive season.

The event was hosted in Bloemfontein at the Vodacom Park Stadium. Its theme
was: South African Police Service Members: My Family. Approximately 42 000
members of the provinces and divisions attended this event on 29 January
2010. Thank you.

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the two unions in the Department of
Police told the portfolio committee that they were looking forward to yet
another event. Was the country’s security compromised in any way at any
time in the run-up to the event, during the event or after the event? If
not, why not? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: The country’s security during the event was
not compromised at all. The event was decentralised. Most of the police
officers who attended are those who took leave because they were on duty
during the festive season. Their attendance at the centralised event in
Bloemfontein was part of an agreement with management in different
provinces.

When the police gathered in the Vodacom Park Stadium in Bloemfontein, there
were police officers manning police stations on the ground. They were on
duty as agreed. We are convinced that the security of the country was well
planned for in view of those who would be absent, and it was certainly not
compromised.

Mr D A KGANARE: Madam Deputy Speaker, will the Deputy Minister explain why
food ran out, but liquor continued to flow when 50 000 police officers were
celebrating in the Free State? Was this the best method of showing
appreciation for their services? Does the Deputy Minister not have any
other programme to acknowledge excellence in the police force or to
incentivise other members to emulate those who performed excellently? Thank
you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, there are various
methods in the Police Service to acknowledge excellence. In the days
preceding that gathering, there was an evening event where we were
honouring police offices who had excellent performance in the Police
Service for 30 years. This preceded that event. It’s only that it was not
publicised. Only the actual big celebration was publicised.

Regarding what came first, before food - liquor or cooldrinks - it’s an
operational question. If drinks were exhausted before food, that is another
question. The budget and everything was the same. Everything supplied at
that event was equal for everybody. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Deputy Speaker, one in three of our SA Police
Service, SAPS, members were ordered under penalty of disciplinary hearings
to drop their duties and undertake a long and often chaotic trip to
Bloemfontein. Many arrived after this party was over. No one will believe
for a moment that removing 50 000 of our police officers from our stations
to go to the party did not leave our citizens extremely vulnerable over a
three- to five-day period: two days, travel, one day party, during which
food ran out and no ablution facilities or accommodation was provided, and
then two days to recover. In many instances two days were needed to recover
from excessive drinking at the town’s bottle stores.

Your spokesperson from the Ministry promised to reveal to the DA the total
cost of the event before the event, during the event, and after the event,
and has now lapsed into silence. We have asked you exactly how much was
spent on the party and from which SAPS programme the money came. The
country still does not know where their tax money went. Tell us now: What
did the party cost the nation when it could have been held effectively,
efficiently and safely for the citizens of this country in the provinces?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: The question of the cost of the party will
be addressed. We need an overall report, which we are still awaiting. The
question of the cost of the party and how much exactly cost it the SA
Police Service’s budget is a matter that will also be addressed.
There are many people who came to the fore to support the party and the
efforts of the police, and to recognise them on that day. Costs did not
only come from the SA Police Service’s budget; they also came from the
corporate sector that was saying thank you to the police for rendering a
wonderful job. We take only one day to say thank you to the police
officers, not every day. On that day, many people came to the party, and we
are grateful for that. [Applause.]

Regarding the report, we are open to scrutiny. In the budgetary processes,
this information will come up and we will be in a position to share how
much the party cost.

Regarding the ablution facilities and the drunken behaviour of the
individuals, and whether or not people were hung over for another day, it
will require a detailed scientific analysis to determine if people were
still suffering from a hangover the following day. Whether or not we are
better placed here, or if we have a neurologist, I don’t know.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: I believe
that the Deputy Minister has already informed us he is not a lawyer. May I
ask if he is a scientist? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Whether one is a scientist, a lawyer or
something else, one applies different tools of analysis to arrive at
particular conclusions about people. [Applause.] My school of thought is
the university of wisdom, which teaches me that, logically, you cannot,
from far away, make a determination about the social behaviour of an
individual unless you have tested that person. In this instance we cannot
come to that conclusion because we are responding to hearsay.

The most appropriate way to respond to that would be to come with empirical
evidence that, indeed, people were tested and were hung over. In this
instance, we do not have that report. [Laughter.]

        Query regarding constitutional basis for shoot-to-kill policy

39.   Mr V B Ndlovu (IFP) asked the Minister of Police:


      On which provision of the Constitution does the shoot-to-kill policy
      rely?
      NO380E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: The South African Police Service does not
have a shoot-to-kill policy. “Shoot to kill” is in fact the invention of
the media. The policy of the South African Police Service and the Ministry
is as follows: If the life of a member or of any other person is in danger
and there is no other way for the member to protect himself or herself, or
the other person whose life is in danger, but to shoot at the person who is
posing the danger, the member may use his or her firearm to shoot at the
person posing the danger.

Should this result in the death of a person posing the danger, the action
of the member will be justified as self-defence in terms of the law. This
is in line with section 11 of the South African Constitution. Police
officers who are confronted or faced with violent armed criminals have been
instructed to defend themselves and citizens where necessary. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Ngiyabonga Sekela Somlomo, Mhlonishwa ngiyakuzwa ukuthi
uthini. Inkinga yokuqala enginayo ukuthi uma i-ICD isiqala ukwenza uphenyo
kutholakala ukuthi iphoyisa yilona elidubule labulala kungafanele kwenziwa
njani? Okwesibili, emndenini, umuntu omunye engashayeka ongahlangene nalo
okufanele kudutshulwe kubhekiswe kuyena, oseceleni nje ethinteka,
uzonxephezeleka kanjani kulesi simo okhuluma ngaso? (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I hear what you are
saying. The first problem I have is what happens when the ICD starts doing
its investigations and discovers that it is the police officer who shot and
killed unnecessarily? Secondly, if someone else in the family, who has
nothing to do with the one to be shot at, is hit by a stray bullet, how
will that person be compensated with regard to the condition you are
talking about?]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, where the police
officers have acted recklessly in the execution of their duties for the
protection of the citizens, the law has taken its course, and the law must
take its course.

When we say people must act in self-defence in protection of ordinary
citizens that is not a licence to kill ordinary citizens who are actually
innocent, and that is the application of the law. By law, the use of deadly
force is guided by section 49. In this particular respect, most police
offices have upheld the law. Where they have not, the law has taken its
course and, we reiterate, this is what must actually happen.

In instances where innocent people and civilians have actually been shot,
some of these cases have been referred to the Independent Complaints
Directorate, ICD; there have been reports; and strong action was taken
against those who performed those actions. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA has watched with great
interest the Ministry’s publicity campaign in relation to section 49 and
the National Police Commissioners’ announcement that this section would be
changed to give police more firepower.

It is already crystal clear in that section that the SAPS may not shoot
unarmed citizens, and citizens who are fleeing, in the back. So, the
conclusion is that our Minister wanted to go back to apartheid-era
policing. Now, as a result of this shoot-to-kill puffery, citizens have
died. Even a little three-year-old, whom the police officer thought had
held a gun, has died. Now the Minister makes a 180 degree turn, saying
there are just one or two technical changes he wants to make. This would
suggest that a full bench of judges somehow got it wrong when this
legislation was moved away from the apartheid-era format.

Now one wonders if one is disagreeing with the statements made by the
National Police Commissioner, or perhaps realising that the statements made
by the then Deputy Minister, Susan Shabangu, who said, “Shoot and kill the
bastards and don’t worry about the regulations”, might have encouraged SAPS
members to become law breakers. And I want to know what right the Minister
had to run such a publicity campaign; one that has caused so many police
offices to become confused about what previously was crystal clear
regarding their rights to “shoot and kill” ... [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: The amendment to section 49 is not a major
amendment. It has been blown out of proportion and exaggerated. It deals
with ambiguities in terms of the law. And I suppose that in the near future
the amendment would come before us and we would debate it. What we
encouraged is – and this is what the national commissioner has always said
and done - that the police must apply the law in their own self-protection.
Words have been put in the national commissioner’s mouth - basically, much
of what he says is interpreted out of context.

We are not going backwards. What we have been telling our people is that
when you are confronted by dangerous criminals, use the law, use deadly
force, in self-protection and the protection of the innocent. The law
permits you to do that. So, there is no retreat into the past in this
regard. This is what has actually been said over and over again. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Madam Deputy Speaker, firstly, let me thank the Deputy
Minister for turning around. At least you realise the mistake you have made
with “shoot to kill”. I must say, Deputy Minister, it’s good that you are
beginning to learn that what you were doing was dangerous.

The question is: If you’re now saying no, you were just telling the police
what was in the Act and in the Constitution, why did you shout about it as
if you were bringing something new?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, what I have said and
what we are saying is: There is no turnaround strategy; there is no going
backwards. Forward ever, backward never. [Applause.] And what we are saying
is we shall not retreat when we are confronted by the most dangerous armed
criminals. Police officers must use the law to protect themselves. That is
what we have said and we will continue to say that, even if we sound like
an old broken record because this is what our country needs. This is what’s
required by our people, because criminals are running amok. This is what we
are doing and this is where we are going.

So, we have never been beyond the law and we have never said anything
outside the law. It might be the harsh-sounding voices and the language
that made you think this is a war. This is a war against criminals. The
innocent must stay where they are, we will protect them. This is what we
are encouraging police officers to do. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Dr M J PHAAHLA: Madam Deputy Speaker, Minister, you are on record as saying
that there is no such policy and that there is no licence for any police
officer to disregard the Constitution and the laws of the country. What
more does the Minister think is necessary to explain this issue to the
opposition Members of Parliament and to stop them from misleading the
public? Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: We will request all hon members to actually
support us in our endeavour to rid South Africa of dangerous criminals.
What this means is: Don’t always take everything that was said by the
Ministry from third parties, meaning the media, the fourth estate. It is
only right to engage with us. The processes of talking to the opposition
parties and Members of Parliament, including leaders of the opposition,
about some of our actions are a step in the right direction, as is engaging
with the media in South Africa about our statements. The war against
criminality is not a political one, it requires all-round active
participation. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, the time allocated for questions
has expired. Outstanding replies will be received and printed in Hansard.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr G R MORGAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I intend moving the following motion on behalf of
the DA:

   That the House debates the problems of enforcement and general compliance
   in the medical waste industry in South Africa and any interventions that
   may be required by government and the private sector to avert a major
   environmental disaster.

Thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that, at the
next sitting of the House, I shall move:

   That the House debates the ruling of the Labour Court in favour of
   Captain Renate Barnard against the Department of Police, on the basis
   that the policy of affirmative action was abused by the SAPS as a measure
   to promote unfair discrimination.

Mr P D DEXTER: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that, at the next
sitting of the House, I shall move:

   That the House debates the impact of the impending Eskom tariff hikes on
   households as well as the agricultural sector, as the hikes could have a
   detrimental impact on food security and job creation in the country.

Thank you.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that, at the
next sitting of the House, I shall move:

   That the House debates the ruling party’s involvement in public tenders
   and other business transactions with the state, including its share in
   Eskom through Chancellor House, all of which have a detrimental impact on
   the living conditions of the poor.

Mr D A KGANARE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that, at the
next sitting of the House, I shall move:

   That the House debates the failure by government to implement the sector-
   specific wage increases for medical doctors, which might now result in
   industrial action by doctors, with serious disruption of the public
   health system.

         ONE HUNDRED DAYS TO THE KICK-OFF OF THE 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Deputy
President, I move without notice:

   That the House —

   (1)      notes that 2 March 2010, was the 100-day mark for the World Cup
         kick-off;


   (2)      further notes that with less than three months before kick-off,
         we are more determined than ever to make this World Cup a success:
         the infrastructure, security and logistical arrangements are on
         track and the last 99 days will be used to put the finishing
         touches on all preparations;


   (3)      recognises that these 100 days signify years of planning and
         hard work and not only have our stadiums been built to world-class
         standards, but also the infrastructure, which includes roads, is
         undergoing a massive facelift - a legacy that will remain beyond
         2010;


   (4)      is encouraged by the results of the African Response latest
         survey showing that a record 85% of South Africans believe that the
         country will be ready for the World Cup when the first ball is
         kicked off on June 11;


   (5)      congratulates Fifa, particularly the 2010 Local Organising
         Committee, for a job well done in preparing the country to host the
         world’s most prestigious sporting event and assures them that the
         nation is ready to give the world a proudly South African World
         Cup; and


   (6)      urges all South Africans to rally around Bafana Bafana to make
         sure that the World Cup stays on African soil!

Agreed to.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, before we begin, I think the hon Chief
Whip of the Majority Party is going to propose a motion on the
Parliamentary Interfaith Council. I would urge him not to put it today.
Although we discussed it briefly at the Chief Whips’ Forum this morning, we
really haven’t had a chance to look at it; it has just been put on our
desks now. I think, in fairness to the other opposition parties – it is a
convention we have – he shouldn’t put it today.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I agree with
hon Ellis. We were told at the Chief Whips’ Forum that the motion would
come later, and it has just arrived. Therefore, I agree with him: we won’t
put it. That’s what I was going to do.

             DANGER ASSOCIATED WITH UNGUARDED RAILWAY CROSSINGS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —


   (1)      notes that on 2 March 2010 six people died, among them high
         school children, when the minibus in which they were travelling was
         hit by a train in Welgeval outside Rustenburg;


   (2)      further notes that there are still over 7 500 railway crossings
         in South Africa and these railway crossings are often open or
         uncontrolled and sometimes without warning lights to warn of
         approaching trains;


   (3)      further notes that 95 per cent of crashes at railway crossings
         are caused by driver error;


   (4)      expresses its sincere condolences to the families of the
         casualties of this accident; and


   (5)      calls upon the government to improve the infrastructure of
         railway crossings to reduce the risk and calls on road users who
         make use of these railway crossings to follow the road rules and
         signs and pay attention to their environment when approaching a
         railway crossing.

Agreed to.

           OUSTANDING ACHIEVEMENT OF PROTEAS CRICKETER HASHIM AMLA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes with pride the outstanding achievement of Proteas cricketer
         Hashim Amla, who was named Man of the Series in the recently
         completed cricket test matches played in India;


      2) further notes that Hashim Amla, in scoring an undefeated 253 runs
         at Nagpur, achieved the highest score by a South African batsman at
         number three; and furthermore, that on account of his being
         dismissed only once in the series he recorded an average of 494
         runs for the test series making him only the second player after
         the great Wally Hammond to achieve such a rare feat;


      3) acknowledges that he is a worthy role model for all South African
         sports representatives and a great ambassador for South Africa; and


      4) conveys its sincere appreciation to him for his contribution to
         South African sports.

Agreed to.

                       DEVASTATING EARTHQUAKE IN CHILE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N SINGH: Madam Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the IFP I move without
notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes that on 27 February 2010 Chile was struck by an 8,8 magnitude
         earthquake, resulting in the death of more than 700 people and
         causing widespread damage, destroying buildings, bridges and roads
         in many areas;

      2) further notes that at least eight aftershocks were also recorded,
         the largest being of 6,9 magnitude, which then set off a tsunami,
         hitting countries with waves higher than usual;


      3) expresses its sincerest condolences and  deepest  sympathy  to  the
         government and the people of Chile; and


      4) urges all nations, including South Africa, to send assistance to
         the people of Chile to help them rebuild their lives and their
         country as a whole.

Agreed to.

 EXHUMATION AND REBURIAL OF THE REMAINS OF ANC STALWART JOHNSTONE MFANAFUTHI
                                 MAKHATHINI

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP Of THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes that the African National Congress’s Head of International
         Affairs, Johnstone “Johnny” Mfanafuthi Makhathini, passed away on 3
         December 1988, while exiled in Zambia;


   (2)      further notes that Makhathini’s remains were exhumed in Lusaka,
         Zambia, and repatriated to South Africa, where they were reburied
         in Pietermaritzburg, KwaZulu-Natal on Saturday, 27 February 2010;


   (3)      remembers that Mr Makhathini was born in Durban on 8 February
         1932. He was a gifted, bright and talented debater with an aptitude
         for languages and he attended school at Adams College where he
         trained as a teacher, after which he went on to teach at Mzinyathi,
         in the Inanda area;


   (4)      further remembers that the late Makhathini became politically
         active when Bantu Education was imposed on African schools and
         subsequently resigned from the teaching profession, rather than
         continue to serve under the Bantu Education system and pursued part-
         time studies at the University of Natal;


   (5)      recalls that as a result of the brutal suppression of political
         activity and arrest of political activists by the apartheid regime
         in the 1960s, in 1962 Johnny joined the first group of volunteers
         from Natal to be sent out of the country for military training in
         the then Tanganyika where they met Comrade Nelson Mandela;


   (6)      further recalls that Mr Makhathini had sterling qualities, which
         led to his appointment as head of the ANC mission to the United
         Nations in 1977 and, subsequently, in 1983, as head of the ANC’s
         department of international affairs; and


   (7)      pays tribute to this gallant fighter who contributed immensely
         to the birth of a nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and prosperous
         South Africa.

Agreed to.

                CANCER ASSOCIATION TO HOST SEVENTH SHAVATHON

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms D CARTER: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -

   (1)      notes that on 5 and 6 March 2010, the Cancer Association of
         South Africa, known as Cansa, will be hosting the seventh
         Shavathon;
   (2)      further notes that cancer is a life-threatening disease which
         affects millions of South African men and women, irrespective of
         age or status;


   (3)      recognises that there are more than 200 different kinds of
         cancer and it affects the lives of one in four South Africans, with
         more than 80 000 dying from the disease each year;


   (4)      acknowledges that Cansa is one of the largest funders of cancer
         research in South Africa, and the country’s largest charity
         dedicated to cancer research, facilitating care and support to
         those who are diagnosed, as well as their families; and


   (5)      calls on all South Africans, especially the leaders represented
         in this House, to show solidarity with and support for this effort
         by shaving or colouring their hair.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 17:19.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees

   (1)      The following changes to membership of Portfolio, Joint and
      Joint Standing Committees have been implemented by the ANC:

|Name of Member  |Committee removed from |Committee deployed to|
|A N Luthuli     |PC on Home Affairs     |PC on Science &      |
|                |                       |Technology           |
|                |                       |(full-time)          |
|A N Luthuli     |N/A                    |PC on Transport (Alt)|
|A D Mokoena     |N/A                    |PC on Home Affairs   |
|                |                       |(full-time)          |
|N M Duma        |PC on Public Works     |PC on Transport      |
|                |                       |(full-time)          |
|N M Duma        |N/A                    |PC on Public         |
|                |                       |Enterprises (Alt)    |
|A M Maziya      |N/A                    |PC on Defence &      |
|                |                       |Military Veterans    |
|                |                       |(full-time)          |
|A Van Wyk       |PC on Defence &        |N/A                  |
|                |Military Veterans      |                     |
|N M Madlala     |N/A                    |PC on Public Works   |
|                |                       |(full-time)          |
|M R Sonto       |N/A                    |PC on Public         |
|                |                       |Enterprises          |
|                |                       |(full-time)          |
|M R Sonto       |N/A                    |PC on Mineral        |
|                |                       |Resources            |
|                |                       |(full-time)          |
|L Jacobus       |PC on Public           |PC on Public Works   |
|                |Enterprises            |(full-time)          |
|D E Dlakude     |N/A                    |PC on Transport      |
|                |                       |(full-time)          |
|D E Dlakude     |N/A                    |PC on Human          |
|                |                       |Settlements          |
|                |                       |(full-time)          |
|M M Dikgacwi    |PC on Human Settlements|Constitutional Review|
|                |                       |Committee            |
|A M Maziya      |N/A                    |JSC on Defence       |

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the South African Human Rights Commission
        (SAHRC) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


    (b)     Strategic Plan of the Independent Electoral Commission for
        2010/11 – 2012/13.


    (c)     Medium Term Strategic Plan of  the  Public  Service  Commission
        (PSC) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


    (d)     Letter from the Acting Minister of Finance dated 03 March 2010,
        to the Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of  the
        National  Council  of  Provinces  explaining  the  delay   in   the
        submission of the Update of the National Treasury Strategic Plan.

        REQUEST FOR LATE SUBMISSION OF THE UPDATE OF THE NATIONAL  TREASURY
        STRATEGIC PLAN

        The National Treasury is in compliance with section 10 (1)  (c)  of
        the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act  (No  9
        of 2009). This requires  each  national  department  to  submit  an
        annual Strategic Plan to the Legislature.

        Since we operate  in  a  dynamic  environment  it  is  critical  to
        periodically update  the  Strategic  Plan  to  ensure  that  it  is
        relevant and that it covers the strategic areas which would  enable
        a department to reach its strategic objectives.

        The Minister of Finance has recently presented the National  Budget
        to the National Assembly. The majority  of  the  National  Treasury
        staff was engaged in this process. Hence it  was  not  possible  to
        meet the deadline as set by the Deputy President for the submission
        of our Strategic Plan. Accordingly, I hereby  wish  to  request  an
        extension for the submission of the National  Treasury’s  Strategic
        Plan update.

        Kind regards

        (Signed)
        Mr. G Nkwinti, MP
        Acting:  MINISTER OF FINANCE
        Date:  03/03/2010


    (e)     Letter from the Minister of Economic Development dated 03 March
        2010, to the Speaker of the National Assembly and  the  Chairperson
        of the National Council of Provinces explaining the  delay  in  the
        submission of the tabling of Strategic Plans in terms of the  Money
        Bills Amendment procedure and Related Matters Act, 2009.

        TABLING OF STRATEGIC PLANS IN TERMS OF THE  MONEY  BILLS  AMENDMENT
        PROCEDURE AND RELATED MATTERS ACT, 2009.

        The Office of the Leader of Government Business requested two weeks
        ago that, in terms of  the  Money  Bills  Amendment  Procedure  and
        Related Matters Act, 2009, strategic plans must be tabled after the
        fiscal framework is passed on 2 March 2010.

        Six agencies report to the Minister of  Economic  Development  with
        effect  from  1  April  2010  (the  Competition   Commission,   the
        Competition  Tribunal,  the  International   Trade   Administration
        Commission (ITAC), Khula Enterprise Finance  Limited  (Khula),  the
        South African Micro-Finance Apex Fund (SAMAF)  and  the  Industrial
        Development Corporation (IDC).

        In terms of the PFMA and Treasury  Regulations,  only  SAMAF  as  a
        trading entity was required in the  past  to  table  its  strategic
        plan.

        The new Act,  however,  requires  that  all  entities  table  their
        strategic plans. We have taken immediate steps to have all agencies
        comply fully with the requirements.  I  am  happy  to  report  that
        significant progress has been made and that draft plans  have  been
        submitted to the department.

        Some of the entities  have  requested  an  opportunity  to  further
        engage their Boards regarding the Strategic Plans. In addition,  it
        will be necessary for the Economic Development Department to engage
        the entities on  their  Strategic  Plans  prior  to  submission  to
        Parliament.

        I would therefore request permission to postpone tabling in respect
        of the abovementioned agencies until the end  of  June  2010.  This
        would allow time for the necessary engagements  with  the  agencies
        and finalisation of plans by their respective boards.
        Thank you for considering my request.

        Kind regards

        (Signed)
        MR EBRAHIM PATEL
        MINISTER
        Date:  03/03/2010


    (f)     Letter from the Minister of Communications dated 03 March 2010,
        to the Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of  the
        National  Council  of  Provinces  explaining  the  delay   in   the
        submission of the Strategic Plan of Sentech.

        TABLING OF CORPORATE AND STRATEGIC OF PUBLIC ENTITIES

        In compliance with the requirements  of  section  10(1)(c)  of  the
        Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act, 2009  (Act
        No 9 of 2009), Sentech has submitted its  Corporate  and  Strategic
        Plan to me. However, their  Plan  represents  the  entire  business
        strategy which they  regard  as  highly  confidential  due  to  the
        competitive nature of the market in which Sentech operates.  It  is
        therefore requested that Sentech’s Corporate Plan not be circulated
        to Parliament. I propose that Sentech be requested  to  remove  the
        market sensitive information and resubmit their Plan  that  can  be
        made public.


        Your kind consideration of my proposal will be appreciated.


        Kind sincerely

        (Signed)
        GEN (Ret) SIPHIWE NYANDA
        MINISTER
        Date:  03/03/2010
   2. The Presidency

     a) Strategic Plan of the Presidency for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


3.    The Minister in The Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation

    (a)     Medium Term Strategic Plan of the Government Communication  and
        Information System (GCIS) for 2010 – 2013.


    (b)     Strategic Plan of the International Marketing Council (IMC) for
        2010 – 2013.


    (c)     Strategic Plan of the Media Development  and  Diversity  Agency
        (MDDA) for 2010 – 2013.


   4. The Minister for the Public Service and Administration

     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Service and
        Administration for 2010 – 2014.

   5. The Acting Minister of Mining

               a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Mineral Resources for
                  2010/11 – 2012/13.


 6. The Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries\

     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and
        Fisheries for 2010 – 2011, including the Strategic Plan of the
        Marine Living Resources Fund for 2010 – 2011.


     b) Strategic Plan of the Agriculture Research Council for 2010/11 –
        2014/15 [RP 20-2010].


     c) Business Plan of the Agriculture Research Council for 2010/11 –
        2014/15 [RP 32-2010].


   7. The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs
        for 2010/11 – 2012/13 [RP 70-2010].


               b) Strategic Plan of the South African Weather Service for
                  2010 – 2013.


               c) Strategic Plan of the South African National Parks for
                  2010/11 – 2012/13.


     d) Strategic Plan of the South African National Biodiversity Institute
        (SANBI) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


     e) Strategic Plan (Corporate Strategy) of the iSimangaliso Wetland
        Park Authority for 2011 – 2015.


   8. The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs

     a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for 2009 – 2014.


               b) Addendum to Strategic Plan: Deliverables to be completed
                  by 31 March 2011.
   9. The Minister of Trade and Industry

     a) Medium Term Strategic Framework of the Department of Trade and
        Industry for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


     b) Medium Term Strategic Framework of the Companies and Intellectual
        Property Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.
  10. The Minister of Home Affairs

               a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Home Affairs for
                  2010/11 – 2012/13.

     b) Strategic Plan of the Government Printing Works (GPW) for 2010/11 –
        2012/13.

               c) Strategic Plan of the Film and Publication Board (FPB)
                  for 2009 – 2014.


11. The Minister of Labour

               a) Strategic Plan of the Department of Labour for 2010 –
                  2015.


     b) Strategic Plan of the National Economic Development and Labour
        Council (NEDLAC) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


               c) Strategic Plan and Business Plan of Productivity SA for
                  2010 – 2015.


     d) Strategic Plan of the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) for 2010/11
        – 2013/14.
     e) Strategic Plan of the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and
        Arbitration (CCMA) for 2010/11 – 2012/13.


               f) Strategic Plan of the Compensation Fund for 2010 – 2015.


12.   The Minister of Rural Development and Land Reform

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Rural Development and Land
        Reform for 2010 – 2013.


    (b)     Strategic Plan and Budget of the Ingonyama Trust Board for 2010
        – 2011.


13.   The Minister of Police

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the South African Police Service for 2010 –
        2014 [RP 08-2010].


    (b)     Annual Performance Plan of the South African Police Service for
        2010 – 2011 [RP 09-2010].


    (c)     Strategic Plan of the Independent Complaints Directorate for
        2010 – 2013.

14.   The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Communications for 2010 –
        2013.


    (b)     Strategic Plan of the National Electronic Media Institute of
        South Africa (NEMISA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (c)     Strategic and Business Plan of the Universal Service and Access
        Agency of South Africa (USAASA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (d)     Strategic Corporate Plan of the South African Post Office for
        2010/11 – 2012/13.


    (e)     Strategic Plan of the South African Broadcasting Corporation
        Post Office for 2010 – 2013.


15.   The Minister of Public Enterprises

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Enterprises for 2010
        – 2013.


16.   The Minister of International Relations and Cooperation

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of International Relations and
        Cooperation for 2010 – 2013.


17.   The Minister of Higher Education and Training

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Higher Education and
        Training for 2010 – 2015 and Operational Plans for 2010 – 2011 [RP
        17-2010].

    (b)     Strategic Plan of the National Skills Fund (NSF) for 2010 –
        2013.
    (c)     Strategic Plan of Safety and Security Sector Education and
        Training Authority (SAS SETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (d)     Strategic Plan of the South African Qualifications Authority
        (SAQA) for 2010 – 2013.


    (e)     Strategic Plan of the Tourism and Hospitality Sector Education
        and Training Authority (THETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (f)     Strategic Plan of Agricultural Sector Education and Training
        Authority (AGRI-SETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (g)     Strategic Plan of the Council on Higher Education (CHE) for
        2010 – 2013.


    (h)     Strategic Plan of the National Student Financial Aid Scheme
        (NSFAS) for 2010 – 2013.


    (i)     Strategic Plan of the Media, Advertising, Publishing, Printing
        and Packaging Sector Education and Training Authority (MAPPP) for
        2010 – 2011.


    (j)     Strategic Plan of the Mining and Minerals Sector Education and
        Training Authority (MQA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (k)     Strategic Plan of the Health and Welfare Sector Education and
        Training Authority (HW-SETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (l)     Strategic Plan of the Chemical Industries Sector Education and
        Training Authority (CHIETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (m)     Strategic Plan of the Clothing, Textiles, Footwear and Leather
        Sector Education and Training Authority (CTFL-SETA) for 2010 –
        2011.


    (n)     Strategic Plan of the Energy Sector Education and Training
        Authority (ESETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (o)     Strategic Plan of the Insurance Sector Education and Training
        Authority (INSETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (p)     Strategic Plan of the Food and Beverage Manufacturing Industry
        Sector Education and Training Authority (FOODBEV-SETA) for 2010 –
        2011.
    (q)     Strategic Plan of the Transport Sector Education and Training
        Authority (TETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (r)     Strategic Plan of the Banking Sector Education and Training
        Authority (BANK-SETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (s)     Strategic Plan of the Wholesale and Retail Sector Education and
        Training Authority (W&R-SETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (t)     Strategic Plan of the Local Government Sector Education and
        Training Authority (LG-SETA) for 2010 – 2011.
    (u)     Strategic Plan of the Public Service Sector Education and
        Training Authority (PSETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (v)     Strategic Plan of the Manufacturing, Engineering and Related
        Services Sector Education and Training Authority (MER-SETA) for
        2010 – 2011.


    (w)     Strategic Plan of the Construction Education and Training
        Sector Education and Training Authority (CETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (x)     Strategic Plan of the Education Training and Development
        Practices Sector Education and Training Authority (ETDP) for 2010 –
        2011.


    (y)     Strategic Plan of the Financial and Accounting Services Sector
        Education and Training Authority (FASSET) for 2010 – 2011.


    (z)     Strategic Plan of the Information Systems, Electronics and
        Telecommunications Technologies Sector Education and Training
        Authority (ISETT-SETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (aa)    Strategic Plan of the Forest Industry Sector Education and
        Training Authority (FIETA) for 2010 – 2011.


    (bb)    Strategic Plan of the Services Sector Education and Training
        Authority for 2010 – 2011.


18.   The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the South African Revenue Service (SARS) for
        2010/11 – 2013/13 [RP 206-2009].


19.   The Minister of Social Development

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Social Development for
        2010/11 – 2014/15 [RP 25-2010].


    (b)     Strategic Plan of the South African Social Security Agency
        (SASSA) for 2010/11 – 2012/13 [RP 1414-2010].


    (c)     Strategic Plan of the National Development Agency for 2010 –
        2013 [RP 18-2010].

20.   The Minister of Tourism

    (a)     Strategic Plan of South African Tourism for 2010/11 – 2014/15.


21.   The Minister of Basic Education

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the South African Council for Educators
        (SACE) for 2010 – 2013.

    (b)     Strategic Plan of the Council for Quality Assurance in General
        and Further Education and Training (Umalusi) for 2010 – 2013.


22.   The Minister of Correctional Services
    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Correctional Services for
        2010/11 – 2014/15.

23.   The Minister of Defence and Military Veterans

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Defence and Military
        Veterans for 2010/11 – 2012/13 [RP 27-2010].

24.   The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Transport for 2010/11 –
        2012/13.

25.   The Minister of Energy

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Energy for 2010/11 –
        2012/13.

26.   The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Strategic Plan (Corporate Strategy) of the Department of
        Science and Technology for the Medium Term 2010 – 2013.

    (b)     Strategic Plan (Corporate Strategy) of the Technology
        Innovation Agency for the Medium Term 2010 – 2013.

    (c)     Strategic Plan for the Africa Institute of South Africa (AISA)
        for 2010-2012.


    (d)     Strategic Plan for the Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC)
        for 2010/11-2012/13.


    (e)     Strategic Plan for the Council for Scientific and Industrial
        Research (CSIR) 2010/11-2012/13.


    (f)     Strategic Plan for the National Research Foundation (NRF)
        2008/15.

27.   The Minister of Sport and Recreation

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Sport and Recreation South
        Africa for 2010 – 2014.

28.   The Minister of Public Works

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Works for 2010/11 –
        2012/13.

29.   The Minister of Health

    (a)     Strategic Plan of the National Department of Health for 2010/11
        – 2012/13.

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Consolidated Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on
        Inspections of Service Delivery Sites: South African Police Service
        [RP 251-2009].
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT - T100303e-insert1 – PAGES 321-322

CREDA INSERT - T100303e-insert2 – PAGES 323-338


