---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 14 September 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-09-14
---

TUESDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:01.

The Acting Chairperson (Ms T C Memela) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, let me
just voice my surprise. Traditional gear is not only for women, but now I
am seeing hon members in their Western suits and ties. [Laughter.] Anyway,
hon ladies, thanks for paying heed to the message and you are all looking
beautiful. [Applause.]

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next
sitting of the Council I shall move:

   That the Council –

      1) notes with utter dismay and discontent revelations that the Western
         Cape Premier Helen Zille uses taxpayers’ monies to pay Heart  104.9
         FM for publicity;


      2) further notes that –

             i) the station’s managing director Gavin Meiring has  admitted
                that Premier Helen Zille has used the slot as Mayor of  the
                City of Cape Town before and took a  decision  to  continue
                with it in April this year;


            ii) early this month Premier Helen  Zille  and  her  government
                sought cheap  publicity  by  slamming  the  SABC’s  alleged
                attempts to offer the Western Cape government news coverage
                on its Interface programme;


           iii) the DA spokesperson for communication Niekie van  den  Berg
                publicly stated that “paying for any content during news or
                current  affairs  programming  violates  basic  tenets   of
                ethical journalism”; and

            iv) the Heart 104.9 contract  seems  to  have  attracted  other
                benefits for Premier Helen Zille, who received  substantial
                coverage and even appeared with several  DJs  of  the  same
                station on events that were disguised as “support  for  the
                World Cup and Bafana Bafana”; and
      3) takes this opportunity to condemn in the  harshest  possible  terms
         the double standard and hypocrisy of Premier Helen Zille and the DA
         for their unscrupulous attempt  to  mislead  the  people  of  South
         Africa and the Western Cape that the DA government in  the  Western
         Cape was not paying for media coverage  a  few  months  after  they
         committed over R2 million in  taxpayers’  funds  to  pay  for  news
         coverage.

Mr D A WORTH: Hon Chairperson, I wish to give notice that at the next
sitting of this Council I will move:

   That the Council –

      1) notes that the Free State has experienced huge losses due  to  veld
         fires over the past few weeks and, according to the  Department  of
         Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, more than 236 000 hectares  of
         grazing have been lost due to veld fires so far this year, of which
         151 000 hectares have been in September alone;


      2) further  notes  that  livestock  as  well  as  houses  and  farming
         equipment have been lost due to the various fires in the province;

      3) acknowledges that  the  agricultural  sector  cannot  afford  these
         losses during an economic recession;
      4) recognises that the agricultural sector in the province shed 10 000
         jobs last year, which has had a devastating  impact  on  struggling
         municipalities as people moved to towns and cities in search of new
         livelihoods; and

    (5)   realises that the provincial government has no choice but to
         declare the worst hit areas in the province disaster areas and
         urges them to urgently assist the agricultural sector to enable
         them to survive until pastures have recovered and to maintain as
         many jobs as possible and to speed up the bureaucratic process to
         achieve this.

Mr D B FELDMAN: Chairperson, I wish to give notice that at the next sitting
of this Council I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the Council debates whether there is any justification for the
   Department of Public Works to continue in existence seeing that this
   function is being exercised elsewhere, as in the instance of Minister
   Siphiwe Nyanda’s department renting a building from the state-owned
   weapons manufacturer Denel at R4,3 million to provide accommodation for
   13 Institute for Software and Satellite Applications employees.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Chairperson, I wish to give notice
that at the next sitting of the Council I will move:

   That the Council –


      1) notes that the Weekend Post of 11 September 2010 reported on the
         front page how one moves up in the ANC ranks;


      2) further notes that a particular official at the Nelson Mandela
         Metro Municipality was involved in the controversy of obtaining 300
         golf shirts at R560 each and 300 carry bags at R216 each to a total
         value of R230 000 for a housing conference in 2004, after which the
         official was suspended on allegations of corruption, nepotism and
         bribery and eventually left of his own accord with a golden
         handshake of an estimated R1 million;


      3) also notes that this same official was thereafter appointed as the
         municipal manager of Sundays River Municipality in 2008, from which
         he was fired in July 2009 for gross mismanagement and misconduct,
         but was saved by the ANC regional executive who reinstated him;

      4) acknowledges that the Sundays River ratepayers obtained a court
         order to have him dismissed with charges for his own cost; and

      5) notes that this same official is now appointed in the Eastern cape
         provincial government in a top position in the department of local
         government to manage Operation Clean Audit 2014 for local
         government.

This wolf in sheep’s clothing has certainly qualified to move up in the
ranks of the ANC.

Mr Z MLENZANA: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
Council I shall move:

   That the Council –

      1) debates the very serious allegations made by Gen Hlela that Gen
         Cele had lied to Parliament regarding Gen Cele’s direct and
         personal involvement in two rental deals;


      2) discusses the forced resignation of generals Hamilton Hlela,
         Matthews Sivundla and Stefanus Terblanche, who were involved in the
         SAPS supply chain management (SCM); and

    (3)   therefore calls on the President to appoint a judicial commission
        of inquiry to reveal the truth.

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the Council I shall move on behalf of Cope:


   That the Council debates the question raised by the Minister of Finance
   to the Minister of Communications regarding the failure of the SABC to
   table a turnaround strategy consistent with the stringent conditions
   imposed by government, in order to access the second tranche of the R1,47
   billion loan secured through a loan guarantee issued by Treasury.

Mr R A LEES: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the Council –

      1) notes with concern the lack of a rebuttal by the ANC of the ANCYL’s
         rhetoric that  the  mining  industry  in  South  Africa  should  be
         nationalised;


      2)  further  notes  the  negative  impact  that   such   irresponsible
         pronouncements on the part of the ANC Youth League and the lack  of
         leadership  to  refute  these  pronouncements  have   on   investor
         confidence; and

   (3)    therefore condemns both the irresponsible rhetoric on the part of
         the ANC Youth League and its leader Mr Malema, as well as the lack
         of a clear direction from the President of South Africa that
         nationalisation of mining would be bad for the South African
         economy.

Mr S H PLAATJIE: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of the
House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the Council debates whether government has been acting decisively
   and prosecuting to the full extent of the law all those who continue to
   illegally dump medical waste, seeing that this criminal practice is
   continuing without any abatement.

                   PATRICIA DE LILLE’S DECISION TO JOIN DA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms B V MNCUBE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –

      1) notes with utter dismay that in a desperate attempt to salvage  her
         flagging and sinking political career, the leader of the soon-to-be-
         politically extinct Independent  Democrats  has  since  joined  the
         Democratic Alliance and  been  sworn  in  as  the  MEC  for  social
         development;


      2) further notes that in an attempt to appease Patricia De  Lille  for
         handing over the ID to the DA on a broken platter,  the  leader  of
         the DA and Premier of  the  Western  Cape  province,  Helen  Zille,
         discarded Lennit Max who was the MEC  for  safety  in  the  Western
         Cape; and

   (3)   takes this opportunity to call on the betrayed people of the
        Western Cape, particularly the communities that voted for the ID
        and the majority of the leaders who are opposed to this unholy
        alliance to realise that only the ANC, which has fought for their
        liberation for almost 100 years, understands their needs and
        conditions while the DA continues with its elitist agenda,which has
        resulted in the neglect of their communities in favour of white
        affluent areas.

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, this is a question for clarity. Is it correct
that the DA is “atheist”? It is just a question for clarity.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, we have a
very long list of people. Let us not waste time.

Mr A WATSON: Chairperson, if it is true, because I also heard the member
refer to the DA as an atheist government, then I wish her to withdraw that
word before we reject the ...

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson, be
specific. Who is that person?

Mr A WATSON: The motion that has just been read.
The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I then ask hon Mncube
to stand up and verify that.

Ms B V MNCUBE: Do you mean I must reread it?

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Maybe ...
[Interjections.]

Ms B V MNCUBE: It is not there, no. You can read the motion.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Can you do it?

Ms B V MNCUBE: Sure. I hereby move without notice:

   That the Council —

      1) notes with utter dismay that in a desperate attempt to salvage her
         flagging and sinking political career, the leader of the soon to be
         politically extinct ID has since joined the DA and been sworn in as
         the MEC for social development.

Maybe it was a matter of pronunciation. [Interjections.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order!

Ms B V MNCUBE: I continue:
   (2)   further notes that ... [Interjections.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Wait! Wait!

Mr A WATSON: [Inaudible.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson, please do
me a favour. She is still on the floor. I asked her to read.

Mr A WATSON: She has stopped.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I am not going to take
this! I am going to make a ruling. Hon Mncube, would you hand over your
script? We will verify it and, if the complaint is not a true reflection of
it, then the people who have expressed their dissatisfaction will have to
put their apology in writing as soon as possible. Thank you.

Mr A WATSON: It is nonsense! [Interjections.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson. Please
people, put your hands down. Hon Watson ...

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, I will not ...
The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): No! No! No! Can you
listen to me now? At no stage should you say “nonsense” when I talk;
otherwise I am going to make a ruling and really seriously ask you to
leave.

Mr A WATSON: I withdraw the word “nonsense”, Madam, if you heard it, but I
will not, I tell you now, I will not apologise. I will not apologise.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson, I am not
prepared to entertain you. Can I proceed? I will need that in black and
white. Thank you. The hon Nesi may proceed.

Mr B NESI: Chairperson, I move ...

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Wait! Wait! Before you
speak, hon Nesi – I’m sorry about this – is there any objection? Hon
Watson?

Mr A WATSON: You asked if there were any objections and I put my hand up.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Who else? That is fine.
That being the case, in terms of section 65 of the Constitution the motion
is ... He’s making me angry! There is an objection and the motion therefore
becomes a notice of motion.
Hon Faber, I know you have had your hand up, but I have already asked hon
Nesi. There is a reason why I chose him before ... [Inaudible.] Proceed.

             REDEPLOYMENT OF HON T D HARRIS TO NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr B NESI: Madam Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes that the hon Mr T D Harris, who was the Western Cape
         Provincial Whip, has since been redeployed by the DA and sworn in
         as a member of the National Assembly; and


      2) takes this opportunity to congratulate the hon Harris for his
         diligence and commitment to his work since joining the NCOP in May
         2009 and wishes him well on his new deployment.

I hope the hon Watson will not object to this motion. Thank you.
[Laughter.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                              INTEREST RATE CUT
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T E CHAANE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes that the South African Reserve Bank cut the interest rate by
         50 basis points to 6,0% as a result of the fragile recovery in the
         country’s economy and its vulnerability to an uncertain global
         environment;


      2) takes this opportunity to welcome the interest rate cut and
         acknowledges that it will help alleviate the economic hardship felt
         by many of our people; and

      3) encourages all South Africans to take advantage of this relief and
         refrain from fruitless and unnecessary expenditure.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          PERFORMANCE OF SHARKS IN
                           CURRIE CUP COMPETITION

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mnr W F FABER: Voorsitter, ek stel sonder kennisgewing voor:

   Dat die Raad –

   (1)   kennis neem dat die Sharks-rugbyspan die Pumas die naweek met 30-
         14 verslaan het;


   (2)   verder kennis neem dat die Sharks-rugbyspan nou ver voor loop op
         die Curriebeker-reeks met ’n allemintige 41 punte, met die naaste
         span aan hulle die Westelike Provinsie met 33 punte, en dat dit dus
         ’n uitgemaakte saak is dat die Sharks na die kwarteindstryd van die
         Curriebeker-reeks sal vorder; en


   (3)   die Sharks-rugbyspan alle sterkte toewens met hul kragmeting teen
         die Vrystaat Cheetahs op Saterdag in Durban in die Shark-tenk en
         kennis neem dat hul ondersteuners ook geweldige simpatie het met al
         die ander Curriebeker-rugbyspanne wat nie naastenby op die Sharks
         se standard kan rugby speel nie.

Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans draft resolution follows.)

[Mr W F FABER: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council –


      1) notes that the Sharks rugby team beat the Pumas by 30-14 over the
         weekend;


      2) further notes that with a formidable 41 points the Sharks rugby
         team is now way ahead in the Currie Cup series, the team closest
         to them being the Western Province with 33 points, and that it is
         therefore a foregone conclusion that the Sharks will progress to
         the quarter-finals of the Currie Cup series; and

      3) wishes the Sharks rugby team well in their showdown against the
         Free State Cheetahs on Saturday in the Shark tank in Durban and
         notes that their supporters also have enormous sympathy with all
         the other rugby teams in the Currie Cup who cannot even come close
         to matching the level of rugby played by the Sharks.

I thank you.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Is there any objection
to the motion?

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chair, I’m just a bit confused. I want to find out from
which province the hon Faber comes. [Laughter.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): That’s not an
objection. [Interjections.]

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                       TRAGIC CAR ACCIDENT IN CULLINAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M W MAKGATE: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes the tragic death of two teachers and the injury of a third
         teacher in a car accident involving a horse-and-trailer truck in
         Cullinan on the KwaMhlanga-Mamelodi route;


      2) further notes that the three teachers were teaching at Lethabong
         High School in the KwaMhlanga area and were on their way to a
         pupil’s funeral in Pretoria; and

      3) takes this opportunity to convey its condolences to the families of
         the teachers and the Lethabong High School for their loss and
         wishes the third teacher involved in the accident a speedy
         recovery.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          NATIONAL CRIME STATISTICS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Madam Chair, I would like to move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes the release of the national crime statistics by the Minister
         of Police, the hon Mthethwa on 9 September 2010;


      2) further notes that the statistics show a decrease in murder,
         attempted murder, sexual offences, grievous bodily harm, aggravated
         robbery, cash-in-transit robbery, bank robbery, public or street
         robbery and carjacking and truck-jacking;


      3) acknowledges that more still needs to be done to rid our country of
         all kinds of criminality, particularly in fighting burglary at
         residential premises, robbery at non residential premises,
         commercial crimes and stock theft;


      4) takes this opportunity to –

            i) congratulate the tireless efforts and dedication of the
               South African Police Service and its Ministry to shield the
               people of South Africa from heartless and inhuman criminals;
               and


           ii) pay tribute to the 110 police officers who lost their lives
               in the fight against crime.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, praat, jong!
[talk, man!]

Mr D V BLOEM: Mama, no. I raised my hand and I explained that I had raised
it on behalf of Nesi. Thank you very much for the opportunity, Mama.
[Laughter.]

                     SUSPENSION OF PUBLIC SECTOR STRIKE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chair, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes the suspension of the public sector strike by the public
         sector unions; and


      2) takes this opportunity to congratulate the South African National
         Defence Force, SANDF, for responding to the call of our nation by
         deploying over 4 700 soldiers to 73 state hospitals to assist our
         people with emergencies and medical attention and patient care.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution

                               HERITAGE DAY -
             CELEBRATING OUR LIVING HUMAN TREASURES AND HERITAGE

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Chairperson, hon members, addressing the
UN General Assembly in October 1976, the then President of the ANC and
great patriot and internationalist, Comrade O R Tambo, spoke about the
contribution of the student uprising in helping to free South Africa. In
the same speech he projected the vision of the ANC for a future South
Africa.
He said:

   Like all other patriots, we love our country and its peoples — all its
   peoples. It is a varied land of snowcapped mountain peaks, of deserts and
   subtropical greenery covering vast mineral resources. Its warm seas to
   the east and cold ones to the west contain also large animal and mineral
   resources.


   Our peoples, with their varied cultures which are continuously mingling
   and interacting to their mutual enrichment, exhibit, despite their
   conditions, a great love for life and a sensitive joy in the creative and
   humane endeavours of the peoples of the world, without exception.


   These ordinary, industrious and peaceful people want to revolutionise
   themselves and their country.

It is this selfsame spirit described by Comrade O R Tambo that
characterises our people today. It is indeed our great love for life and a
sensitive joy that enables us to share our stories and to value our
cultural expressions.

It is precisely our commitment to the creative and humane endeavours of the
peoples of the world that has propelled us to want the story of our people,
our nation and our national living human treasures to take pride of place
in the narratives of the world, as our contribution to our own development,
and as part of world culture.

It is in this context of drinking from the fountains of history and
learning from the men and women of practical wisdom in our communities, who
gave birth to us, that we are embarking upon an initiative to honour and
celebrate our living human treasures.

Celebrating South Africa’s living human treasures – the custodians of our
intangible cultural heritage - is an initiative of the Department of Arts
and Culture to draw attention to the role played by our living legends and
to seek to protect and preserve this knowledge and to transmit it to future
generations.

Intangible cultural heritage covers a wide range of cultural
manifestations, which include oral traditions and expression, language,
performing arts, social practices, rituals and festive events, knowledge
and practices concerning nature, the universe and traditional
craftsmanship.

Unesco, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation, defines living heritage as being -

   ... transmitted from generation to generation. Culture is dynamic and is
   constantly being recreated in response to changes in the social and
   cultural environment. It provides individuals, groups and communities
   with a sense of identity and continuity and constitutes a guarantee for
   sustainable development.

However, due to globalisation and the technologies associated with it,
heritage broadly and living heritage in particular are facing significant
pressures. These pressures have resulted in people no longer practising and
transmitting living heritage.

Cultures, once thriving, now face restriction and possible destruction.
Ways of life that emphasise ubuntu and communalism have to compete with the
individualism that comes out of highly materialistic societies that profit
by and propagate through accumulation.

In order to address some of these realities, in 1993 the Republic of Korea
proposed to the executive board of Unesco the establishment of a Unesco
Living Human Treasures Programme. The board adopted a decision inviting
member states to establish such systems in their respective countries. The
purpose of establishing Living Human Treasures Systems is to preserve the
knowledge and skills necessary for the performing, enactment or re-creation
of intangible cultural heritage elements with high historical, artistic or
cultural value.

In 2007, the Department of Arts and Culture embarked on the process of the
ratification of the 2003 Unesco convention on intangible cultural heritage.

At the same time, the department began drafting a national policy on South
African living heritage. The key objective of the policy is the
safeguarding of living heritage, but it is also aimed at ensuring
compliance with the convention once it is ratified.
The draft National Policy on South African Living Heritage provides for the
establishment of a national Living Human Treasures Programme as part of the
protection, promotion and transmission of living heritage. The policy
argues that the recognition of living treasures, as well as the
encouragement of their role, will protect, preserve and promote living
heritage.

The policy outlines the following selection criteria, namely the value of
their skills as a testimony of human creative genius; the character and
reputation of such individuals in their community; the risk of their
knowledge disappearing; the ability to transmit living heritage; and the
recommendation by the community.

The policy also makes provision for the posthumous recognition of living
treasures, where strong recommendation is made by the bearer communities
and where the strength of the criteria listed above is applicable.
According to the policy, being a national living treasure is a lifelong
status.

In this way, we shall recognise the value and importance of human agency in
the transmission of norms, values and skills in society. The arts, culture
and heritage sector is full of such distinguished individuals.

Unfortunately, due to a myriad of reasons, most of these individuals pass
on without transferring their outstanding skills to other people. The
department wants to arrest this and help to create the conditions for a
seamless passing on of knowledge to future generations.

The department will host a national seminar on living human treasures on 30
September 2010 – and you are all invited, hon members. The main objective
of the seminar is to start a national dialogue that will expand and further
elaborate on the concept of living human treasures as articulated in
national policy.

As from next year my department, in collaboration with other spheres of
government and the provinces in particular, will begin identifying these
living human treasures in a systematic and transparent manner.

This programme has the potential to significantly contribute to the outcome
of one of government’s priorities and programmes of action, which is the
improved quality of basic education, as well as Outcome 5, which is a
skilled and capable workforce to support an inclusive growth path.

The Department of Arts and Culture is embarking on this project as a result
of its significant potential to contribute to human development and job
creation. This project also simplifies and puts a face on otherwise
esoteric concepts of living or intangible cultural heritage.
Another objective of the project is to bridge the intergenerational gap so
that the youth of today can benefit from this knowledge and so that the
elders are accorded respect and honour for the possession of this
knowledge. In this way we can add value to contributions made over
generations and take a long view of history and of sustaining development.

When we closely examine our intangible cultural heritage, we find there are
many examples of contributions that need to make their way into our history
books and be defined as part of our cultural wealth.

In the arena of literature and literary heritage, the Department of Arts
and Culture has reprinted 27 titles by authors such as Sibusiso Nyembezi, O
K Matsepe, A C Jordan, M L Bopape, T N Maumela, S P Lekabu and Samuel
Mqhayi, who have made an indelible contribution to our cultural wealth.
Many of the books were written in indigenous languages. The books are both
informative and substantive, making younger readers aware of the literary
merits of these writers. The next phase of this project is to identify more
texts that need to be made available, as well as writings by our national
living human treasures.

In the area of craft, traditional crafters are very important as the
bearers of culturally specific craft products and skills that have been
carried down through the generations in diverse communities around South
Africa. Many of these craft products have meaning and significance to
specific groups, like basketry, blanket-making, beadwork and clay pots, to
mention but a few. We need to increase the contributions of these living
human treasures in the crafts industry to take them to even greater
heights.

In order to recover the indigenous music of the past, with the use of
traditional instruments, the department has partnered with three
institutions, namely the University of Fort Hare, the University of
Zululand and the University of Venda, to do research in this area and to
preserve and promote this musical culture.

An important method of preserving and amplifying our heritage comes through
oral history as well.

Lastly, at the end of Women’s Month we honoured women in the arts with
awards. The event was at the State Theatre, and it included a reproduction
of some of their musical products, like those of Miriam Makeba. There are
many others.

We were able to recognise as national living women treasures the likes of
Dorothy Masuka, Abigail Kubheka, Nothembi Mkhwebane, the Mahotella Queens,
Thandi Claassen, Miriam Tlali, Esther Mahlangu, Busi Mhlongo, and Sis Dolly
Rathebe, to mention but a few. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ms M W MAKGATE: Ke a leboga, Modulasetulo. Tona ya lefapha, Maloko a
Palamente a a leng fa ... [Thank you Chairperson. Minister, Members of
Parliament present here today ...]

... hon Chairperson, I welcome this opportunity to speak on the very
important topic: “Celebrating our Living Human Treasures and Heritage”.
This topic is very relevant, as we all know that September is Heritage
Month. Heritage refers to something which is inherited from one’s
ancestors. It includes several different areas, such as natural heritage
and cultural heritage.

Allow me to quote one of the cultural activists, Greg Richards, who said in
1996:

   Cultural heritage tourism is important for various reasons; it has a
   positive economic and social impact, it establishes and reinforces
   identity, it helps preserve the cultural heritage... facilitates harmony
   and understanding among people.

Today we can proudly say we are South Africans, despite our diverse
cultural backgrounds. We are one nation with one national identity.

National heritage sites reflect the birth and beauty of our heritage. South
Africa has several national heritage sites, three of which have been
selected for their cultural significance, another three for natural
importance and one for a combination of both. These sites are, amongst
others the Cradle of Humankind, which includes Swartkrans, Kromdraai and
Environs, and Vredefort Dome.

Let me point out something important about the Vredefort Dome. It is
situated 120 km from Johannesburg on the border of the North West and Free
State provinces, and the greater portion of it is in the North West. It
dates back 2 023 million years and it is the oldest astrobleme on the
planet. It is also the site of the world’s greatest known energy release
event. Many activities are enjoyed in this area, from river rafting, river
tubing and abseiling to horse riding, to mention but a few, creating job
opportunities for our people.

The division into homelands was based not only on colour, but common
culture and language, which was a strategy of divide and rule. The cultural
differences were exploited for political reasons, the Balkanisation of our
country. It is for this reason that today, when we are debating this
important topic, we should keep in mind the Preamble to our Constitution:

   We, the people of South Africa,
   Recognise the injustices of our past;
   Honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land;
   Respect those who have worked to build and develop our country; and
   Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our
   diversity.

Article 1 of the Unesco Convention against Discrimination in Education
defines the term “discrimination” as -

  ... any distinction, exclusion, limitation or preference... based on
  race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion,
  national or social origin ...

Contrary to this, during the apartheid era the divisions between
communities were based on race, and different laws governed education. The
Bantu Education Act, Act 47 of 1953, was promulgated for Africans, the
Coloured Persons Education Act, Act 47 of 1963, for coloured persons, and
the Indians Education Act, Act 61 of 1965, for Indians.

These denied the majority of our people cultural education. They neglected
indigenous languages and led to their underdevelopment. This led to the
underdevelopment of our culture and denied us an opportunity to learn and
develop our own languages. This discouraged and distorted the history of
our people. There was no equal access to education and the right to learn
in the mother tongue.

As this august House we have a responsibility to ensure that enough
resources are allocated and programmes are in place to respond to these
anomalies of distortion of our history and neglect of our mother tongues as
the medium of instruction.

In its response, the ANC Freedom Charter, as adopted at the Congress of the
People in Kliptown on 26 June 1955 states:

   The government shall discover, develop and encourage national talent for
   the enhancement of our cultural life.

Article 5 in the draft Bill of Rights of the ANC, the 1993 Bill of Rights
for a democratic South Africa, recognises the right of association,
religion, language and culture.

Under language rights it is stated that the state shall act positively to
further the development of these languages, especially in education,
literature and the media, and to prevent the use of any language or
languages for the purpose of domination or division. As we allocate
resources in this House, the issue of development of these languages should
remain a priority.

The manipulation of and attack on the cultural rights and practices of our
people have manifested themselves in many ways, for example, the passing of
bylaws which denied our people the right to practise their cultural
beliefs. If I have to give an example, in the African culture, when there
is a funeral, it is within our culture to slaughter a cow in the back yard
of the bereaved family.
Go tsholola madi ka setso sa rona ... [In our culture to spill blood ...]

... is an important ritual that needs to be observed. According to the
bylaws that were imposed upon us it was seen as cruelty to animals.

We welcome the passing of legislation that gives recognition to our
traditional healers and practices which were suppressed on the basis that
they were barbaric. The practices that were observed by our people ...

... go tswa kwa ga lowe e bile di na le bokgoni ba go thusa batho ba rona
[... from ancient years also have a fulfilling role in our people’s lives].

This is part of our indigenous knowledge system. The Act provides for
traditional healers to co-operate with western trained doctors and health
institutions in our fight against prevalent diseases such as HIV/Aids. It
provides for the erection of consulting rooms for those suffering from
these dreaded diseases.

The Constitution of the Republic of South Africa is the supreme law of the
country, founded on, amongst others, the following values: human dignity,
the achievement of equality, the advancement of human rights and freedoms,
the supremacy of the Constitution, and the rule of law.

These values, particularly the achievement of equality and the advancement
of human rights and freedoms, underpin the right of the recognition of the
protection of individuals, communities or minority groups. Today there is
equality, and the right to education; freedom of religion, belief and
opinion; and language and culture. The Constitution promotes cultural
diversity and restoration of human dignity.

South African-based journalist and sociologist, Vidya Bhandarker, too
familiar with religious wars in her home country, was inspired by President
Jacob Zuma’s inauguration ceremony, which included prayers by various
faiths, and had this to say:

   I saw so much hope for the future of South Africa ... I saw a Gandhian
   country - tolerance, patience, forgiveness and genuine bonhomie.

The importance of the point she makes about interfaith matters links
directly with the freedom we enjoy in our country today, the “freedom of
religion, belief and opinion”, as stated in the Constitution. In our
struggle for freedom, the ANC has always ensured that there shall be
freedom to worship and tolerance of all religions, and, indeed, this is
what gives her hope about our country. Today we are a country at peace with
itself because of the cultural tolerance amongst among our people.

The ANC draft Bill of Rights, 1993, asserts that sporting, recreational and
cultural activities shall be encouraged on a nonracial basis, drawing on
the talents and creative capacities of all South Africans, and autonomous
organisations may be established to achieve these objectives. Our sports
federations are transformed to fulfil objectives set out in this section.
All South Africans participate on an equal footing to showcase their
talents and to project our country as a sporting nation. Since the dawn of
our democracy we have as a country used sports to promote reconciliation,
social cohesion and nation-building.

Once again, the World Cup was a great success. Dr Danny Jordaan described
it as the most important event since the end of apartheid in 1994. He also
said: “It was a moment of special unity”.

It undoubtedly brought us together. We stood and celebrated together as a
nation and we supported our national team as South Africans and hoisted our
flag high across the class and racial divide. I thank you.

Mr A WATSON: Hon Chairperson, please allow me at the outset to deviate
slightly from the subject in hand in order to say goodbye to our two very
good friends and colleagues. Firstly, there is the hon Tim Harris, who has
already taken up a position in the NA and has been appointed the DA’s
shadow minister of trade and industry.

Secondly, there is our very well-loved hon Sherry Chen, who is leaving us
at the end of September to devote more time to her charity work all over
the world, but especially in Africa. This will be her last sitting.

I would like to have said a lot about these two exceptional people, but
because I am using the little time that I have, I will just say that I will
be missing them very much. I am sure that most of you will do so too.

We were requested to wear traditional clothing today, but that has been
quite a challenge for me. [Laughter.] On the paternal side I am of Scottish
ancestry, but each successive Watson, from my great-grandfather onwards,
married an Afrikaans lady, just like I did. So, I can’t appear here today
wearing a Scottish kilt, and sporting bagpipes, or even worse in a khaki
boere outfit, with a voorlaaier [muzzle-loading rifle] slung over my
shoulder.

My earlier childhood was spent amongst the Xhosa people; so I also suppose
that I qualify for a knobkierie and a red ochre-stained calico blanket.
Then again, my formative years were spent with my parents in Lesotho. I
could also have worn a Basotho hat and a genuine pitso blanket. I don’t
know if you know what the pitso blanket is. [Laughter.] However, I do think
that my pale face would have given me away. So, in the end, I settled for a
traditional dark suit and a white shirt. I hope you will forgive me.

On a serious note, I think we are on very thin ice in saying that we are
celebrating our living human treasures because we really have very little
to celebrate. The governing party of this country is in turmoil because of
the infighting. Just three days ago, the local municipality of Nokeng Tsa
Taemane, in Gauteng, was disbanded because of this. We have heard that
heads will be rolling next Monday. I am not sure what that is all about.

Municipalities, which should be the lifeline of service delivery to our
people, are in turmoil, especially outside the Western Cape where the DA is
governing. [Interjections.] Hon member, you are welcome to comment, but
through the Chairperson. I can see that the hon Adams has been writing his
speech. [Interjections.]

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): [Inaudible.]

Mr A WATSON: I am trying to. That was part of my input. Municipalities are
in chaos and disruption. In my province, Mpumalanga, not a single
municipality is functional any more. In the industrial hub of Emalahleni,
especially in Witbank, all services have broken down totally, so much so
that the DA councillors and party members have had to attend to refuse
removal, whilst the bottled water industry is booming! [Interjections.] Now
who is speaking? Madam Chair, why don’t you protect me? [Laughter.]

The factionalism and infighting in South Africa have escalated to criminal
antics and brutal political murder. In Mpumalanga, no less than nine
assassinations and two unsuccessful attempts have been recorded since 1998,
including the murder of the Speaker of Mbombela Municipality and the Deputy
Mayor of Govan Mbeki Municipality. We must ask ourselves what living human
treasures we have to boast about when we consider what is happening around
us, and when the President of the governing party is ousted by one faction
to favour the crowning of their own candidate. Barely two years down the
line, there are again murmurs of discontent and removal from the same
group.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! Hon Mashamaite,
can you try the next one.

Mr T A MASHAMAITE: Hon Chairperson, on a point of order: The hon member is
no longer talking on the subject of the day. He should not take advantage
of being given the time to speak on the subject of the day, and then speak
about something else. He is out of order.

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson, you are
running out of time. Can you please conclude your speech?

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chairperson, it is clear that the hon member’s first
language is not English, because he was not listening to what I was saying.
[Laughter.] I asked: How can we celebrate Heritage Day when acknowledged
World Heritage Sites like the Cradle of Humankind and the ancient rocks of
Barberton, and many others, like those mentioned earlier by the hon
Makgate, are endangered by exploitation for worldly gain?

It is good and right to pay tribute to our past leaders and national
heroes. Of course, we must honour and acknowledge our heritage, especially
the tangible heritage sites which we are charged to preserve. We cannot
pretend that nothing is wrong and continue on the current road of self-
destruction.

The vital question that we, as elected representatives of the people,
should be asking ourselves very seriously today is: What can we do to
honour and preserve the fine heritage of our wonderful country? Indeed, we
should do everything within our power and ability to leave a heritage for
our children and for the generations to follow. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms D Z RANTHO: Hon Acting Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Members of the
NCOP, distinguished guests, comrades and colleagues, let me bring your
minds back to the fact that the debate today is about heritage, but there
are people who are not wearing their cultural attire, and who have
forgotten that this is a heritage debate.
Our Heritage Day debate provides the opportunity to outline how colonialism
and apartheid neglected, distorted and suppressed the culture of the
majority of South Africans. It provides us with the opportunity to reflect
on how the freedom of expression, cultural rights and linguistic rights of
black South Africans were destroyed, their creativity stifled and their
dignity attacked.

It provides us with the opportunity to reflect on how the ANC, after the
demise of the apartheid regime, strategically positioned itself to use the
arts and culture to advance its commitment to building social cohesion and
respect for human dignity.

This strategic positioning has ensured the allocation of resources and
facilities to develop an inclusive cultural heritage of the African value
of ubuntu as the embodiment of our national objective to build a united,
nonsexist, democratic South Africa.

The ANC’s Arts and Culture policy deals with custom and tradition, belief,
religion, language, identity, popular history and crafts, as well as all
the art forms, including music, theatre, dance, creative writing and visual
art.

Let me mention some of the integral components. Culture is an integral
component of the process of human development and also plays a facilitative
role by seeking to inform and contribute to nation-building efforts.
Colonialism neglected, distorted and suppressed the culture of the majority
of South Africans. Freedom of expression was destroyed, and systematic
efforts were made to stifle creativity. Communities were denied resources
and facilities to develop their own cultural expression, unless they
coincided with the aims of the colonial masters.

The absence of an effective education system, high rates of illiteracy, and
extreme poverty compounded the cultural deprivation of the majority. In
response to this, and to the suppression, the culture of the majority of
South Africans became one of resistance to colonialism and apartheid. The
resistance became a major instrument in the achievement of political
democracy and social transformation in our country.

A flourishing cultural life is vital to the wellbeing of South Africa. The
ANC strives to facilitate and celebrate cultural productions that capture
the diversity, complexity and vibrancy of all South Africans. The ANC
upholds, promotes and protects the rights of all South Africans to practise
their religion and their culture and speak the languages of their choice.

ANC policies and guidelines recognise that through arts and culture a sense
of national identity and pride can be cultivated. Arts and culture are thus
a potential unifying force in our diverse country.

Thriving and thought-provoking artistic and cultural practices do
contribute to a democratic and tolerant sociopolitical environment. Arts
and culture are not the property of any one political party or group.

Apartheid policies have resulted in an alarmingly high rate of illiteracy
amongst the black population. This is especially true of Africans, but
blacks in particular. ANC policies strive to raise the national level of
literacy, particularly as literacy is a precondition for many forms of
creative and artistic expression.

ANC policies promote artistic and writers’ associations, which explore and
encompass the diverse cultural values in South African society.

As the ANC, we strongly believe that arts and culture should assist in
transforming customs and practices that oppress or discriminate against
women and girl-children.

ANC policies, through various programmes in diversity, strive to increase
the participation of black people and women in particular in all spheres of
the arts and culture, including participation in the direction of
management of state-funded cultural institutions.

Access to heritage and art centres is one of the fundamental principles of
freedom of expression and heritage practices. Arts and culture centres with
appropriate facilities should be established in disadvantaged communities
and promote all art forms. The ANC recognises that a broad spectrum of
South Africans should have the opportunity to pursue and appreciate the
arts, including the visual, performing, and traditional art forms. In this
regard, access to training and facilities should be promoted and created.

Policies of the ANC recognise that well-resourced libraries should be
established throughout the country, in both rural and urban centres, in
order to encourage a reading culture among all our people. This should give
recognition to the fact that arts and culture should be preserved, promoted
and exhibited as part of our national heritage, and the production of arts
and crafts should be supported and encouraged in our communities. This
should also include the creation of a comprehensive and accessible archive
of South African photographic and digital material, both past and present.

The ANC recognises and appreciates programmes that have been implemented by
government through the Department of Arts and Culture in promoting and
making arts, heritage and culture accessible to everyone in the country.

However, it believes that more effort should be made to allocate greater
resources, and to ensure that the available funds for arts and culture are
widely distributed in order to reach poor and rural communities. Currently,
this is biased towards urban areas.

The xenophobic attacks that gripped our country in 2008 and 2010 were
partly a manifestation of the lack of community identity and diversity,
between South Africans and foreign nationals. An HSRC study noted that:

  On a much broader scale, the xenophobic violence which has occurred in
  the country invokes the imperative to go beyond institutional safeguards
  that can best manage diversity but to take into consideration the issues
  of subjectivity, history and lived meaning in our communities. The latter
  infers the need to look into a long-term strategy in order to create a
  new and appropriate national identity framework and consciousness. There
  is now an imperative to invest in ideological resources that will foster
  the inculcation of a tolerant and inclusive “we feeling” in our
  communities.

It is against this background that the ANC encourages cultural exchange
between the people of South Africa and those of the rest of the world,
especially those on the continent of Africa. Immigrants and foreign
nationals from African countries bore the greatest brunt of xenophobic
attacks. In the arts and heritage sector, this exchange must take into
account the views of cultural workers and associations, and promote local
development programmes and international understanding, without undermining
the ethos and values of arts and cultural communities.

I would like to conclude my speech by quoting from a declaration of the
recently held national conference on ubuntu values.

  Recognition was made that ubuntu values include integrity and honesty,
  respect and acceptance, self-worthiness and self-reliance, compassion and
  care. There need to be tangible partnerships and investment by government
  and the private sector towards the development of ubuntu, and the
  establishment of centres for its promotion through culture, education and
  recreation. The conference declared that a just and caring society cannot
  be achieved without collective and cohesive ownership by all institutions
  and individuals and declared that ubuntu is the key to bringing about
  social justice and is an inseparable part of social development and the
  RDP of the soul.


I thank you! [Applause.]

            POINT OF ORDER RAISED BY HON WATSON ON 31 AUGUST 2010

                                  (Ruling)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs N W Magadla): Thank you, hon member. Hon
members, before hon Gunda takes the podium, I would like to make a ruling
on a point of order put by hon Watson during the plenary of 31 August 2010.
In respect of the point of order put by hon Watson, my ruling is as
follows.

During the debate on the Social Assistance Amendment Bill, hon B V Mncube
spoke the sentence: “Setlhare sa motho e motsho ha se lekgowa, empa ke
ANC!” Hon Watson put a point of order that hon Mncube should withdraw the
sentence, “Setlhare sa motho e motsho ha se lekgowa, empa ke ANC!”
[Laughter.] According to the hon member this sort of sentence was hate
speech. I then undertook to study the Hansard in order to give a ruling at
a later stage.

I have had the opportunity to consider the Hansard, as well as section
16(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa and cases decided
on by the Constitutional Court regarding the use of hate speech.

The translation of the Hansard reflects that the sentence, “Setlhare sa
motho e motsho ha se lekgowa, empa ke ANC!” directly translated into
English means, “A black person’s solution does not come from a white man,
but from the ANC!”

In the case of Freedom Front v South African Human Rights Commission and
Another, the Constitutional Court found that: -

  In terms of section 16(2)(c), expression will amount to hate speech if it
  is advocacy of hatred that is based on race, ethnicity, gender or
  religion and that constitutes incitement to cause harm ...

  The phrase “hate speech” is not a phrase of casual connotation. To
  promote hatred or hate speech is to instil detestation, enmity, and ill
  will.

In determining whether the statement made during hon Mncube’s speech
constituted hate speech, I applied the following test: whether a reasonable
person assessing the advocacy on the stipulated grounds within its context,
and having regard to the consequences thereof, would objectively conclude
that the statement constituted hate speech.

The sentence in question, “Setlhare sa motho e motsho ha se lekgowa empa ke
ANC!” when subjected to the above-mentioned test does not instil
detestation, enmity, or ill will, nor does it advocate hatred in any way or
form.

I would, however, like to take this opportunity to encourage members, as
public representatives, to promote the provisions of the Constitution when
making statements in the House.

My ruling is therefore that the point of order raised by hon Watson cannot
be upheld.

Mr J J GUNDA: Chairperson, and hon members ... [Interjections.]

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, I just want to say that I accept your ruling and
I bow to your knowledge. But the mere fact that your colleague, the House
Chairperson, enjoyed listening to that phrase so much proves that I was
right. [Laughter.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Hon Chair, hon Minister, hon members, ladies and gentlemen,
in his Heritage Day speech in 1996 former President Nelson Mandela said:

   When our first democratically elected government decided to make
   Heritage Day one of our national public holidays, we did so because we
   knew that our rich and varied cultural heritage has a profound power to
   help build our new nation.


The Constitution of our beloved country states clearly that:

    We, the people of South Africa ...
    Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our
    diversity.

South Africans do things in unique ways, which is most evident in the way
we strive for winning solutions. Our collaborative spirit in dealing with
some of our challenges has led South Africa to participate in many peace
initiatives on our African continent.

Our remarkable rebirth and transformation is perhaps the most tangible
proof that the manner in which we do things is the key driver of our
success as a nation. September is the time to learn more about each other’s
cultures in order to open our eyes to the rich diversity of the South
African people.

The Khoisan term: “!ke e: /xarra //ke”, meaning  “unity in diversity”,
serves as a living testimony to the choice we made 16 years ago, which is
to find peaceful and productive ways of resolving our differences and this
has led to all of us living together as one nation. That choice makes it
possible for us to proudly speak of “unity in diversity”.

However, we have largely forgotten the contributions and the rich cultures
of the Northern Cape’s Khoisan and other indigenous people. Chair, let me
say this in Afrikaans.

Die Khoisan en inheemse volke was die eerste inwoners van ons land. Daarom
is dit kommerwekkend dat in 16 jaar van demokrasie daar feitlik niks aan
hul ekonomiese en sosiale omstandighede verander is nie. Hulle word selfs
op politieke gebied uitgesluit as ons hulle vergelyk met ander tradisionele
leiers vir ander bevolkingsgroepe, wat wel hul regmatige erkenning kry in
Suid-Afrika, deurdat hulle glad nie jaarlikse toelaes en ander byvoordele
ontvang nie. Erfenis beteken om iets te besit. Wat het die Khoisan en
inheemse volke om te bewys dat hulle wel ’n erfdeel van Suid-Afrika besit?
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The Khoisan and indigenous peoples were the first inhabitants of our
country. It is therefore worrying that in 16 years of democracy virtually
no changes have been made to their economic and social circumstances. They
are even excluded on a political level in comparison with other traditional
leaders of other population groups, who do receive their rightful
recognition in South Africa, in that they receive no annual grants or other
perks at all. Heritage implies the possession of something. What do the
Khoisan and indigenous peoples own which demonstrates that they are in
possession of a hereditary portion of South Africa?]

As a nation, we must not turn our backs on our Khoisan brothers and
sisters.  Instead we must always show our gratitude for the respectful and
caring way in which they were the custodians of our land before any of us
arrived.

We have also not done enough to ensure that all schools teach at least one
indigenous language. Heritage month is a time to reflect on our
constitutional responsibility to develop South African culture, and part of
this is nurturing our indigenous languages and supporting South African
literature. We must develop all languages so that they have equal status in
our day-to-day lives and not just equal status in our Constitution. I thank
you. Ke a leboga. Baie dankie. Siyabonga. [Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Greetings, Chairperson. It was disheartening to hear the hon
Watson saying to the hon Mashamaite that English is not his first language.
Yes, of course, you were blessed to be where you were when you grew up, and
actually you are in the election mood right now and that is why you are
trying to score politically ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs N W Magadla): Order, hon member! You must
address hon Watson through me.

Ms M P THEMBA: Okay, I am sorry. Chairperson, August was Women’s Month, and
although it is now a month later, the celebration of women as an anchor and
a rock of our liberation struggle should continue all the time. We salute
all the women who contributed to the liberation struggle and to those who
have passed we say, “A luta continua [The struggle continues]! Amandla!
[Power!]”

African weddings are characterised by singing, dancing, and women ululating
as an expression of joy. The ululating is accompanied by poetry, where the
bride and the groom are called by their clan name, and all their ancestors.
Therefore, today is the day that reminds us of the African wedding and I
feel like saying, Halala! Halala! Lilili! Lilili! Kwakuhle kwetfu! [Siswati
expression of gratitude and happiness.]

Music, poetry and art have always been part of the African culture, and
therefore I am honoured to be given the opportunity to acknowledge our
living treasures who dedicated their lives to the liberation of the people
of South Africa.

Colonialism and apartheid deliberately sought to negate our cultural
heritage, to deny us our own sense of identity and continuity. For many
centuries racism has been a defining feature of our society. During the
colonial and apartheid time our museums and monuments reflected the
experiences and political ideals of a minority, to the exclusion of others.

The racist system sought to destroy everything that would give the
indigenous majority a sense of identity and continuity. They had to contend
with a historical reality that sought to deprive them of their cultural
heritage, transmitted from generation to generation. It meant the virtual
loss of intangibles such as cultural norms like communal life, human
solidarity and ubuntu, which were the non-material expression of the
material conditions of precolonial society.

Until recently, museums represented the kind of heritage which glorified
mainly white and colonial history, and the small glimpse of black history
largely painted a racist and stereotyped picture. Museums excluded and
marginalised most of our people, and whenever cultural institutions did go
to the trouble of recognising the existence and heritage of the indigenous
populations, they were depicted as lesser human beings.

The coming of democracy has given us as South Africans the opportunity to
ensure that our institutions reflect history in a way that respects the
heritage of all our citizens. When our museums and monuments preserve the
whole of our diverse heritage and when they are living to the public and
interact with the changes of all around them, they strengthen our
attachment to human rights, mutual respect and democracy.

We must all participate in the process of our continuing effort to give
birth to a caring human society. One of those critical elements is our
diverse and common sense of identity and continuity. The objective of a
better life for all not only refers to the material, but also encompasses
the spiritual, and the intangible.

Cultural heritage does not end at museums and monuments, but includes
traditions or living expressions inherited from our ancestors and passed on
to our descendants. Although fragile, intangible cultural heritage is an
important factor in maintaining cultural diversity in the face of growing
globalisation.

The importance of intangible cultural heritage is not the cultural
manifestation itself, but rather the wealth of knowledge and skills that is
transmitted through it from one generation to the next. In the field of
literature, music and art there are many who have earned themselves the
title of “living treasure”, people who through the apartheid years
responded to the denial and distortion of their heritage with their own
affirmation by celebrating their heritage outside of the sphere of the
country’s museums and monuments.

Women have always been on the receiving end of the apartheid regime, as
husbands were taken to jail, and children fled into exile. The worst time
was from 1959, when apartheid was at its worst, to 1989 when the apartheid
regime started to collapse.

During this era a lot of talent emerged from the South African people, like
Miriam Makeba. She was a woman dedicated to the liberation of her people
and had a “never say die” attitude. She received a lot of accolades from
the international community. Her immense contribution reached a crescendo
when she went to the UN and informed them about the unjust system of
apartheid. Her songs and music appealed to Africa and the rest of the world
because she saw that the liberation of Africa would mean a total defeat of
the colonialists. The approach she took was beyond women’s issues, which
enabled her to get the respect of her peers and world leaders. The songs
she sang touched the heart and soul of all Africans. A song that comes to
mind is A Luta Continua, which speaks about the continuation of the
struggle for liberation in the SADC countries.

Our living heritage consists of the practices, representation, expressions,
knowledge, skills, instruments, objects and cultural spaces that our
nation’s communities and groups recognise as part of their cultural
heritage.

As far as the building of social cohesion through heritage, arts and
culture is concerned, the ANC Polokwane conference emphasised the need to
accommodate diversity in our national heritage, and the need to restore the
proud heritage located in South Africa and the continent at large as the
cradle of humankind and early forms of human civilisation.

As I conclude, let me say that, as with any nation, South Africans will
continue to have multiple identities based on class, gender, age, language,
geographic location, religion and so on. In a national democratic society,
such diversity should feed into an overarching national identity. In its
own unique way, South Africa should emerge as a united African nation,
adding to the diversity and identity of the continent and humanity at
large.

We must, through heritage, affirm and acknowledge the relationship between
those who were oppressed and heritage. This is especially of significance
in the context of nation-building. As we seek to build a nation by
integrating South African society across racial, language, ethnic and other
barriers, we are also engaged in the process of developing those individual
elements that distinguish these various communities from one another.

Thirteen years ago, in his Heritage Day address on Robben Island, our
venerable ex-President Nelson Mandela said that in affirming a joint
heritage we are reminded that today’s unity is a triumph over yesterday’s
division and conflict a triumph that must have concrete content if it is to
have real meaning. They must entrench the conditions in which each of us
can participate in building our collective democratic future; speak our own
language, have pride in our culture and our heritage.

I thank you.

Mr O DE BEER: Chairperson, in Cope we have a very strong belief in the
rights of individuals and communities to live by religious views and to
uphold their cultural heritage. This is because we stand for the rights
that are guaranteed in our Constitution.

Erfenisdag moet ’n deurslaggewende rol speel in ons proses van nasiebou.
Elke Erfenisdag behoort as ’n mylpaal te dien om te sien hoeveel
struikelblokke ons oorkom het as ’n nasie en ook om vir ons leiding te gee
op die pad na ’n sterker gemeenskaplike nasionale identiteit. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Heritage Day must play a decisive role in our process of nation-building.
Every Heritage Day should serve as a landmark to show how many obstacles we
have overcome as a nation, as well as to guide us on the road to a stronger
common national identity.]

We conceived Heritage Day as a way to reinforce the political compromises
we had reached. This Heritage Day we can afford to set aside political
affiliation, creed, race and religion to share our culture and to learn
from one another.

Gedurende die Fifa-sokkerwêreldbekertoernooi in 2010 het ons gedemonstreer
hoe trots ons is as Suid-Afrikaners. Daar was eenheid onder alle Suid-
Afrikaners, ongeag ouderdom en ras. Ons almal wil Suid-Afrikaners wees,
want ons verstaan die belangrikheid en betekenis van ’n gemeenskaplike band
wat ons bind as een nasie, ten spyte van ons verskille. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[During the Fifa World Cup Tournament in 2010 we demonstrated how proud we
were as South Africans. There was unity among all South Africans,
regardless of age and race. We all want to be South Africans, because we
understand the importance and significance of a common bond that binds us
as one nation, regardless of our differences.]

South Africa today is the world’s most unequal society. Millions of our
people are out of work. The dreams of a better life for all have turned
into living nightmares. Heritage Day must give us time to pause and reflect
on whether this is the kind of society we set out to forge in 1994.

Eenheid en nasionale identiteit is terme wat almal verstaan. Oor die hele
wêreld is daar by nasies ‘n behoefte om saam te staan, ongeag geskiedenis,
ras, ouderdom of kultuur. In die Verenigde State, byvoorbeeld, vier hulle
’n hele maand lank die bydrae van Spaanse Amerikaners, van 15 September tot
15 Oktober. Gedurende dié tydperk word Spaanse erfenis en kultuur gevier en
erken. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Unity and national identity are terms which everyone understands. Across
the world there is a need within nations to stand together, despite
history, race, age or culture. In the United States, for instance, they
celebrate the contribution of Spanish Americans for a whole month, from 15
September to 15 October. During this period Spanish heritage and culture
are celebrated and acknowledged.]

I want this House to ponder for a moment the implications of such a move in
our country. We have so much to offer because we are such a diverse group
of people and in the process we could create good tourism. We are a unique
country, because the cradle of human society is right here on our doorstep.
We are also unique in being the first country ever to settle deep political
divisions around a negotiating table, not having to resort to a destructive
war to settle the conflict.

Op hierdie dag is dit nie net belangrik om potjie, stampmielies en ’n
heerlike bak Maleise kerrie te maak of ’n lekker braai te hou nie, maar ook
om terug te kyk na ons geskiedenis en te dink aan diegene wat geveg het vir
die kulturele en rassevryheid wat ons vandag ondervind. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[On this day it is not only important to make a potjie, samp and a
delicious Malay currie or to have a nice braai, but also to look back on
our history and consider those who fought for the cultural and racial
freedom which we now enjoy.]

It is proper and fitting that the Most Reverend Desmond Tutu, Archbishop
Emeritus, has been decreed patron of this day. What a major role he has
played in fighting for liberation and then consolidating democracy in South
Africa!

He was the first black South African Anglican Archbishop of Cape Town, and
Primate of the Church of the Province of Southern Africa. He has been
active in the defence of human rights and uses his high profile to campaign
for the oppressed. He has campaigned to fight Aids, TB, poverty and racism.
Tutu received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1984, the Gandhi Peace Prize in
2005, and the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2009. He was inducted into
the Golden Key International Honour Society as an honorary member in 2001
by the University of Stellenbosch. Thank you, Chairperson. [Time expired.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo, uNgqongqoshe okhona phakathi kwethu, amalungu
ahloniphekile ale Ndlu,abasebenzela lo  Mnyango, ngimi la njengenye
yamadodana eNingizimu Afrika ngihalalisela ukuthi lena yinyanga ebaluleke
kakhulu kithi eNingizimu Afrika ngoba niyazi ukuthi ngasohlangothini
lwesifundazwe engiphuma kuso, umbumbi wesizwe samaZulu, iNkosi uShaka
kaSenzangakhona, wawakha ngejozi ehlanganisa wonke umbuswana
owawungaphandle wawenza umbuso owodwa ongenalo ubandlululo. Bonke bakholwa
yiculo elilodwa lokwakha isizwe.

Ngikusho ngingehlonize ukuthi iNkosi uDingane kaSenzangakhona, laba
bokuhamba abamhlasela emzini wakhe eMgungundlovu bethi bamzomtshela
okuthile wafika wabavumbeka ngejozi, ngoba wayebona ukuthi ngabathakathi
okwakufuneka babulawe ngoba kukhona okuthile ababephezu kwakho. Kuwo wonke
amakhona aleli lizwe kwaba khona ukubulalana kwabantu;kodwa-ke ngokwamasiko-
 isiko kufanele silihambise phambili. Sasingeke sikwazi ukubulalana ngoba
isiko lidalula ukuthi kufanele kuhlonishwane; angikhathali noma ngabe
ukuphi.
Kule nyanga esikuyona, bathi yinyanga yamagugu, laphaya sibambe umkhosi
wesizwe samaZulu, siholwa yinkosana yendlu kaMpande, uZwelithini
kaBhekuzulu, lapho bekunezintombi zesizwe sizoyalwa khona ukuthi kufanele
siziphathe kanjani njengesizwe ukuze sikwazi ukuphumelela. Kuye kungabhekwa
zona zodwa izintombi, kuye kubhekwe nezinsizwa uqobo lwazo;ukuthi uma
usuyindoda uye uziphathe kanjani ebudodeni ukuze ungagqobhozi amafasitela
emizi yabantu, uziphathe kahle.

Njengesizwe, singeze saphumelela uma izilimi zakithi e-Afrika zingenikezwe
amandla, laphaya eMelika nje, ningangifakazela ukuthi noma ngabe wenza
ziphi iziqu zemfundo ephakeme kufanele uwazi kahle umlando wakho ukuthi
usuka kuphi ukuze wazi ukuthi uyaphi. Uma ungazi ukuthi uyaphi, awusona
nhlobo isizwe, uyisilahlwanaboya nje, ngesikithi.

Ngqongqoshe, kufanele ukuthi uMnyango wakho uxhumane nowezemfundo, nikwazi
ukubambisana kulolu limi engilukhulumayo nezinye zaseKoloni nakwamanye
amazwe nezizwe zalapha ngoba siyizizwe okufuneka ukuthi izilimi zakhona
zikhulunywe. Lapha sisePhalamende labantu uCetshwayo kaSenzangakhona walwa
elwa namaNgisi, elwela khona ukuthi ayeke ukusiqinela njengesizwe. Iminyaka
emihlanu nje ebusa, wenza umnikelo obalulekile kuleli lizwe, enikela kuleli
lizwe eliseMpumalanga nezwe laseNingizimu Afrika. Ngiyabonga. (Translation
of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson, hon Minister present here, hon members of
this House, and officials of this department, I am standing here as one of
the sons of our soil celebrating the most important month in the South
African calendar. As you know, in the province that I come from, the
founder of the Zulu nation King Shaka kaSenzangakhona built this kingdom
through war – he brought together the smaller nations to  build one
democratic nation; they all believed in one thing – nation-building.

Let me say without a doubt that King Dingane kaSenzangakhona attacked the
people who came to his kraal in Mgungundlovu under the pretext of telling
him something, because he was aware that they were up to no good. They were
witches who deserved to be killed. People killed each other in all the
corners of this country, but culturally – culture must come first – we
could not go on killing each other because culture encourages us to respect
each other irrespective of where we are.

This month is regarded as Heritage Month. We held a celebration of our Zulu
nation led by the heir of Mpande’s kraal, King Zwelithini kaBhekuzulu,
where young maidens of our nation were to receive guidance about how they
should conduct themselves in order for the nation to succeed. Usually, it
is not only the young maidens who are attended to, but young men also get
this attention where they are taught how to conduct themselves when they
enter into manhood so that they should not engage in sexual activities
before marriage - they need to behave themselves.

We will not succeed, as a nation, if our African languages are not
developed. For example, in America, and others can bear witness to this,
whatever degree you are pursuing – to those who are learned, you need to
know your history well – you must know where you are coming from so that
you know where you are heading to. If a nation does not know where it is
heading to, it is not a nation at all but a good-for-nothing nation.

Hon Minister, your department must meet with the Departments of Education
so that you can work together on this issue of the language that I am
speaking and other languages of the Cape, as well as those of other
provinces and ethnic groups of this country. Our indigenous languages need
to be utilised. We are here in the people’s Parliament, because King
Cetshwayo kaSenzangakhona fought the English; he fought them to force them
to stop dominating us as a black nation. And in just five years on the
throne, he made a very important contribution to this country as well as to
the eastern part of South Africa. Thank you.]

Mnr F ADAMS: Agb Voorsitter, agb Minister, agb lede, as ons praat oor ons
kultuurskat en -erflating, moet ons eers al ons mense gelukwens dat hulle
ons verskeidenheid so mooi verteenwoordig het met die 2010 sokkerskouspel.
Ons is met rede trots op ons land en sy mense vir die welslae wat behaal is
met hierdie geleentheid om ons land as vertoonvenster te kon gebruik om ons
uiteenlopende dog gesamentlike kultuurbelewenis aan al die lande uit te
stal. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Mr F ADAMS: Hon Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members, when we speak of
our cultural treasure and cultural legacy, we have to firstly congratulate
all our people on having done such a good job at displaying our diversity
during the 2010 soccer spectacle. We have every reason to be very proud of
our country and its people for the success we achieved in utilising this
opportunity to showcase our country to the world and to present our
diverse, yet collective cultural experience.]

Yes, we are proud of all our people and the rich heritage that we have. We
have just returned from a provincial week, and I must say that I was, once
more, exposed to the reality of how little the party that the hon Watson
belongs to, the DA, and the DA-led provincial government, care about the
culture of all our people in my own province, the Western Cape. It is as if
culture is not a priority to the DA.

In the provincial government, the DA gave this very important portfolio to
a junior partner in its coalition. A year into this administration’s term
the MEC has had to go and has been replaced by another MEC who has been
demoted from one of the critical portfolios. Clearly, cultural affairs is
the stepchild of the DA in the Western Cape. That is how they treat
everything - as a stepchild - if you are not a member of the DA.

This was even more glaringly evident when the outgoing MEC last week, in a
mini debate, had to admit that there were problems with the awarding of
tickets to children from poorer areas to have the once-in-a-lifetime
experience of going to the 2010 soccer spectacle. They only ended up being
disappointed. Seemingly the tickets landed in the hands of family and
friends who belong to a certain political party in the Western Cape. This
scandal and abuse of power needs closer examination.

I realise that this year the theme of Heritage Month is: “Celebrating our
Living Human Treasures and Heritage”. It is also celebrating South African
craft. However, I also had to learn that this very important job creation
tool has been scaled down in the Western Cape, where the DA, to which the
hon Watson belongs, is in control.

Let me tell the hon Watson, through you, Chair, that in the City of Cape
Town, one of the first things the then Mayor, Helen Zille, did was to throw
the craft market out of the Civic Centre, where it had helped to provide an
opportunity for a number of entrepreneurs to display their handwork and
earn a living. It was deemed to have been an ANC project and that is why
they threw it out.
Again to the hon Watson, through you, Chair, during the soccer celebrations
many crafters on the parade were also pushed aside into obscurity. They
were not even afforded a chance to showcase their handmade wares like
utility articles, shoes and clothing to the visitors on the Fan Walk or on
some of the streets closed off for pedestrians.

One would expect that the Western Cape province would stimulate crafting
more and create opportunities for the small traders. Instead, it is cutting
funds and assistance to these kinds of undertakings, if you don’t know, hon
Watson, through you, Chair. Like with the RED Door project, it is moving
away from the global trend of building cottage industries to focusing
instead only on existing industries that the ANC has put there.

Dan praat ons nie eers van die afskeping van ons eie Kaapse kultuur en
erfenis nie. Die Kaapse Klopse is eiesoortig aan die Kaap en meer
geleenthede behoort geskep te word op verskillende vlakke om
vryetydsbesteding vir sulke mense so te kanaliseer dat mense hulle energie
kan gebruik om selfgeldend ’n eie identiteit te koester en uit
moedeloosheid te ontsnap, agb Watson.

Ek wil die wens uitspreek dat die Wes-Kaap meer mededinging tot stand sal
bring, behoorlike befondsing sal verseker, en veral, dansbedrywighede sal
aanmoedig om die jeug van die straat en dwelms weg te hou. Die DA het nie
eers so ’n plan nie, agb Watson.
Dan is daar die skynbare nepotistiese verskynsel, agb Van Lingen, deur u,
Voorsitter, met die Wes-Kaapse leier, Theuns Botha, wie se singende seun
telkens by verskeie geleenthede opduik om op te tree. Dan is die DA,
Voorsitter, hard om te praat oor nepotisme, maar kyk wat maak hulle.

Toevallig sing die jonge Willem Botha by talle geleenthede wat deur die
stad of die provinsie geborg word – soos die aanskakel van kersliggies, die
Top Tiener wedstryd en selfs feeste waar pa en seun nou al die
publisiteitswa bestyg het om saam-saam onderhoude toe te staan, agb
Groenewald. ’n Mens kan maar net wonder of hy so dikwels sou kon optree as
dit nie was vir sy pa se party wat in beheer is en kitaar slaan oor wie
genooi kan word nie. Dis nepotisme, Voorsitter. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Then we are not even speaking of neglecting our own Cape culture and
heritage. The Cape Minstrels are unique to Cape Town and more opportunities
 should be created on various levels so that the leisure time of these
people can be channelled in such a way that the people can utilise their
energy to assert their own identity and to escape from despondency, hon
Watson.

I would like to express the wish that the Western Cape should create more
competition, ensure decent funding and especially encourage dancing
activities to keep the youth off the streets and away from drugs. The DA
does not even have a plan to this effect, hon Watson.
Then there is the apparent phenomenon of nepotism, hon Van Lingen, through
you, Chairperson, with the Western Cape leader, Theuns Botha, whose singer
son pops up time and again at various functions to perform. Then,
Chairperson, the DA is quick to raise the issue of nepotism. However, look
what they are up to.

By chance the young Willem Botha has performed at functions sponsored by
the city or the province – like the switching on of the Christmas lights
for instance, the Top Tiener [Top Teenager] competition and even festivals
where both father and son have now appeared on the public platform and
given interviews together, hon Groenewald. One can but wonder whether he
would have been able to perform as often had it not been for his father’s
party being in control and determining who should be invited. That is
nepotism, Chairperson.]

I also wish to address another matter, and that is the need for proper and
better indigenous sites.

Mr W F FABER: Sorry, Madam Chair. May I ask the speaker a question, please?

Mr F ADAMS: No, no, I haven’t mentioned his name, and that’s why ...

Mr W F FABER: I just want to know if he has got a good voice to sing for
us, perhaps. I think he is singing, Madam Chair. Thank you.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs N W Magadla): Answer the question.

Mr F ADAMS: No, I am not prepared to take ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs N W Magadla): He wants to know whether he may
...

Mr F ADAMS: No, I did not mention his name. That is why he wants to ask me
a question. No, I have not got time for that now, Chair.

Mr W F FABER: I would just like to know if I may ask the hon Freddie a
question.

Mr F ADAMS: Chair, can I carry on? His surname is not ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs N W Magadla): He says no.

Mr W F FABER: No. Thank you, then I suppose he cannot sing. Thank you.

Mr F ADAMS: His surname is not Botha, Chair; neither is it Zille.

I also wish to address another matter, and that is the need for proper and
better indigenous sites, like those for cultural activities, initiation or
ritual slaughtering. I would have thought that the Western Cape, as the
self-proclaimed leader - and I re-iterate, as the self-proclaimed leader,
because it is not even a leader  in its own right – and an example of
innovation and service delivery, would have formalised facilities like this
for reasons of safety, health and hygiene. Let me mention his name, Chair,
through you - hon Faber.

But, what can one expect of a province and party that cannot even get
sanitation in Makhaza right? What can a person expect from a party like
that, that cannot even build proper walls for toilets and cannot even cover
toilets?

I also want to urge the provincial government of the Western Cape to get
its act together to preserve the heritage of our slave history. Too often
one still receives reports of evidence destroyed, like slave bells, poles,
housing and rings where slaves were tied down. No such traces of this very
important part of our diversity may be allowed to perish. That is a warning
to the DA. What is the DA doing to preserve it? Nothing! Or is it also
indulging in the practice of denial and covering the tracks of the so-
called masters, as they are always in denial, the DA?

This also ties in with recording and keeping alive the tradition of
storytelling.

To digress for a moment, there was the denial when the hon premier said in
the House last week that she had never paid for any advertisement. Then
afterwards it came out that she had paid R2,2 million for advertisements -
R2,2 million to get advertising space! You are always in denial, hon Faber
and hon Watson.

Many of the older folks are the bearers of a wealth of oral tradition, but
it is going to die with them unless we take it down and take steps and hold
competitions to hear it, in order to keep it alive for future generations
to benefit from.

I want to humbly request the Minister to assist us with archives and study
material about the history of the ANC, please. We can make it compulsory
for every person in South Africa to study it, for every schoolchild to
study it. If we can get hold of those people who have been in the trenches,
Minister, it would be good if we could get their stories on CDs, records
and DVDs, so that we can treasure them and give them to those who are still
growing, for them to treasure as well. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Chairperson, I will not waste my time
with Mr Watson’s lamentations. I think he was not prepared, since he did
not understand the subject. As a result he started to rant, huff and puff,
and spout hot air in the House, which did not really address the subject of
the day. Therefore, I will not waste any time on that.

I want to thank all the members for their contributions, starting with hon
Makgate and then going on to the rest of the members.

I agree that culture and education were distorted and destroyed by the
colonial and apartheid governments of the past. It was done systematically
and became part of the legal system. Indeed, many laws were passed to
ensure that we lost our culture, heritage, indigenous knowledge systems and
religion. Since 1994 this government has passed a number of laws and drawn
up policies that have sought to reverse that damage.

Hence, on Thursday we shall be launching the Social History Centre at the
Iziko Museum in Cape Town. The centre will play an important ...
[Interjections.] Hon Watson, you had your time to speak.

The centre will play an important role in the preservation of our culture,
history and heritage. Mr Watson, it will reverse all the damage you did in
your youth. Now we are trying to reverse the centuries of damage.

Indeed, I agree with hon Makgate and other members that the 2010 World Cup
was a great success. That is why our theme for National Heritage Day is
also: “Celebrating our Successes during the 2010 Fifa World Cup, our
Heritage”. It is important for us to claim the success of the 2010 World
Cup as part of our legacy and heritage going forward. We will be
celebrating this day at the Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban, where we had
many of the 2010 World Cup matches, on 24 September.

As government, it is an opportunity for us to say a very big thank you to
the people of South Africa for their contribution and participation in the
2010 World Cup. We believe that we should sustain the spirit of the 2010
World Cup, where black and white South Africans came together and rallied
behind our team, Bafana Bafana, and our flag, singing our national anthem
together with passion. We need to sustain this unity, nationhood and
patriotism that were demonstrated by many South Africans.

Our guests were warmly received during the tournament and we demonstrated
the spirit and values of ubuntu. The doubting Thomases who had not wanted
to come because they had been told all sorts of lies about South Africa
told us when they finally came that they had had the time of their lives,
and that they would come back again with their families, children and
friends. They are now our ambassadors.

Mr Watson, a little bit of patriotism is needed to maintain that momentum.
If we love this country, not just for ourselves or for this government, but
for our children and future generations, we ought to sustain that spirit
and ensure that it makes South Africa the best tourism and investment
destination in the world. We should not just stand here and oppose for the
sake of opposing. We should stand here as South Africans and say that this
World Cup was good, not for the ANC, and not for the government, but for
the people of South Africa.

And how do we maintain that spirit of cohesiveness and unity, going
forward? I agree that we need facilities that will help us to preserve and
promote our culture, especially in the disadvantaged communities where
there are no theatres and playhouses. We need to start where there is
absolutely nothing.

Regarding xenophobia, in looking at the 2010 World Cup, we saw how South
Africans were actually xenophiles. We did not see any xenophobia. In fact,
we supported African teams, including Ghana, to the very end.

Kufanele ukuthi siyibheke kahle lendaba yodlame olubhekiswe kwabokufika
kuleli ngoba inobugebengu ngaphakathi. Kukhona laba abayibumbayo bayibumbe
bayibumbe basinike yona siyidle. Kufanele siyibhekisise ukuthi lendaba
yodlame olubhekiswe kwabokufika iqala nini futhi isukaphi. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[We must look carefully at this issue of xenophobia because it has an
element of crime in it. There are these people who fabricate stories
relating to xenophobia again and again and then feed them to us. We must
look at where these stories originate from.]

The 2010 World Cup tournament was held here and many African countries
came. We did not have any problems. At the end of 2010 ...

... ngoba izindaba ezazitshelwe abantu ngathi azibanga khona lwaqala udlame
olubhekiswe kwabokufika lapha eNtshonalanga Kapa. Kungani iqala la?
Kufanele sizibuze leyo mibuzo. [... the stories told to people about us did
not materialise; xenophobia then started manifesting itself in the Western
Cape. Why did the outbreak start here? We must ask ourselves these
questions.]

I believe that through our social cohesion programmes, sport and arts, we
are able to bring our communities together. Let us use culture. If you are
a Nigerian, your music is good. If you are Zimbabwean or Mozambican, song
and dance can bring us together. That is something that can actually unite
us in action.

I want to inform hon Gunda that this department has been working very
closely with the Khoisan communities. We have brought back the remains of
Sarah Baartman. From 1994 on we fought for her to come back and be given a
dignified reburial in her motherland. In August - last month - we launched
the Sarah Baartman Centre of Remembrance, which will be a repository for
the Khoisan people. They will have a centre of remembrance where they can
do research; develop their language and culture; and research their
indigenous knowledge system, which one sees is vast when one looks at the
plants, their closeness to nature, the knowledge they have and, of course,
their culture.

We are also developing a national liberation route for the Khoisan people,
which will start in the Northern Cape, move down to the Western Cape, and
go right through to the Eastern Cape. We are doing this in consultation
with the Khoisan people and their leadership. A lot is being done in that
regard.

Ngizophinda-ke ngingangeni lapho. [Again I am not going to venture into
that.]

We are doing a lot of research on rock art. We have a centre at the
University of the Witwatersrand which is looking at how to preserve it and
teach our children about that heritage. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs N W Magadla): Hon Minister, your time has
expired.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Angizukhuluma nge-Cope. [I shall not be
speaking about Cope.]

There was a lot of confusion in Cope. They did not even understand the
topic.

Ngizondlula lapho bese ngithi ngibonga kakhulu. [I will move on and say
thank you very much.]

The last comrade was talking about job creation and economic development,
that this is critical for arts and culture. There are vast opportunities.
We can use our music, song, dance, film and crafts to create job
opportunities for our people. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LAND AND ENVIRONMENTAL
  AFFAIRS – AGREEMENT ON MUTUAL ACCEPTANCE OF OENOLOGICAL PRACTICES BY THE
                        WORLD WINE TRADE GROUP (WWTG)

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON LAND AND ENVIRONMENTAL
                   AFFAIRS – AGREEMENT ON REQUIREMENTS FOR
             WINE LABELLING OF THE WORLD WINE TRADE GROUP (WWTG)

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Chairperson, Minister, hon members, this afternoon I will
share with the House some of the deliberations that the Select Committee on
Land and Environmental Affairs had on the Agreement on Requirements for
Wine Labelling of the World Wine Trade Group, WWTG, and the Agreement on
Mutual Acceptance of Oenological Practices by the World Wine Trade Group,
WWTG, which were sent via the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries.
The World Wine Trade Group is an informal group of wine-producing countries
entrusted with facilitating trade in wine. This is done by reducing
barriers in the wine trade, whilst sharing information and collaborating on
aspects relating to the trade and production of wine among the member
countries.

The countries that are signatories to the Agreement on Mutual Acceptance of
Oenological Practices and the Agreement on Requirements for Wine Labelling
are responsible for exchanging laws and regulations related to wine-making
practices and wine labelling amongst themselves to ensure free and fair
trade internationally. At the national level, the Department of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries had to amend some legislation in order
for us to be compliant with international agreements.

As a signatory, South Africa will benefit greatly. By signing these
agreements South Africa will benefit by reducing costs related to
documentation and will no longer have to provide a certificate with each
consignment of wine exported, which has been a major constraint in ensuring
that our wines are accessible. These agreements will further ensure that
wine labelling will be simplified and costs will be drastically reduced in
the wine industry.

Therefore, the Select Committee on Land and Environmental Affairs, having
considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Agreement on
Requirements for Wine Labelling of the World Wine Trade Group and the
Agreement on Mutual Acceptance of Oenological Practices by the World Wine
Trade Group referred to it, recommends that the National Council of
Provinces in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution approves the said
agreements. Thank you, Chair.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on the Agreement on Mutual Acceptance of
oenological Practices by the World Wine Trade Group be adopted.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Agreement on Mutual Acceptance of Oenological Practices by
the World Wine Trade Group accordingly adopted in accordance with section
65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on the Agreement on Requirements for Wine
Labelling of the World Wine Trade Group be adopted.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Agreement on Requirements for Wine Labelling of the World
Wine Trade Group accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.
 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – PROTOCOL AMENDING
                CONVENTION BETWEEN RSA AND KINGDOM OF SWEDEN

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON FINANCE – PROTOCOL AMENDING
              CONVENTION BETWEEN RSA AND GOVERNMENT OF IRELAND

Mr S S MAZOSIWE: Chairperson, the National Treasury and SA Revenue Service
briefed the Select Committee on Finance about the proposed amendments to
the protocols between South Africa and Sweden, and between South Africa and
Ireland. The protocol between South Africa and Sweden is a double taxation
convention, while the protocol between South Africa and Ireland is on the
avoidance of double taxation and also the prevention of fiscal evasion with
respect to taxes on income and capital gains.

Double taxation refers to a situation where the same income is taxed twice:
first as profit for the corporation and, secondly, as dividends paid to its
shareholders. The rationale for double taxation for corporations is based
on the fact that the corporate form of business is separate from owners of
the corporations. Both shareholders and corporations benefit individually
from the public goods supplied by the government.

Shareholders need to pay tax as individuals for the benefit derived from
the public goods and services rendered by government to them as
individuals. Corporations enjoy the same benefits, as separate entities
from the shareholders. For this reason, double taxation will not only
ensure that shareholders and corporations, as separate legal entities, will
be paying their own share of benefits, but will also ensure that each
country receives its share of tax revenue.

The South Africa-Ireland Tax Treaty Protocol was signed on 17 March 2010,
and the South Africa-Sweden Tax Treaty Protocol was signed on 7 July 2010.
The implementation of the proposed conversions is subject to renegotiation
of the nine tax treaties that have a zero rate, withholding tax on
dividends. These include Australia, Cyprus, Ireland, Malta, Netherlands,
Oman, Seychelles, Sweden and the United Kingdom. The renegotiation also
addressed certain aspects that are not present in the old treaties.

The committee was further briefed on dividend flows, trade flows and
general investment flows between South Africa and the two countries over
the period from 2005 to 2009. Having considered the presentations on the
proposed amendments by the National Treasury and the SA Revenue Service,
the Select Committee on Finance recommends that the National Council of
Provinces considers approval of the proposed amendments to the protocol
between South Africa and Sweden, and the protocol between South Africa and
Ireland. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on the Protocol amending Convention between
RSA and Kingdom of Sweden be adopted.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Protocol amending Convention between RSA and Kingdom of
Sweden accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on the Protocol amending Convention between
RSA and Government of Ireland be adopted.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on the Protocol amending Convention between RSA and Government of
Ireland accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

      CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES -
     OVERSIGHT VISIT TO PRINCESS MANDISA HEALTH CARE CENTRE, BENEDICTINE
                HOSPITAL AND HLABISA REVITALISATION HOSPITAL

Mrs R N RASMENI: Hon Chairperson, hon members, comrades and distinguished
guests, the Select Committee on Social Services undertook an oversight
visit to two health centres, as well as one hospital revitalisation
programme in Nongoma, KwaZulu-Natal on Wednesday, 17 March 2010.

The objective of the visit was to carry out the committee’s mandate on
ensuring that provincial interests are taken into account in the national
sphere of government. The committee interacted with the officials from the
health centre and hospitals, and it was briefed on the challenges facing
these hospitals and the health centre.

The overarching challenges that confronted the committee were a lack of and
infrequent supply of water; a lack of electricity; poor roads; dilapidated
hospital buildings; inadequate infrastructure; poor sanitation; a high
number of HIV and TB infections, as well as meningitis; high rates of
gastric ailments and herbal intoxication in children; a high unemployment
rate; deep levels of poverty; staffing challenges in all the hospitals we
visited; and, lastly, challenges in regard to financial resources to run
the institutions.

The nature of the recommendations that the committee proposes are not new
and are in many cases logical. These can be categorised as calling upon the
Departments of Health and of Social Development to: assist with funding
initiatives; make resources available in regard to training, human
resources and medicines; strengthen existing campaigns of government; and
fill the existing vacant nursing posts.

Our recent healthy debate in this House on the Intergovernmental Relations
Framework is a stark reminder that we have to ensure that we make the
necessary legislative and regulatory changes that we spoke of.

The oversight visit clearly demonstrated the challenges we have with regard
to intergovernmental relations. There must be integration of service
delivery plans in all spheres of government. The committee’s recommendation
is that the challenges outlined in the visit must be taken up with the
respective departments so as to ensure that there is a qualitative change.

What we experienced during this oversight visit brings us back to issues of
capacity to ensure service delivery and the implementation of ANC policy by
government departments. The visit highlighted the centrality of the
revitalisation of the primary health care system.

As in most public hearings, people complained about the inaccessibility of
health services and time spent waiting for an ambulance when it was needed.
The health policy framework of the ANC and the 10-point plan government
programme on health address the need to expand access to and coverage of
primary health care services, as well as the incorporation of other
priority programmes. It speaks of the training of community nurses, working
together with community health workers, so as to broaden the scope of their
work.

The ANC policy framework and 10-point plan speak of the efficiency and
management of health care systems. During the committee’s oversight visit,
the revitalisation of infrastructure was the critical point of discussion.
Part of the 10-point plan to turn health around speaks to the Hospital
Revitalisation Programme and the role that different stakeholders can play
in this area.

Again, from the experiences during our visit the need for a review of
aspects of the water provision strategy became clear. National standards
and norms remain a huge challenge. Clearly, municipalities are still
struggling with internal systems that don’t effectively deal with the
totality of the need for sanitation and water supply.  A lack of decent
sanitation and water has an adverse effect on people’s health, exposing
them to illnesses such as cholera and other infectious diseases.

The ANC health policy 10-point plan emphasises the strengthening of the
health information system. The ANC health policy framework speaks to
accelerating the delivery of health technology and information technology
infrastructure so that there is ease of accessibility of patients’ records.
The same strategy applies in the case of a shortage of medicines or out of
stock medicines. Information technology systems have assisted tremendously
in being able to trace where to access medicines and track down the
patients’ medical history rather than having to depend on paper-based
information.
Any system is only as good as the human resource capacity that has to run
it. This health plan addresses improved human resource planning,
development and management training.

Central to the health policy framework is the mobilisation of communities
for better health care and environmental protection. This strategy is
underpinned by the basics of the health education and awareness programme
using hygiene and morals as key levers. Continued mobilisation of
communities in the HIV and Aids programme has been a very important
achievement.

In conclusion, what the oversight visit has taught us is that the solutions
and answers to the challenges we were confronted with around health are
contained in the ANC comprehensive manifesto policy framework. What we need
to do is to intensify measures to improve equitable access to health care
provision and to involve communities in service delivery improvement to
ensure an adequate supply of appropriate medicines and other supplies;
ensure adequate safety for health institutions and health workers, as well
as the monitoring of the general cleanliness of facilities and the quality
of care; and speed up the revitalisation programme.

I table the report before this House for consideration. Thank you very
much, Chairperson.

Debate concluded.
Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL
     RELATIONS – JOINT OVERSIGHT VISIT WITH SELECT COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC
    DEVELOPMENT TO KWAZULU-NATAL: MTUBATUBA AND UMHLATHUZE MUNICIPALITIES

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chairperson, it is an honour for me today, as we celebrate
Heritage Day, to take part by reporting on our joint oversight visit to
KwaZulu-Natal with the Select Committee on Economic Development. This
report was in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of 14 May
2010.

The joint committees visited different areas in KwaZulu-Natal, firstly St
Lucia, where they met with communities and officials from iSimangaliso
Wetland Park, local businesspeople, SMMEs and the local municipality of
Mtubatuba. In Richards Bay they met the local municipality, the City of
uMhlathuze, the MEC for economic development in KwaZulu-Natal, hon Mike
Mabuyakhulu, and officials from his department.
We also visited KwaMbonambi where we met communities and two amakhosi and
we visited the local mine, which is Richards Bay Minerals. We visited
Empangeni where we met with officials from Exxaro mine, thereafter meeting
with community members of eMadlankala, where Exxaro mines. In Durban we
visited the Engen Refinery. On this oversight visit, we were also
accompanied by the KwaZulu-Natal Regional Director of the Department of
Mineral Resources. We also went to Richards Bay, where we visited the
industrial development zone, IDZ, and the Richards Bay harbour.

After all the oversight visits, the joint committees recommended that the
Department of Trade and Industry should properly fund the industrial
development zone in Richards Bay. The Richards Bay IDZ should hold their
own account, which means that their grants and monies should not go via
Ithala Bank.

The Department of Water and Environmental Affairs should look at the
possibility of building a dam within the Mtubatuba municipality. We also
recommended that Mtubatuba municipality should submit to Parliament a
progress report regarding the exchange of land with private owners.

The national Department of Tourism should strengthen relationships for a
national marketing strategy involving all stakeholders.

UMhlathuze municipality should provide a progress report with regard to
SMME development and the manufacturing sector. Relationships between the
mines, Richards Bay Minerals and Exxaro, and the communities must be
improved through formal forums, and the Department of Mineral Resources
should be the facilitator. Richards Bay Minerals and Exxaro should treat
amakhosi and traditional leaders with respect and hear their side of the
story when they are about to mine in those areas. Richards Bay Minerals and
Exxaro should formally consult communities about new developments so that
they are on the same level as the local communities. There should be a
follow-up on the Engen Refinery with regard to compliance with the new air
emissions standards.

In conclusion, the committees felt that after submitting this report and
the recommendations to the relevant department, there should be a follow-up
on the recommendations and their implementation after about six to nine
months.

I therefore, on behalf of all the members of both committees, submit this
report for adoption. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT –
               OVERSIGHT VISIT TO PORT NOLLOTH, NORTHERN CAPE

Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, hon colleagues, the Northern Cape is the largest
of the nine provinces, taking up almost 30,5% of South Africa’s land area.
It borders on four other provinces, the Atlantic Ocean to the west and the
countries of Namibia and Botswana to the north, making it an ideal gateway
to West African markets. The province also offers profitable investment
opportunities in minerals and metals processing, agriprocessing, fishing,
mariculture and tourism. Four investment corridors have been developed: the
Namaqua corridor, the Karoo corridor, the Diamond Field-Kalahari corridor
and the Orange River basin.

The purpose of the oversight visit by the Select Committee on Economic
Development to the Northern Cape was to discuss the impact of socioeconomic
and social labour plans of the mines on local government municipalities; to
discuss their strategies for and development towards achieving service
delivery; to determine whether the respective mines’ social responsibility
plans towards the surrounding communities are being adhered to; to
establish whether those communities were benefiting from the social
responsibility plans of the surrounding mines; and to establish the form of
such benefits.

The province accounts for some 7% of global diamond exports. The region
also accounts for most of the country’s iron ore production. Other
important metals and minerals include copper, limestone, gypsum, rose
quartz, tiger’s eye, mica, verdite and semiprecious stones.

These metals and minerals are mostly processed outside the province, so
there are opportunities for investors to establish value-adding
beneficiation plants inside the Northern Cape, and not outside it. That is
what the ANC wants to do. It wants to add beneficiation and value inside an
area and not outside, hon Faber, like your DA does.

During our discussions with the communities, the committee established the
fact that, even though each town has its own distinctive historical
background, they all share similar problems, notably that land is used for
marginal farming and communities have been historically denied access to
large tracts of valuable mining, fishing, mariculture and agricultural
land. This and poor infrastructure are but two of the serious economic
challenges the communities are facing.

Mining has been the dominant industry within the municipalities, with mines
controlling most of the land where there are opportunities for industries
such as irrigation, agriculture and mariculture. With the reaching of an
agreement in the land claims case, this situation will now change
dramatically.

Chairperson, investment is required to upgrade accommodation facilities,
develop new attractions and entertainment centres like theme parks, and
upgrade air transportation networks.

These are some of the recommendations that the Select Committee on Economic
Development has made, as can be seen in the ATC of 1 June, and which we
would like to place before the House.

The committee must monitor the progress that has been made with the
employment of a medical officer at the Alexander Bay Hospital. A new state-
of-the-art hospital has been built by Alexkor but it has no doctors and no
staff. Alexkor recently - about a week or two ago, before the provincial
week - came to report to the committee. They said that they had a
specialist doctor and a labour doctor and all that, but we need to do a
follow-up to see if these are really in place because, according to the
communities, they are not. What Alexkor told us, what the department told
us, and what the communities said to us are three different things.

We need to follow up on the promulgation process of Alexander Bay,
including identifying the institution responsible for promulgating phases.
We need to follow up phase 1 projects and the progress made by the
implementing organisation – either Alexkor or the Richtersveld CPA – and
follow up phase 2 projects and progress.

We need to investigate housing in Alexander Bay. We have learnt that
Alexkor is evicting people from the mining houses where miners are living.
Now, if the son and daughter do not work on the mine where the father
works, he alone can live in the house, but his family may not. We feel that
it is grossly inhumane to do that. Alexkor has given the community and the
committee the assurance that they will revisit their policies and take
steps to prevent that situation.

Who is currently in command of the houses in Alexander Bay? Concerning the
evictions by Alexkor, we want to know to whom the houses are being
allocated at present, and on what basis these houses are allocated. We also
want to know what the remaining term of the agreements for renting these
houses is. There are mining consultancies and mining contractors. Now,
these contractors also live in these houses.

You know, with deep sea diving, you only work around 20 days a year. That
is what we have been told by the mining contractors. If the sea is rough
you can’t go out, whether the sun is shining or not. If the sea is not up
to standard you can’t go down and mine in the belly of the earth.

So, we need to find out from Alexkor what the rehabilitation plan for small-
scale miners entails, because the contracts that Alexkor offered to small-
scale miners at one stage had the small-scale miners getting 30%, while
Alexkor got 70%. At another stage, the small-scale miners got 40%, while
the big company got 60%. So, as a committee, we still need to follow up on
these things.

We went to De Beers and had meetings with the Richtersveld community. There
are projects. De Beers has now put in place mariculture projects, as well
as conservation projects, for the communities. De Beers is also trying to
establish a game reserve for the communities there and they are
rehabilitating through ground art. Now, if hon Faber – who is from the
Northern Cape – does not understand what ground art is, I want him to drive
480 km to the Richtersveld and see what ground art is really all about and
how we, the ANC, think about job creation.

Chairperson, we want to place this report before the House for adoption. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.
IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

  CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND RECREATION –
                 OVERSIGHT VISIT TO NONDZAME PRIMARY SCHOOL,
                          GROOT DRAKENSTEIN, PAARL

Ms M W MAKGATE: Chairperson, this is the report of the Select Committee on
Education and Recreation on the oversight visit to Nondzame Primary School,
Groot Drakenstein in Paarl on 14 October 2009, dated 17 February 2010.

The Select Committee on Education and Recreation undertook an oversight
visit to Nondzame Primary School in Paarl on Wednesday, 14 October 2009.
The visit was in response to correspondence received from the governing
body of the school, and was also aimed at contributing to the committee’s
mandate of ensuring that provincial interests are taken into account in the
national sphere of government.

The committee consisted of a multiparty delegation led by the chairperson,
and was accompanied by the school principal and members of the school
governing body, as well as educators and administrative staff of Nondzame
Primary School.

The main purpose of the meeting with the school governing body and the
educators was to discuss the challenges facing the school in its proposed
merger, and the terms and conditions in the event that such a merger did
take place, as well as a proposed relocation of the school from Groot
Drakenstein to Stellenbosch. Due to a misunderstanding between departmental
officials and the school governing body, the relocation did not
materialise.

The oversight visit to the school provided the committee with an in-depth
understanding of the situation at the school. They found that the school is
situated on privately owned land, and is the only school in the area using
isiXhosa as a medium of instruction. After a visit by the MEC for education
it was proposed that the school be merged with another school offering
Afrikaans as a medium of instruction.

Communication channels between the school governing body and the department
are almost nonexistent, as the department has been giving instructions to
the school most of the time. The provincial department of education has
been keeping the school in the dark about the processes involved in regard
to the proposed merger and did not handle the matter with the required
sensitivity. It appears that there were no clear terms and conditions for
the proposed merger, which has led to the conflict.

The possible closure and merger of the school has led to the school losing
a number of teachers due to uncertainty about the future of the school. The
school and the governing body are not opposed to the idea of the proposed
merger or the relocation. The general view is that before the school can
consider the proposed merger and possible relocation, terms and conditions
need to be clarified.

Some learners are using bicycles donated to the school as a mode of
transport to and from school. The school is far from the residential area,
and this is one of the reasons why the school is not opposed to the idea of
relocating to a place closer to the community.

Relations between the councillor and the school are almost nonexistent, as
he is alleged to have failed to act and intervene when his intervention was
most needed and could have played a major role in this regard. The regional
director did not assist the school to address the issue of the possible
relocation and merger. The departmental representative and circuit manager
could not respond to any of the questions of the delegation, since he had
not been briefed and was not directly involved in the matter.

The key challenges revealed by the oversight are: insufficient school
furniture and a lack of library facilities, computers and sports ground; a
limited number of classrooms, which results in overcrowding; an
insufficient number of teachers, which leads to some teachers teaching in
more than one learning area; a lack of security, which leads to vandalism;
teachers leaving the school for greener pastures, which was also triggered
by the possibility of the merger and relocation of the school to Pniel.

Learners walk long distances to and from school, as the school does not
benefit from the scholar transport grant, causing some learners to reach
the school only by midday due to the long distances that they have to walk.
Parents are unemployed, and it becomes difficult to pay for learners to get
to school. This leads to learners’ arriving late for school.

The visit has provided the committee with a general overview of the
challenges faced by the school and a clear picture of the situation, as
well as the manner in which this issue was handled. In essence, the school
is faced with the common challenge of poor quality of physical
infrastructure and a general lack of resources.

The committee resolved that the department of education in the province
would be summoned to appear before the select committee to explain the
status of Nondzame Primary School, specifically with regard to the proposed
merger and relocation. The committee further recommends that the provincial
department of education should clarify the terms and conditions of the
merger and proposed relocation, and ensure that, in the event that the
schools are merged, the legacies of the two schools are not compromised.

Mechanisms should be developed to improve relations between the school
governing body and the councillor of the area. Communication channels
between the department and the school should be improved, and an amicable
solution found without compromising the learners’ constitutional right to
education. Communities should begin to treat the school as a community
centre; they should feel that they own the school, which will ensure that
no vandalism takes place at the school. The merger should be done in a way
that does not lead to learners being deprived of their constitutional right
to be taught in the language of their choice.

The department of education, both at district and provincial levels, must
explore ways of developing retention strategies to prevent the poaching of
teachers by urban schools, and develop mechanisms to provide incentives for
teachers in rural and farm schools such as Nondzame.

The department of education must ensure that Nondzame Primary School has
proper infrastructure, such as sporting facilities, libraries and computer
laboratories. It must also make sure that scholar transport is provided as
a matter of priority; that the school is fenced to prevent vandalism; and
that security is provided as a matter of urgency.
The school governing body, as well as the management of the school, must
not be excluded from taking part in the merging and relocation processes.
With the problem at Nondzame Primary School being very sensitive, it could
have been handled better by the provincial department, which has a moral
obligation to treat it with the urgency it deserves.

I put this report before the House for consideration. Thank you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS – THIRD
  QUARTER CONDITIONAL GRANTS SPENDING PATTERNS ON HIV AND AIDS (LIFE SKILLS
                                 EDUCATION)

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS – THIRD
 QUARTER CONDITIONAL GRANTS SPENDING PATTERNS ON COMMUNITY LIBRARY SERVICES
                                    GRANT
    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS – THIRD
 QUARTER CONDITIONAL GRANTS SPENDING PATTERNS ON DEVOLUTION OF PROPERTY RATE
                                 FUNDS GRANT

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS – THIRD
 QUARTER CONDITIONAL GRANTS SPENDING PATTERNS ON COMPREHENSIVE HIV AND AIDS,
               HOSPITAL REVITALISATION AND FORENSIC PATHOLOGY

Mr S D MONTSITSI: Chairperson, with the time allocated here, we will not be
able to finish all the reports. Therefore, we shall make sure that we
capture the recommendations in particular.

The first report is the “Third quarter conditional grants spending patterns
on HIV and Aids”; the second, the “Third quarter conditional grants
spending patterns on Community Library Services Grant”; the third, the
“Third quarter conditional grants spending patterns on Devolution of
Property Rate Funds Grant”; and the last, the “Third quarter conditional
grants spending patterns on Comprehensive HIV and Aids, Hospital
Revitalisation and Forensic Pathology”.

The report is quite comprehensive. What we have are the observations, and
we also made recommendations. The report from the Appropriations committee
was as a result of an invitation that we gave the provinces, for the
various departments to come and tell us about their spending patterns. Most
of the departments invited were either the overspenders or underspenders of
the conditional grants.

The meetings took place during the period April to June 2010. This was as a
result of the statistics provided by the National Treasury in March.
Starting with the conditional grants spending patterns on HIV and Aids, I
will get directly to the recommendations.

Let me start with the recommendations on community libraries:

  Having considered the presentations on the spending on the Community
  Library Service Grant by the National Treasury and the aforementioned
  provincial departments, the Select Committee on Appropriations recommends
  that the National Council of Provinces considers the following:

      1. That the provincial departments of arts and culture should
         strengthen their supply chain management units to avoid delays in
         the tendering processes.


      2. That the provincial departments of arts and culture should develop
         monitoring tools to be utilised when they are monitoring spending
         on conditional grants by municipalities.

      3. That the National Treasury and provincial departments of arts and
         culture should discuss effective ways of reporting spending of
         funds that are actually spent by municipalities ...

      4. That the provincial departments of public works should appoint
         experienced contractors ...

Who will provide better services.

      5. That the reporting requirements by municipalities should be
         improved to ensure that conditional grant funds transferred to
         municipalities were spent adequately.

      6. That the provincial departments of arts and culture should refrain
         from spending grant funds on compensation of employees rather than
         purposes they were created for.

What I have omitted here, Chairperson, are the observations.

The recommendations on HIV and Aids (Life Skills Education) are as follows:

      1. That all provincial departments of education should formulate,
         implement, monitor and evaluate proper tendering and tender-related
         payment processes within three months ...


      2. That all provincial departments of education should ensure that
         conditional grants are only spent as per provisions of the Division
         of Revenue Act.


      3. That all provincial departments of education should report to all
         relevant stakeholders as per the Public Finance Management Act.


     4. That all provincial departments of education should improve the
        management of compensation budgets and control their growth in line
        with spending on other items.


     5. That all provincial departments of education should ensure the full
        payment of relevant service providers out of HIV/Aids grant budget.

Those were the recommendations from the HIV programme.

The recommendations in regard to Comprehensive HIV and Aids, Hospital
Revitalisation and Forensic Pathology are as follows:

     1. That the provincial departments of public works should investigate
        track records of contractors and examine them before awarding ...
        tenders in order to determine the ability of these contractors to
        successfully implement projects before them.
     2. That all provincial departments of health should comply with the
        annual Division of Revenue Act.

     3. That the provincial departments ... should work with the Department
        of Public Works to improve spending on capital budgets and ensure
        they are spent fully.

     4. That the provincial departments ... should improve the management
        of the hospital revitalisation grant.

Those were the recommendations.

The last recommendations, on the Devolution of Property Rates Funds Grant,
are as follows:

     1. That the national Department of Public Works should assist
        provincial departments of public works in settling the accounts
        they are owing to municipalities.

     2. That the national Department of Public Works should explain to the
        House why it could not attend the hearing on the third quarter
        spending by the provincial departments of public works. This
        explanation should reach the House within 15 working days after the
        adoption of this report ...

     3. That the National Treasury should discuss the possible assistance
        that can be given to the province of KwaZulu-Natal with respect to
        the devolution of the property rates grant.

     4. That provinces should assist less capacitated municipalities to
        improve on property management, and on their billing system.

We present this report for adoption. I thank you.

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon members, I shall now put the
question in respect of the Ninth Order.

Question put: That the Report on Third Quarter Conditional Grants Spending
Patterns on HIV and AIDS (Life Skills Education) be adopted.

In the absence of any declarations, we shall now come to the voting:
Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Mpumalanga,
Northern Cape, North West and Western Cape. Have all provinces voted? If
any member wishes to correct his or her voting, he or she now has an
opportunity to do so.

In the absence of any such change, I now declare the voting closed and
request the Table to assist with the tally.

We have noted in regard to the Northern Cape that the hon Faber was the one
who voted on behalf of the province. I want to believe that the delegation
head probably gave him the mandate to vote on behalf of the province when
he realised that there was no one from the Northern Cape to do so.
[Interjections.]

All nine provinces voted in favour. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Third Quarter Conditional Grants Spending Patterns on HIV and
AIDS (Life Skills Education) accordingly adopted in accordance with section
65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Third Quarter Conditional Grants Spending
Patterns on Community Library Services Grant be adopted.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Third Quarter Conditional Grants Spending Patterns on Community
Library Services Grant accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of
the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Third Quarter Conditional Grants Spending
Patterns on Devolution of Property Rate Funds Grant be adopted.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Third Quarter Conditional Grants Spending Patterns on Devolution
of Property Rate Funds Grant accordingly adopted in accordance with section
65 of the Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Third Quarter Conditional Grants Spending
Patterns on Comprehensive HIV and AIDS, Hospital Revitalisation and
Forensic Pathology be adopted.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Third Quarter Conditional Grants Spending Patterns on
Comprehensive HIV and AIDS, Hospital Revitalisation and Forensic Pathology
accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
    TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS – CONSIDERATION OF 2007-08 REPORT OF WESTERN CAPE
                         MUNICIPALITIES’ PERFORMANCE

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND
   TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS - CONSIDERATION OF 2007-08 REPORT OF KWAZULU-NATAL
                        MUNICIPALITIES’ PERFORMANCE.

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chairperson and hon House, the provision was for the
examination of the 2007-08 Municipal Performance Reports from the Western
Cape province and KwaZulu-Natal province. The report specifies the
committee’s recommendation of corrective measures to be taken in that
regard.

We recommend in regard to the Western Cape that the House should endorse
the report. The provincial executive committee should improve the spending
capacity of municipalities, in particular the municipal infrastructure
grant, MIG. The departments of local government and of housing should
assist municipalities to improve critical skill shortages and in the
filling of vacant positions. The province should compile service delivery
data and submit it to the House. The Western Cape departments of local
government and of housing should provide a comprehensive report on the
allegation that the City of Cape Town has violated residents’ rights by not
building walls around toilets in the Makhaza section of Khayelitsha. The
Western Cape MECs for local government and for housing should table
quarterly progress reports in the NCOP.

In regard to KwaZulu-Natal, the committee recommends that the House
endorses the 2007-08 report. The KwaZulu-Natal department of co-operative
governance and traditional affairs should assist the municipalities in the
province to improve their spending capacity on the capital budgets and, in
particular, the MIG. The KwaZulu-Natal MEC for co-operative governance and
traditional affairs should table quarterly reports in this House.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report on Consideration of 2007-08 Report of Western
Cape Municipalities’ Performance be adopted.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West.

AGAINST: Western Cape.

Report on Consideration of 2007-08 Report of Western Cape Municipalities’
Performance accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Question put: That the Report on Consideration of 2007-08 Report of KwaZulu-
Natal Municipalities’ Performance be adopted.

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report on Consideration of 2007-08 Report of KwaZulu-Natal Municipalities’
Performance accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

          CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON FINANCE –
               OVERSIGHT VISIT TO NORTHERN CAPE MUNICIPALITIES

Mr C J DE BEER: Chairperson, the oversight visit of the Select Committee on
Finance to the Northern Cape forms part of the ongoing interaction with
municipalities in order to monitor collaboration and co-ordination
pertaining to the provision of municipal services, and support given to
municipalities by the provincial and national departments.

Local municipalities that were visited in the Northern Cape were Sol
Plaatje, Siyancuma, Thembelihle, Kgatelopele, Dikgatlong, SiyaThemba,
Phokwane, Emthanjeni, Richtersveld, Kamiesberg, Karoo Hoogland, and Mier,
as well as the Siyanda District Municipality.

Several stakeholders accompanied the committee on this visit, namely the
national Departments of Treasury, of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs, of Water and Environmental Affairs and of Energy, and
the provincial departments of treasury, of co-operative governance and
traditional affairs, and of human settlements, as well as other
stakeholders such as Eskom, the Development Bank of Southern Africa, DBSA,
Salga, the Auditor-General and the Financial and Fiscal Commission, FFC.

The purpose of the visit was to engage the above-mentioned municipalities
and the national and provincial departments, in terms of section 154 of the
Constitution, in regard to the following areas: development and
implementation of municipal budgets; municipalities’ compliance with the
Local Government: Municipal Finance Management Act, MFMA; spending and
performance with regard to conditional grants; municipalities’ relations
and collaboration with various national and provincial departments and vice
versa, capacity constraints; the extent to which municipal services are
provided, and the alignment of municipalities’ integrated development
programmes with the provincial growth and development strategy.

The provincial Auditor-General’s opinion indicated that 11 municipalities
received disclaimers, and that the audit outcome for the 2008-09 financial
year did not change. The 11 municipalities that received disclaimers have
not implemented basic accounting practices. Of great concern to the
committee were the failure by chief financial officers, CFOs, to ensure
adherence to basic accounting principles; a lack of proper document
management systems, resulting in municipalities not being able to provide
documents to support transactions processed in their accounting records;
and the ineffective utilisation and management of consultants. The 11
municipalities with disclaimers of opinion used consultants during the 2008-
09 financial year for day-to-day accounting functions and to compile annual
financial statements.

The lack of effective monitoring in the implementation of action plans to
address prior year findings is largely due to municipalities not having
effective internal audit and audit committee structures capable of
monitoring management’s implementation of action plans and reporting to
those charged with governance. A lack of technical support from provincial
treasury and the department of co-operative governance and traditional
affairs is due to capacity constraints and skills shortages.

Sir, 7 out of the 11 municipalities did not have an audit committee in
operation throughout the year, and 6 of the 11 municipalities did not have
an internal audit function throughout the year. The effectiveness is
hampered by capacity constraints and inadequate scope of work. The internal
audit should include responsibilities to assist with providing assurance in
the financial statements and other reporting processes to those charged
with governance.
The key findings of the select committee were the following: smaller
municipalities seriously lack capacity, which makes them rely on the use of
consultants; municipalities in the rural areas are experiencing a skills
flight and shortage in the fields of finance and engineering; the DBSA is
assisting struggling municipalities, but it is a massive task to be carried
out by a single entity; most municipalities are spending more funds on
salaries rather than on operational programmes; municipalities appointed
people to positions without relevant skills; national and provincial
departments owe monies to municipalities for services rendered by those
municipalities on behalf of the provincial and national departments; not
all sector departments attend integrated development plan, IDP, meetings of
municipalities, or they send junior officials to attend the IDP meetings;
most municipalities, especially the low-capacity municipalities, are
struggling to convert to the generally recognised accounting practice,
GRAP, reporting systems due to both financial and human resource capacity
constraints; and almost all water systems or facilities are outdated and
water is being lost due to daily water pipe leakages.

The Select Committee on Finance recommends that the National Council of
Provinces considers the following, and I quote:

  • That the national Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
    Affairs, the National Treasury, and the national Department of Labour
    should monitor and evaluate the skills of people employed at
    municipalities in order to ensure that people with relevant skills are
    employed in key positions in the areas of finance, engineering and
    other technical fields;


  • That the national Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
    Affairs and the National Treasury should contribute to the Municipal
    Turnaround Strategy by developing tools that are going to assist
    municipalities to comply with all provisions of the Local Government:
    Municipal Finance Management Act;

  • That the national Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
    Affairs and the Presidency should develop rules and procedures on how
    the provincial and national departments must fully and actively
    participate in the integrated development plans, IDPs, of the
    municipalities and ensure that IDPs are aligned to the provincial
    growth and development strategy, PGDS;

  • That the National Treasury and the national Department of Co-operative
    Governance and Traditional Affairs should develop programmes aimed at
    assisting municipalities ... with the conversion from the Institute of
    Municipal Finance Officers to the generally recognised accounting
    practice ...

That is a serious problem in all provinces. The committee further
recommends:
  • That the national Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
    Affairs and the national Department of Public Service and
    Administration should ensure that municipal and other government
    officials are banned from doing business with any municipality in the
    country;

  • That the National Treasury and the national Department of Co-operative
    Governance and Traditional Affairs should contemplate creating a
    conditional grant aimed at providing municipalities with funds to
    acquire skills and finance water pipe replacement projects;

  • That the national Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
    Affairs and the national Department of Labour should review the use of
    consultants by municipalities with an aim of finding solutions to
    capacity constraints of municipalities;

  • That the national Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
    Affairs and the National Treasury should ensure that the plans to
    establish internal audits, audit committees, and budget and treasury
    offices are included by municipalities in their municipal turnaround
    strategies; and

  • That the national Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
    Affairs, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, should review
    salaries, qualifications and experiences, and the number of employees
    in scarce skills areas and other areas with an aim to determine if the
    appropriate number and skills of officials are employed at
    municipalities.

We liaised with the Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs and recommended that in future, when we do follow-ups
on these different municipalities in the different provinces, we do them
together. In terms of section 154 of the Constitution we will also do a
follow-up to see if the national and provincial departments are assisting
these local municipalities.

Hon Chairperson, the Select Committee on Finance tables this report in the
House for consideration. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                  MOTION WITHOUT NOTICE MOVED BY HON MNCUBE
                                  (Ruling)

The ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, before we
close, for the benefit of all the hon members here I would like to read the
motion without notice that was moved earlier by the hon Mncube, over which
there was a question mark. I hope everybody is going to listen properly now
- listening is a very good skill! I quote:

   That the Council —

   (1)   notes with utter dismay that in a desperate attempt to salvage her
         flagging and sinking political career, the leader of the soon-to-be
         politically extinct ID has joined the DA and been sworn in as the
         MEC for social development;


   (2)   further notes that in an attempt to appease Patricia de Lille for
         handing over the ID to the DA on a broken platter, the leader of
         the DA and Premier of the Western Cape province, Helen Zille,
         discarded Lennit Max, who was the MEC for community safety in the
         Western Cape; and


   (3)   takes this opportunity to call on the betrayed people of the
         Western Cape, particularly the communities that voted for the ID
         and the majority of the leaders who are opposed to this unholy
         alliance to realise that only the ANC, which has fought for their
         liberation for almost 100 years, understands their needs and
         conditions, while the DA continues with its elitist ...

I’ll repeat that, “elitist” –

         ... agenda, which has resulted in the neglect of their communities
         in favour of white affluent areas.

I therefore say, as I have said before, that I expect a written apology
from hon Watson for wrongfully misleading the people in this House. He
blamed hon Mncube for having uttered a very derogatory word, one that
doesn’t exist here. The House is adjourned.

The Council adjourned at 17:29.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          MONDAY, 6 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson
1.   Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)  The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration:

          a) The Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate on
             Domestic Violence for the period July – December 2009, tabled
             in terms of section 18(5)(c) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998
             (Act No 116 of 1998).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)  Report of the South African Law Reform Commission on Privacy and
        Data Protection – February 2009.


    (b)  Progress report on the provisional suspension from office of
        Magistrate M T Masinga, an additional magistrate at Umlazi, in
        terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90
        of 1993).

    (c)  Progress report on the provisional suspension from office of
        Magistrate L B Maruwa, an additional magistrate at Daveyton, in
        terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90
        of 1993).
    (d)  Progress report on the provisional suspension from office of
        Magistrate D Jacobs, a magistrate at Clocolan, in terms of section
        13(3)(f) of the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

    (e)  Progress report on the provisional suspension from office of
        Magistrate C M Dumani, a magistrate at Graaff Reinet, in terms of
        section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).



    (f)  Progress report on the provisional suspension from office of
        Magistrate M K Chauke, an additional magistrate at Pretoria, in
        terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90
        of 1993).

    (g)  Progress report on the provisional suspension from office of
        Magistrate W J M Prinsloo, an additional magistrate at Ermelo, in
        terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90
        of 1993).

 2. The Minister of Human Settlements

    (a)  Report and Financial Statements of the National Housing Finance
        Corporation Ltd (NHFC) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.

    (b)  Report and Financial Statements of the Housing Development Agency
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


    (c)  Report and Financial Statements of the National Home Builders
        Registration Council (NHBRC) for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for 2009-2010.
    (d)  Report and Financial Statements of the Rural Housing Loan Fund
        (RHLF) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010.


    (e)  Report and Financial Statements of the Social Housing Foundation
        (SHF) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010.


     f) Report and Financial Statements of the National Urban
        Reconstruction and Housing Agency (NURCHA) for 2009-2010, including
        the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
        for 2009-2010.

                          TUESDAY, 7 SEPTEMBER 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister in The Presidency: Performance Monitoring and Evaluation
    as well as Administration

    (a)  Report and Financial Statements of the Media Development and
        Diversity Agency (MDDA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.

2.   The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)  Report and Financial Statements of the Academy of Science of South
        Africa for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010.

3.   The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)  Report and Financial Statements of the National Empowerment Fund
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010
        [RP 175-2010].

    (b)  Report and Financial Statements of the Small Enterprise
        Development Agency for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.

    (c)  Report and Financial Statements of Export Credit Insurance
        Corporation of South Africa Limited for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010.

    (d)  Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Accreditation System (SANAS) for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 82-2010].

    (e)  Report and Financial Statements of the National Lotteries Board
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.

    (f)  Report and Financial Statements of the National Gambling Board
        (NGB) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010
        [RP 196-2010].

    (g)  Report and Financial Statements of the Estate Agency Affairs Board
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.



    (h)  Report and Financial Statements of the National Credit Regulator
        (NCR) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010
        [RP 154-2007].

    (i)  Report and Financial Statements of South African Bureau of
        Standards (SABS) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 226-2010].

    (j)  Report and Financial Statements of the National Regulator for
        Compulsory Specifications for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 80-2010].

    (k)  Report and Financial Statements of the National Consumer Tribunal
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.

    (l)  Report and Financial Statements of the National Metrology
        Institute of South Africa for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 214-2010].

    (m)  Report and Financial Statements of the Technology and Human
        Resources for Industry Programme (THRIP) for 2009-2010, including
        the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010.

    (n)  Report and Financial Statements of the Support Programme for
        Industrial Innovation (SPII) for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010.

    (o)  Report of the National Industrial Participation Programme –
        Performance Review 2009.

                         WEDNESDAY, 8 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson
1.   Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)  Bill passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 8 September 2010:


         (a)  Independent Police Investigative Directorate Bill [B 15B –
             2010] (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security
             and Constitutional Affairs of the National Council of
             Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.   The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)  Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
        the Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction for 2009-2010.



    (b)  Report of the Consumer Affairs Committee (CAFCOM) for 2009-2010
        [RP 234-2010].

                         THURSDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.   Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2010] – Act No 4
         of 2010 (assented to and signed by President on 8 September 2010).

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.   Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)  Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 9 September 2010:


        (a)  Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2010] (National Assembly
             – sec 77).


         (b)  Voluntary Disclosure Programme and Taxation Laws Second
             Amendment Bill [B 29 – 2010] (National Assembly – sec 75).


             The Bills have been referred to the Select Committee on
             Finance of the National Council of Provinces.
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

   1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)  Government Notice No R 381 published in Government Gazette No
        33171 dated 14 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/660), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (b)  Government Notice No R 437 published in Government Gazette No
        33211dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1405),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (c)  Government Notice No R 438 published in Government Gazette No
         33211 dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No. 1 (No 1/1/1406)
         in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (d)  Government Notice No R 439  published in Government Gazette No
        33211 dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1407),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (e)  Government Notice No R 440 published in Government Gazette No
        33211 dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/325), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (f)  Government Notice No R 441 published in Government Gazette No
        33211 dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/1/662),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (g)  Government Notice No R 454 published in Government Gazette No
        33211 dated 28 May 2010: Exemption in terms of the Financial
        Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).


    (h)  Government Notice No 471 published in Government Gazette No 33241
        dated 04 June 2010:  Exemption in terms of the Financial
        Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).


    (i)  Government Notice No R 622 published in Government Gazette No
        33382 dated 14 July 2010: Amendment of Rules (DAR/72), in terms of
        the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (j)  Government Notice No R 623 published in Government Gazette No
        33382  dated 14 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/326),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (k)  Government Notice No R 624 published in Government Gazette No
        33383  dated 15 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1410), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (l)  Government Notice No R 604 published in Government Gazette No
        33370 dated 16 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1409),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (m)  Government Notice No R 606 published in Government Gazette No
        33370 dated 16 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/662), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (n)  Government Notice No R 616 published in Government Gazette No
        33370 dated 16 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/327), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (o)  Government Notice No R 630 published in Government Gazette No
        33385 dated 23 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/332), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (p)  Government Notice No R 639 published in Government Gazette No
        33385 dated 23 July 2010: Regulations made under section 121 of the
        Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


    (q)  Government Notice No R 637 published in Government Gazette No
        33394 dated 23 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1411),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (r)  Government Notice No R 638 published in Government Gazette No
        33394 dated 23 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/328), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (s)  Government Notice No R 653 published in Government Gazette No
        33400 dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1408),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (t)  Government Notice No R 655 published in Government Gazette No
        33400 dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/329), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (u)  Government Notice No R 656 published in Government Gazette No
        33400 dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/330), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (v)  Government Notice No R 672 published in Government Gazette No
        33423 dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of Rules (DAR/73), in terms of
        the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (w)  Government Notice No 710 published in Government Gazette No 33457
        dated 13 August 2010: Amendment of Regulations, in terms of the
        South African Reserve Bank Act, 1964 (Act No 90 of 1989).Amendment
        of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1413), in terms of the Customs and Excise
        Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (x)  Government Notice No R 738 published in Government Gazette No
        33481 dated 20 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1412), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (y)  Government Notice No R 739 published in Government Gazette No
        33481 dated 20 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1413), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).

   2. The Minister of Basic Education

    (a)  Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council for
        Educators for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010.

   3.  The Minister of Communications

    (a)  Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Department of
        Communications for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 21 for 2009-2010 [RP 126-2010].


    (b)  Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Communications
        Authority of South Africa (ICASA) for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 210-2010].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic Media
        Institute of South Africa (NEMISA) for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010.


   4. The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)  Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
        Foundation for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010.


   5. The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)  Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the State of Kuwait, tabled in terms
        of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)  Explanatory Memorandum to the Trade Agreement between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the State of Kuwait.


    (c)  Agreement on Economic, Commercial and Technical Co-operation
        between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
        Government of the State of Qatar, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
        of the Constitution, 1996.


    (d)  Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement on Economic, Commercial
        and Technical Co-operation between the Government of the Republic
        of South Africa and the Government of the State of Qatar.


    (e)  Bilateral Agreement on Economic, Trade and Technical Co-operation
        between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
        Government of the United Arab Emirates, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (f)  Explanatory Memorandum to the Bilateral Agreement on Economic,
        Trade and Technical Co-operation between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United Arab
        Emirates.


    (g)  Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Republic of Yemen, tabled in terms
        of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (h)  Explanatory Memorandum to the Trade Agreement between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Republic of Yemen.
   6. The Minister of Transport

    (a)  Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
        Africa (Ltd) (ACSA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.

    (b)  Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
        Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.


    (c)  Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Roads Agency Limited (SANRAL) for 2009-2010, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 81-2010].

                          FRIDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

          1. The Minister of Police

    (a)  The Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate on Domestic
        Violence for the period July – December 2009, tabled in terms of
        section 18(5)(c) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act No 116 of
        1998).
                          MONDAY, 13 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.   Introduction of Bills


     (1)  The Minister of Home Affairs


          a) Refugees Amendment Bill [B 30 – 2010] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 33478
             of 20 August 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Home
             Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
1.   The Minister of Finance

    (a)  Report of the Executive Officer of the Financial Services Board on
        the Road Accident Fund (RAF) for the period 1 April 2006 to 31
        March 2009.
   2. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)  Report and Financial Statements of the National Prosecuting
        Authority (NPA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 87-2010].

    (b)  Report and Financial Statements of Legal Aid South Africa for 2009-
        2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 44-2010].

    (c)  Report and Financial Statements of the President’s Fund for 2009-
        2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 223-2010].


    (d)  Proclamation No R. 35 published in Government Gazette No 33425
        dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of proclamation, in terms of the
        Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No
        74 of 1996).


    (e)  Proclamation No R. 36 published in Government Gazette No 33425
        dated 30 July 2010: Referral of matters to existing Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
        1996).
    (f)  Proclamation No R. 37 published in Government Gazette No 33425
        dated 30 July 2010: Referral of matters to existing Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
        1996).


    (g)  Proclamation No R. 38 published in Government Gazette No 33425
        dated 30 July 2010: Referral of matters to existing Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
        1996).


    (h)  Proclamation No R. 41 published in Government Gazette No 33448
        dated 6 August 2010: Commencement of the Jurisdiction of Regional
        Courts Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 31 of 2008).


     i) Proclamation No R. 42 published in Government Gazette No 33451
        dated 10 August 2010: Referral of matters to existing Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
        1996).


3.   The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)  Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of Trade
        and Industry for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 32 for 2009-2010.


4.   The Minister of Transport

    (a)  Report of the Regulating Committee to the Airports Company of
        South Africa and Air Traffic and Navigation Services Company for
        2009-2010.

                         TUESDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.   Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)  The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Trade
        and International Relations for consideration and report:

        (a)  Amendments to Articles VI and XIV.A of the Statute of the
             International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), tabled in terms of
             section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

        (b)  Explanatory Memorandum to the Amendments to Articles VI and
             XIV.A of the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency
             (IAEA).

    (2)  The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:

        (a)  Progress report on the provisional suspension from office of
             Magistrate M T Masinga, an additional magistrate at Umlazi, in
             terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No
             90 of 1993).

        (b)  Progress report on the provisional suspension from office of
             Magistrate L B Maruwa, an additional magistrate at Daveyton, in
             terms of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No
             90 of 1993).

        (c)  Progress report on the provisional suspension from office of
             Magistrate C M Dumani, a magistrate at Graaff Reinet, in terms
             of section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).

        (d)  Progress report on the provisional suspension from office of
             Magistrate D Jacobs, a magistrate at Clocolan, in terms of
             section 13(3)(f) of the Magistrates’ Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).

2.   Message from National Assembly to National Council of Provinces in
     respect of Bills passed by Assembly and transmitted to Council


    (1)  Bills passed by National Assembly and transmitted for concurrence
         on 14 September 2010:


        (a)  South African Postbank Bill [B 14B – 2009] (National Assembly
             – sec 75).
             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Labour
             and Public Enterprises of the National Council of Provinces.


        (b)  Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill [B 16B – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 76(1)).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Security
             and Constitutional Development of the National Council of
             Provinces.


        (c)  Transport Laws Repeal Bill [B 19B – 2010] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).


             The Bill has been referred to the Select Committee on Public
             Services of the National Council of Provinces.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.   The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)  Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) on A Gendered
        Analysis of Land Reform Policy and Implementation Outcome in South
        Africa, (2006 – 2008/09) - 5 May 2010 (Final Comprehensive
        Version).


    (b)  Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) on A Gendered
        Review of South Africa’s Implementation of the Millennium
        Development Goals.

2.   The Minister of Trade and Industry
    (a)  Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and Intellectual
        Property Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 174-2010].


National Council of Provinces

1.   The Chairperson

    (a)  The President of the Republic submitted the following letter dated
        27 August 2010 to the Chairperson of the National Council of
        Provinces, informing members of the Council of the employment of
        the South African National Defence Force for a service in co-
        operation with the South African Police Service and to assist other
        government departments during the countrywide public service
        strike:

        EMPLOYMENT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE FOR A
        SERVICE IN CO-OPERATION WITH THE SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE SERVICE AND
        TO ASSIST OTHER GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS DURING THE COUNTRYWIDE
        PUBLIC SERVICE STRIKE


        This serves to inform the National Council of Provinces that I have
        employed 1350 members of the South African National Defence Force
        (SANDF) personnel for service in co-operation with the South
        African Police Service and to assist other government departments
        during the countrywide public service strike.


        This employment is authorised in accordance with the provisions of
        section 201(2)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
        Africa, 1996, read with section 18 and 19 of the Defence Act, 2002
        (Act No 42 of 2002).


        Members of the SANDF are employed from 19 August 2010 until 24
        September 2010.


        I will communicate this report to members of the National Assembly
        and wish to request that you bring the contents hereof to the
        attention of the National Council of Provinces.


        Regards


        signed
        J G ZUMA


        Referred to the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
        Development.


    (b)  South African Child Gauge 2009/2010.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Women, Children and People with
        Disabilities for information.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on   Co-operative   Governance   and
   Traditional Affairs on Intervention  in  Mafikeng  Local  Municipality  –
   Dated 14 September 2010

1.   Background and Overview
1.1   The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs, having considered the request made by the National Council of
      Provinces (NCOP) on 30 April  2010  to  consider  and  report  on  the
      intervention notice invoked in terms of  section  139  (1)(b)  of  the
      Constitution  at  Mafikeng  Local  Municipality  by   the   North-West
      Provincial Executive Council (PEC), reports as follows:

1.2  In terms of section 139(1)(b), when a municipality cannot or  does  not
      fulfil an  executive  obligation  in  terms  of  the  Constitution  or
      legislation, the relevant provincial executive may intervene by taking
      any appropriate steps to ensure the  fulfilment  of  that  obligation,
      including assuming responsibility for the relevant obligation in  that
      municipality.

1.3  The Office of the Chairperson  of  the  NCOP  referred  the  notice  of
      intervention in the affairs of  Mafikeng  Local  Municipality  to  the
      Select Committee of Co-operative Governance and  Traditional  Affairs,
      in terms of  NCOP  Rule  101  for  consideration  and  reporting.  The
      Committee took a decision during its meeting to conduct  an  oversight
      visit to the above-mentioned Municipality on 19 August 2010.

2.   Purpose and Objectives
2.1  The main objectives of the oversight visit  was  to  determine  whether
      procedural requirements had been met and to verify whether the PEC had
      used  its  discretion  appropriately,  before  the   Committee   could
      approve/disapprove the intervention.  Through  the  deliberations  and
      interaction with internal and  external  stakeholders,  the  Committee
      wanted  to  determine  how  the  PEC  was  intending  to  restore  the
      fulfilment of the relevant obligations and ensure  fulfilment  in  the
      long term. The aim was to ensure intergovernmental checks and balances
      aimed at guarding the integrity and  efficiency  of  the  intervention
      process.

3.   Delegation
3.1  The delegation of the Committee was composed of the  following  Members
      of Parliament and Officials: Hon MH Mokgobi,  Limpopo  (ANC);  Hon  AG
      Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon  DV  Bloem,  Free  State  (COPE);    Hon  A
      Watson, Mpumalanga (DA);  Mr  NA  Mfuku,  Content  Adviser  (Committee
      Section) and Mr  V  Mfuniselwa,  Administration  Assistant  (Committee
      Section).

4.   Introduction

   1.  On  21  July  2010,  the  North-West  Premier  tabled  a  notice   of
      intervention in Mafikeng Local  Municipality  to  the  Office  of  the
      Chairperson  of  the  NCOP.  The  Municipality  was  previously  under
      administration during the 2003/04 financial year, on matters  of  poor
      financial management and administration. Furthermore, the Municipality
      had also been identified  as  a  priority  Municipality  in  terms  of
      section 106 of the Local Government: Municipal Systems Act (Act 32  of
      2000) for investigation by  the  Special  Investigations  Unit  (SIU).
      However, despite these  interventions,  the  Municipality’s  financial
      situation continued to deteriorate and this affected service  delivery
      adversely.

4.2   In  terms  of  section  139  (2)(b)(ii)  of  the   Constitution,   the
      intervention must end if the NCOP  does  not  positively  approve  the
      intervention within 180 days since the  intervention  began,  in  this
      case before the end of 27 December 2010.

5.   Problems Identified by the Provincial Executive Council (PEC)
5.1   On 30 June 2010, the Provincial Executive decided  to  invoke  section
      139 1(b) of the  Constitution  in  Mafikeng  Local  Municipality.  The
      intervention was scheduled for a period of  six  months,  with  effect
      from 1st July 2010. The  main  issues  identified  by  the  Provincial
      Executive to intervene in the affairs of Mafikeng  Local  Municipality
      related to:


      • governance and administration, which was characterized  by  Council
        instability due to a lack of decisive political and  administrative
        leadership;
      • service delivery challenges with regard to the provision of  water,
        refuse removal, storm water systems and electricity;
      • a dysfunctional Local Labour Forum (LLF) as a  result  of  strained
        relations between management and labour,  and  poor  attendance  by
        management, with resolutions not implemented.


      The Municipality was not financially viable and there was  a  lack  of
      political/administrative will in implementing credit control policy

6.   Appointment and Functions of the Administrator
6.1  The  intervention  was  presented  to  a  Mafikeng  Local  Municipality
      Council  meeting  on  15  July  2010  and  the  Administrator,  Mr   J
      Motlogelwa, was seconded and effectively appointed on the  same  date.
      He was presented by MEC for  Provincial  Treasury,  Hon  L  Mabe.   Mr
      Motlogelwa was appointed to:



      • appoint an Acting Municipal Manager outside the  current  municipal
        personnel with immediate effect;

      • improve service delivery in Mafikeng including surrounding villages
        (these should include facilitation of new projects,  unblocking  of
        old projects, maintenance of infrastructure and cleansing);

      • improve the financial controls  in  the  Municipality,  expenditure
        management,   procurement   processes,   revenue   management   and
        collection, as well as addressing issues  raised  by  the  Auditor-
        General in his reports (MFMA compliance);

      • analyse and implement past and current investigations,  commissions
        of enquiry, forensic audits, SIU, etc;

      •  attend  to  labour  matters  in  the   Municipality   (outstanding
        disciplinary cases,  labour  disputes,  functionality  of  LLF  and
        instil a culture of work and discipline amongst staff members;

      • facilitate the improvement of governance within Council  (oversight
        role), including relations between Council and administration;

      • conclude the outstanding disciplinary case of  suspended  Municipal
        Manager (develop charges and commence with disciplinary process);

      • investigate all recently awarded contracts, in order  to  establish
        validity and legitimacy thereof; and.

      • perform all other applicable executive obligations as stipulated in
        various legislations and prescripts.


7.   Oversight Visit to Mafikeng Local Municipality
   1. On 19 August 2010 the delegation of the Committee had interactive  and
      robust engagements with the internal and external stakeholders of  the
      Municipality. The main internal stakeholders the delegation interacted
      with in the Municipality included the Speaker, Executive Mayor,  Chief
      Whip, Councillors, Ward Committee Members, Administrator and the South
      African  Local  Government  Association  (SALGA).  The  main  external
      stakeholders the delegation interacted with included  members  of  the
      community, the business forum and non-governmental organizations.


7.2  For the purpose of this report, the submissions made by  both  internal
      and external stakeholders are structured on the basis of the five  key
      strategic performance areas of the Local Government  Strategic  Agenda
      which are: Municipal Transformation;  Basic  Service  Delivery;  Local
      Economic Development; Municipal Financial Viability and Management, as
      well as Good Governance and Public Participation.

(A).     Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

7.3  Municipal Council:  There  have  been  serious  challenges  facing  the
      Municipality,  involving  service  delivery.  There  have  also   been
      challenges between Council and administration that  have  led  to  the
      Provincial Executive intervening in the Municipality. During the  past
      intervention, the Administrator did a good job and systems were put in
      place. However, after his departure,  the  administration  started  to
      collapse. Labour relations are a serious concern in the  Municipality.
      Until they are resolved, there will always be disruption  of  services
      in the Municipality.


7.4  The current Executive Mayor, Cllr. Moreetsi Desmond Jabanyane,  assumed
      responsibility for his position on the  1st  February  2010.   It  was
      reported that the previous Executive  Mayor,  Cllr.  Mosa  Sejosingwe,
      took employment with the  Presidency.  The  current  Acting  Municipal
      Manager was appointed on 12 August 2010. The Administrator will assist
      the Council in appointing a full-time Municipal Manager.

7.5  Administrator: Governance and administration has been characterized  by
      Council  instability  due  to   lack   of   decisive   political   and
      administrative leadership. This has been  due  to  persistent  Council
      interference  in  the  administration  and  irregular  appointment  of
      contract workers which were not required. Equally the  Council  failed
      to conclude disciplinary processes of the suspended Municipal Manager.
       There were no performance assessments or evaluation conducted for the
      past three financial years, and the administration was on the brink of
      collapse, with  lack  of  staff  discipline  and  absence  of  ethical
      leadership. In addition, the Municipal Manager has been on  suspension
      for  more  than  12  months,  and  disciplinary  hearings  have   been
      unnecessarily elongated.

7.6   MEC  for  Provincial  Treasury:  The  MEC,  Ms  Mabe,  described   the
      circumstances  that  led  to  the  decision  of  intervening  in   the
      Municipality and how she was the subject of attacks by  the  Municipal
      Council.  According to her, they felt that the MEC was  unfair,  based
      on the reasons identified for  the  intervention.  As  a  result,  the
      majority party did  not  accept  the  intervention,  but  promised  to
      support  the  Administrator,  while  the   opposition   welcomed   the
      intervention. The MEC is of the opinion that an audit of skills  needs
      to be done to verify skills capacity in the Municipality.

7.7   Provincial  Department:  The  Acting  Head  of  Department  of   Local
      Government and Traditional Affairs, Mr Themba Fosi, reported that both
      the Municipal Council and Organized Labour approached  the  Department
      about a  request  on  invoking  a  section  139  intervention  in  the
      Municipality. However, although the Department  instituted  a  section
      106 investigation, the Municipal Council  also  appointed  the  Fivaz-
      Ramathe Commission of Enquiry to  conduct  an  investigation.  In  the
      Department’s  opinion,  this  was  very  strange.  In  terms  of   the
      turnaround areas, the Administrator would look at  the  key  areas  of
      operation and maintenance,  revenue  and  management,  the  Integrated
      Development Plan (IDP), governance and administration. The invoking of
      a section 139  intervention  at  Mafikeng  Local  Municipality  was  a
      necessary corrective measure, and was communicated properly  with  all
      the relevant stakeholders.

7.8   Organized  Labour:  Councillors  in  the   Municipality   persistently
      interfered with the administration. About 20  people  were  reportedly
      being  employed  as  contract  workers  in  the   Community   Services
      Directorate, and all of them were allegedly being brought in  by  Cllr
      Vuyisile Tambam. The same Councillor was paid an amount of R5,  134.18
      (cheque no. 900010758) to attend the ELMA Training at  the  University
      of Pretoria. He did not attend the course  but  received  payment.  He
      further requested payment of a claim amounting to  R1,  121.78  on  16
      February 2010.

7.9  It was reported that a Mr Martin  Sebakwane’s  fixed-term  contract  of
      employment expired since  it  was  linked  with  that  of  the  former
      Executive Mayor. Since the former Executive Mayor had  been  re-called
      in January 2010, Mr Sebakwane was given a  letter  that  automatically
      terminated his contract in March  2010.  However,  evidence  suggested
      that this official was still on the municipal pay-roll system and  was
      still receiving a monthly salary of R38, 241.44.

7.10 Another irregularity reported by Organized Labour was  with  regard  to
      the irregular issuing of clearance certificates to the buyers  of  the
      formerly North-West Housing Corporation which was  sold  recently.  It
      was reported  that  the  Municipality  issued  clearance  certificates
      without settling outstanding debts to Council as required  by  policy.
      This transaction was for an amount of around  R30  million,  and  this
      writing-off of debts and the awarding of discounts warrants a thorough
      investigation.


(B). Basic Service Delivery

7.11 Municipal Council:  A claim was made  that  workers  generally  in  the
      Municipality reneged on their responsibilities. Some Councillors  were
      also not servicing  their  communities.  Another  challenge  that  was
      identified was with regard to the finalisation and appointment of  Bid
      Committee members. This contributed to service delivery challenges and
      delays of projects for communities.

7.12  Administrator:   There  are  basic  service  challenges  in  terms  of
      provision  of  water,  refuse  removal,  storm   water   systems   and
      electricity as  result  of  lack  of  operations  and  maintenance  of
      infrastructure due to insufficient budget. Presently  there  are  high
      mast lights in eight villages installed in 2007, which have  not  been
      energized to date. In summary, service delivery in the Municipality is
      on the brink of total collapse. The Municipality is the  capital  town
      of the Province, but the image of the town does not reflect this.

7.13 A plan  for  engagement  of  affected  stakeholders  such  as  Business
      Chambers and Organised Labour will be unfolded, and this will  include
      the assessment of the efficiency of personnel management  and  optimum
      utilization of municipal equipment  and/or  resources.   Mr  Andre  Du
      Plessis, a DBSA engineering expert,  was  appointed.  A  plan  cutting
      across all service delivery areas will be  finalised  by  25th  August
      2010, and a project team will commence work immediately.

7.14 Ward Committees: Service delivery is  a  major  problem  in  the  whole
      municipal  jurisdiction.  In  addition,  municipal  workers  are   not
      properly  supervised  in  discharging  their  responsibilities.  As  a
      result, the community is  suffering  due  to  poor  service  delivery.
      Furthermore, it has been observed that there is a lot  of  in-fighting
      between Council and administration, which results in undue  delays  of
      projects and basic services.

(C).     Local Economic Development (LED)

7.15 Business Forum: The National  African  Federated  Chamber  of  Commerce
      (NAFCOC) raised concerns about the  municipality’s  inability  to  see
      business as a strategic partner in development at Mafikeng.  Organized
      business should form partnerships with the Municipality especially  on
      issues  of  LED.  Agriculture  was  identified  as  a  major  economic
      development activity in the Province. However,  the  Municipality  has
      not played any pivotal role in this regard. In addition,  NAFCOC  felt
      that the issue of corruption and tender irregularities  needed  urgent
      address.

(D).     Municipal Financial Viability and Management

7.16 Municipal Council: There is a serious challenge of  collecting  revenue
      due  to  the   Municipality.   Government   institutions   owing   the
      Municipality a lot of money that could  have  been  used  for  service
      delivery. The Provincial Government departments owe  the  Municipality
      around R190 million. Parliament  should  assist  the  Municipality  in
      recouping all the money owed to it by the state departments.  Equally,
      there are serious capacity challenges in the Finance Directorate,  and
      this  has  led  the  Municipality  to  receive  disclaimers  in   four
      consecutive years.

7.17 Administrator:  Mafikeng Local Municipality is  not  financial  viable.
      On average, the monthly salary bill is R12 million, which far  exceeds
      the income from services and rates levied at R10  million  per  month.
      Revenue collection  for  services  levied  is  very  low  and  impacts
      negatively on the financial viability of the Municipality.  There  are
      numerous allegations of fraud, corruption and maladministration on the
      procurement of goods  and  services,  as  well  as  on  the  sale  and
      alienation of vacant municipal land.

  18. The DBSA seconded municipal finance expert, Mr  Eduard  Le  Roux,  who
      will lead the Finance Section to deal mainly with  management  issues,
      revenue enhancement and Auditor-General matters. Efforts  are  already
      afoot to ensure that matters  such  as  payment  of  government  debts
      (mainly property rates), are brought to finality without  delay.  This
      will enhance the cash flow of the Municipality  and  realise  a  cash-
      funded budget, which is an issue at the moment.

  19. Furthermore, an Audit Recovery Plan  with  responsible  officials  and
      target dates will be implemented and consultants have  been  appointed
      to assist with fixed asset register and  debtors  database  cleansing.
      The Municipality has decided to leave the Shared Service for  Internal
      Audit and the Shared Audit Committee  rendered  by  the  Ngaka  Modiri
      Molema District Municipality, since it has not been effective.

(E). Good Governance and Public Participation

7.20 Administrator:  The LLF is not  functional  as  a  result  of  strained
      relations between management and labour. There  are  serious  tensions
      and  conflicts  between  management  and  workers,  as  a  result   of
      disagreements  over  labour-related  matters.   There   are   reported
      allegations of corrupt activities in the Municipality  which  are  not
      acted  upon  by  management  and  Council.  In  order  to  rescue  the
      Municipality from total collapse and to salvage whatever  is  left  in
      the institution, there is  a  need  to  decisively  intervene  in  the
      Municipality, both at political and administrative level.

  21. Members of Community Forums: Public participation and consultation  is
      extremely poor in the Municipality. There are  Imbizo’s  held  by  the
      Municipality every six months, where false hopes  are  raised  by  the
      Council. When delivery on the issues raised by the communities is  not
      met, the Council attributes this to  insufficient  funding  or  budget
      constraints.

  22. Ward  Committees:  It  has  been  indicated  that  the  work  of  Ward
      Committees seems not to be appreciated by the  Municipality,  although
      they  are  the  communication  link  between   communities   and   the
      Municipality. Hence it has  been  suggested  that  stipends  for  Ward
      Committee members should be awarded. In addition, it has been reported
      that  there  are  conflicting  roles  between  Ward   Committees   and
      Traditional Leaders.

8.   Committee Observations and Opinion

   1. It was observed that most of the interventions undertaken in the North-
      West Province were based on in-fighting between the Municipal  Council
      and administration. The Municipal Council of  Mafikeng  in  particular
      was suffering from lack of discipline, and this  matter  needs  to  be
      looked at as a matter of urgency.
   2. In Mafikeng, in particular, there  has  been  a  total  break-down  of
      working relations between  stakeholders.  The  invocation  of  section
      139(1)(b)  intervention  will  allow  for  new   leadership   in   the
      Municipality in the form of an Administrator, for both  political  and
      administration to stabilize administratively without the  interference
      of the Municipal Council.

   3. The Committee acknowledged the  partnership  requested  by  NAFCOC  in
      contributing to local economic development  in  Mafikeng.  It  is  the
      Committee’s  opinion  that  this  proposed   partnership   should   be
      encouraged and developed.

10.  Recommendations

10.1 Having conducted the oversight visit  to  Mafikeng  Local  Municipality
      and interacted with all relevant stakeholders, the Select Committee on
      Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs recommends as follows:



        1.  The  NCOP  approves  the   intervention   in   Mafikeng   Local
           Municipality as issued by the  North-West  Provincial  Executive
           Council in terms of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution.


        2. The Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
           should approach the Hawks to pursue  criminal  investigation  in
           all cases of financial  irregularities  and  fraud  in  Mafikeng
           Local Municipality as a matter of urgency.  A progress report in
           this regard should be forwarded to the NCOP within one month.


        3. The Administrator should investigate the  matter  regarding  the
           Council vehicle in Gauteng Province, as well  as  the  municipal
           tractor which was irregularly used by a contractor.

        4.  The  Administrator  should  investigate  the  alleged  improper
           appointment of 20 contract workers in the Municipality, and take
           the  necessary   corrective   measures   in   rectifying   these
           appointments.

        5.  The  Administrator  should  immediately  investigate  and  take
           corrective steps with  respect  to  the  Director  of  Community
           Services,  who  is  alleged  to  have  refused   servicing   the
           community.

        6. The Administrator should fast-track the  process  of  appointing
           the Municipal Manager, in order to facilitate  the  transfer  of
           skills and to ensure continuity.


        7.  The  North-West  MEC  for  Provincial  Treasury  should   table
           quarterly progress  reports  to  the  NCOP  and  the  Provincial
           Legislature  on  the  status  of   the   intervention   in   the
           Municipality, including challenges encountered.

Report to be considered.

2.  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on   Co-operative   Governance   and
   Traditional Affairs on Consideration of the 2007/08 Performance Report of
   Eastern Cape Municipalities – Dated 14 September 2010

1.   Background and Overview

1.1   The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs having considered the directive of  the  National  Council  of
      Provinces (NCOP) to consider and report  on  the  2007/08  Performance
      Report of Eastern Cape Municipalities’ Performance tabled by  the  MEC
      for  Local  Government  and  Traditional  Affairs  in  terms  of   the
      requirements of the Local Government Municipal Systems Act (Act 32  of
      2000), reports as follows:

1.2   Municipalities  are  required  by  legislation   to   produce   annual
      performance reports in terms of section 46  of  the  Local  Government
      Municipal Systems Act. Based on these reports, the MEC responsible for
      local  government  has  to  compile  a  consolidated  report  on   the
      performance of municipalities in the province and submit a  report  to
      the NCOP in terms of section 47 of the Act. In this case,  the  report
      provides an analysis of the municipal performance in the Eastern  Cape
      Province and also makes recommendations for corrective measures to  be
      undertaken in that regard.

1.3  In terms of NCOP Rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson  of  the  NCOP
      referred  the  2007/08  Report   of   Eastern   Cape   Municipalities’
      Performance to the Select Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and
      Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.

2.   Introduction

2.1  On 20 August 2009, the  Eastern  Cape  MEC  for  Local  Government  and
      Traditional  Affairs  tabled  the  2007/08   Performance   Report   of
      Municipalities in the Eastern Cape to the Office of the Chairperson of
      the NCOP, in terms of section 47 of  the  Local  Government  Municipal
      Systems Act. Subsequent to the tabling, the Committee held a  briefing
      meeting on  20  April  2010  with  the  Eastern  Cape  MEC  for  Local
      Government and Traditional Affairs.

3.   Presentation on 2007/08 Eastern Cape Municipality Performance Report
     .
     . 3.1    The MEC for Local  Government  and  Housing,  Hon  S  Gqobana,
       presented the Eastern Cape 2007/08 Municipalities’ Performance Report
       to the Committee. In his political overview, the MEC  indicated  that
       the report had been compiled in terms of  section  47  of  the  Local
       Government  Municipal  System  and  was  largely  based   on   annual
       performance reports of individual municipalities.  In  terms  of  the
       report, of the 45 municipalities  in  the  Province,  44  (98%)  have
       compiled and submitted their reports  to  the  Department.  The  only
       exception was the Mbizana Local  Municipality.  This  represented  an
       improvement of 9% compared to the 2006/07 financial year,  when  only
       40 municipalities (88,8%) submitted their section 46 reports  to  the
       Department.

3.2  The report further highlights areas of weakness and of strength in  the
      various  municipalities  per  each  key  performance  indicator,   and
      proposes remedial actions to  be  taken.  Remedial  actions  that  are
      proposed are premised on the need to ready municipalities for the  new
      paradigm  shift  that  is  associated  with  the  need  to   integrate
      government planning, co-ordination of all public  and  private  sector
      support, and the focus on rural development.

3.3  The Department has  committed  itself  to  enhancing  its  capacity  to
      support all municipalities in the  Province,  and  the  organizational
      structure has been elevated with  progress  made  in  respect  of  the
      filling of critical positions.  Furthermore, the  MEC  explained  that
      the report was published in the  Provincial  Gazette  as  required  in
      terms of section 47 (2)(c) of the Local  Government  Municipal  System
      Act and submitted to the Provincial Legislature, NCOP and the Minister
      of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs.

3.4  The presentation focused  on  the  5-Year  Local  Government  Strategic
      Agenda, which remains the  guiding  strategic  approach  in  improving
      service delivery of all municipalities.  These  areas  are:  improving
      municipal transformation and organisational development,  accelerating
      basic  service  delivery,  putting  in  place  viable  local  economic
      development  strategies,   improving   the   fiscal   management   and
      discipline,  and  ensuring  overall   good   governance   and   public
      participation in the work of the municipality.

4.   Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

4.1  The Department  reported  that,  in  terms  of  vacancy  rate  for  all
      approved posts; filling of section 57 positions and implementation  of
      the performance management system, Cacadu and OR Tambo were  the  only
      District  Municipalities  that  showed   a   slight   improvement   in
      performance when compared with  the  previous  year.   The  Department
      explained that the progress observed in OR Tambo District Municipality
      was due to most municipalities in this District not  submitting  their
      reports in 2006/07 financial year.

4.2  The performance assessment results of  municipalities  with  regard  to
      Employment Equity remained the biggest challenge, as they  reflect  39
      municipalities  (89%)  being  assessed  as  being  ‘extremely   weak’.
      However, with respect to Performance Management Systems  a  remarkable
      improvement was made in the 2007/08 financial year as compared to  the
      previous financial year. This improvement is largely attributed to the
      support which the Department has rendered to  municipalities  in  this
      regard during the past two years.
5.   Basic Service Delivery

5.1  Municipalities  in  the  Province  are  faced  with  a  combination  of
      challenges in the delivery of infrastructure and basic services,  such
      as, for example, growing urbanisation, the  servicing  of  undeveloped
      predominantly rural communities,  and  a  historical  backlog  in  the
      provision of infrastructure. Consequently, the national Department  of
      Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs has provided  a  total
      sum of R22 751 000 as funding to assist municipalities in the Province
      with the provision and development of infrastructure.

5.2  It was reported that most municipalities made progress with  regard  to
      basic service delivery. Nelson Mandela Bay  Metropolitan  Municipality
      had the highest average score of 70%, followed by Chris Hani  District
      Municipality area with an average score of 44%. Despite  the  progress
      made, Alfred Nzo and OR Tambo District Municipalities were reported to
      be the worst performing districts at 35% and 32% respectively in terms
      of  key  performance  indicators  of  access  to  free  basic   water,
      sanitation,   electricity,   bucket   system   eradication   and   the
      implementation of indigent policy.


6.   Local Economic Development (LED)

6.1  The Department reported that,  in  terms  of  number  of  jobs  created
      through the Extended Public Works Programmes  and  the  percentage  of
      municipalities with effective LED Units; Nelson Mandela Bay,  Amathole
      and Alfred  Nzo  District  Municipalities  were  the  best  performing
      municipalities. Despite the progress observed, the average performance
      across all districts was generally reported to be below 50%.

6.2  Many municipalities viewed LED as an unfunded  mandate  and  failed  to
      prioritise  it  or  provide   the   necessary   infrastructure.   Most
      municipalities rely on other partners for the  implementation  of  the
      LED  strategies.  The  Department  and  the  Department  of   Economic
      Development and Environmental Affairs, supported by the Technical Unit
      of Thina Sinako, initiated a process aimed  at  finalizing  guidelines
      for the development of LED strategies by municipalities.

7.   Municipal Financial Viability and Management


7.1  In terms of the total amount of actual trade  creditors,  the  rate  of
      municipal  consumer   debt-reduction   and   percentage   of   capital
      expenditure;  the  Department  reported  that  the  overall  municipal
      financial  management  performance  had  improved  in   all   district
      municipalities, as well as in Nelson Mandela Bay.

7.2  Despite the progress observed, Chris Hani and OR Tambo  district  areas
      were reported to be the worst performing municipalities at 44% and 28%
      respectively. The reasons for the poor performance  will  need  to  be
      determined, so that performance can be improved.

8.   Good Governance and Public Participation

8.1  The Department indicated  that,  in  terms  of  functionality  of  Ward
      Committees,  effective  monitoring  system  of  Community  Development
      Workers (CDWs) and the implementation of  intergovernmental  relations
      policy; most of the district municipalities reported progress in their
      performance compared to the 2006/07 financial year.  It is of  concern
      that even though performance has improved  in  four  districts,  their
      level of performance is still less than 50%, indicating that intensive
      support will be required.
8.2   Notwithstanding  the  progress  observed,   the   Department   further
      explained that the overall performance in  the  district  municipality
      areas was still below 50%. The performance of the Chris Hani  District
      and Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan  Municipalities  was  reported  to
      have regressed compared to the 2006/07 financial year.

8.3  In an attempt to address some of the challenges with  respect  to  this
      key performance area, the Department has:
         • deployed 252 CDWs across all the districts;
         • provided R15 000.00 funding for purposes of public participation
           per ward, per annum;
         •  assisted   municipalities   with   the   disestablishment   and
           establishment of ward committees;
         • facilitated  accredited  training  courses  for  Ward  Committee
           Members and CDWs;
         • assisted  in  the  creation  of  sound  relations  between  Ward
           Councillors, Ward Committees, CDWs and Traditional Leaders;
         • provided funding for voting  station infrastructure; and
         • supported municipalities in handling of petitions.

9.   Committee Observations and Opinion

9.1   The  Committee  has  observed  the   remarkable   progress   made   by
      municipalities  with  respect  to  filling  their  vacant  section  57
      Manager’s positions in the year under review. However, the  Department
      should  ensure  that  skilled  personnel  are   appointed   and   that
      performance agreements are signed and submitted to the  Department  on
      time.

9.2   The  opinion  is  held  by  the  Committee  that  the   provision   of
      infrastructure is crucial for  the  delivery  of  basic  services  and
      central to the  functional  responsibilities  of  municipalities.  The
      scale and pace  upon  which  infrastructure  is  provided  has  to  be
      sufficient in addressing the needs of communities within the  Province
      of the Eastern Cape.

9.3  The Committee is of the  opinion  that,  for  service  delivery  to  be
      effective and efficient in a municipality, there has to be a committed
      political and administrative leadership with sound administrative  and
      management  processes  in  place.  The  performance  of  Eastern  Cape
      Province municipalities in meeting their IDP milestones  and  becoming
      sustainable  institutions  depends  on  their  capacity  to  transform
      themselves and appropriately use the available resources.

10.  Recommendations

10.1  Having  deliberated  on  the  2007/08  Eastern  Cape   Municipalities’
      Performance Report, the Select Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance
      and Traditional Affairs recommends as follows:

      10.1.1   The  NCOP   should   endorse   the   2007/08   Eastern   Cape
           Municipalities’ Performance Report.


      10.1.2  In order to improve the quality of annual reports, the Eastern
           Cape Department of  Local  Government  and  Traditional  Affairs
           should developed a new reporting format for section  46  reports
           to be used by all municipalities as from the  2008/09  financial
           year.


      10.1.3   The  Eastern  Cape  Department  of   Local   Government   and
           Traditional Affairs should  provide  intensive  support  on  the
           municipalities which have serious  performance  challenges  with
           respect to specific key performance areas.


      10.1.4   The  Eastern  Cape  Department  of   Local   Government   and
           Traditional Affairs should assist municipalities in the Province
           to  improve  the  situation  with  respect  to  critical  skills
           shortages and the  filling  of  vacant  positions,  as  well  as
           ensuring that performance agreements are signed.


        5. The Eastern  Cape  MEC  for  Local  Government  and  Traditional
           Affairs should table quarterly progress reports to the  NCOP  in
           respect of municipal performance in the Province.

Report to be considered.

3.  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on   Co-operative   Governance   and
 Traditional Affairs on Consideration of the Termination  of  Interventions
 in Xhariep District Municipality and Mohokare Local Municipality  –  Dated
 14 September 2010

1.   Background and Overview

1.1   The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs, having considered the directive of the  National  Council  of
      Provinces (NCOP) to consider and report on the notice  of  termination
      of   interventions   in   Xhariep   District   and   Mohokare    Local
      Municipalities, as tabled by  the  Free  State  MEC  for  Co-operative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs, reports as follows:

1.2  On 06 June 2008, the Office of the Chairperson  of  NCOP  referred  the
      notice of termination of interventions in both municipalities  to  the
      Select Committee on Co-operative Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs
      for consideration and reporting in terms of NCOP Rule 101.

1.3  Based on the NCOP referral, the Committee  undertook  oversight  visits
      to Mohokare  Local  Municipality  and  Xhariep  District  Municipality
      between 10 and 12 October 2008. In the Committee reports tabled to the
      NCOP, it was recommended that after the completion of interventions in
      both  municipalities,  the  MEC   of   Co-operative   Governance   and
      Traditional Affairs should table a closure or  termination  report  to
      NCOP indicating the progress made in respect of interventions.

1.4  Since the Free State Provincial Executive Council  was  satisfied  that
      the Councils of both municipalities were ready  and  able  to  perform
      their executive  functions  and  obligations,  the  Committee  held  a
      briefing session on 20 April 2010 with the Free State Department of Co-
      operative Governance and Traditional Affairs. The main purpose of  the
      briefing  was  to  consider  the  progress  made  in  respect  of  the
      termination of interventions in both municipalities.

2.   Presentation on Interventions Progress in Mohokare  Local  Municipality
      and Xhariep District Municipality

2.1  On 20 April 2010, the Free  State  MEC  for  the  Department  of  Local
      Government and Housing briefed the Committee on the progress  made  in
      the Mohokare Local Municipality and Xhariep District Municipality.  In
      his political overview, the MEC reminded the Committee that on 14  and
      28 May 2008 the Free State Executive Council by Cabinet Minute  number
      and 8.5 and 8.6, approved the interventions in terms  of  section  139
      (1)(b) of the Constitution in Mohokare Local Municipality and  Xhariep
      District Municipality.

2.2  The MEC further informed the Committee that on 5 August 2009  the  Free
      State Executive Council resolved per Cabinet Minute 7.12 to  terminate
      the interventions in both municipalities  with  effect  from  30  June
      2009.   The  gist  of  the  progress  report   on   Xhariep   District
      Municipality focused on one of the 5-Year Local  Government  Strategic
      Agenda, which is financial viability and management. In Mohokare Local
      Municipality, the progress report focused on financial  viability  and
      management as well as local economic development.

     . 3. Xhariep District Municipality
     .
3.1  The major financial viability and management progress reported  to  the
      Committee included the following:

      3.1.1   Development of  revised  budget  for  2007/08  and  adjustment
           budget for 2008/09  and  budget  related  policies  as  well  as
           internal control manuals.
      3.1.2   Provision of general financial management and  the  conclusion
           of the compilation of Annual Financial Statements by the end  of
           September 2008.
      3.1.3   The review of financial information  for  populating  the  new
           financial system and addressing Auditor- General audit queries.
      3.1.4   The  addressing  of  all  matters  related  to  allegation  of
           unauthorised, irregular,  fruitless  and  wasteful  expenditure,
           possible fraud, corruption, nepotism and maladministration.
      3.1.5   A Municipal  Manager  was  also  appointed,  and  an  internal
           control manual that outline procedures  for  processing  payment
           was developed.


4.   Mohokare Local Municipality

4.1  The financial management and local economic development  highlights  of
      the  progress  made  in  Mohokare  Local  Municipality  included   the
      following:

      4.1.1   Completion of the  reservoir  and  water  network  project  at
      Smithfield.
      4.1.2   The  Smithfield  Road  Construction  Projects  was  officially
      launched.
      4.1.3   A site for the new library in Smithfield was identified.
      4.1.4   Installation of new water pump at Caledon River and donated by
Sasol.
      4.1.5   Funds have been solicitated and the service provider appointed
           for compiling the Implementation Readiness Study for bulk  water
           supply in Mohokare.
      4.1.6   Efficient construction of housing projects was facilitated.
      4.1.7   Facilitation of promulgation of by-laws on keeping of  animals
           and policy on selling of sites.
      4.1.8    Reviewal  of  supply  chain   management   policy   and   the
           introduction of the system of  weekly  programmes,  reports  and
           weekly senior management meetings.
      4.1.9    Public  participation  and   engagements   was   periodically
           undertaken.


5.   Committee Observations and Opinion

5.1  The Committee has observed that, although progress has  been  reported,
      the newly appointed Municipal Managers will serve to ensure continuity
      in both municipalities, in order to deal with  all  municipal  matters
      after the termination of the interventions.

5.2   The  Committee  is  of  the  opinion  that,  for  the  termination  of
      intervention in both municipalities to  be  efficient  and  effective,
      there has to be a committed political  and  administrative  leadership
      with sound administrative and management processes in place.

5.3  Furthermore, national and provincial  government  should  exercise  the
      power given to them in terms of Sections  154(1)  and  155(7)  of  the
      Constitution, to regulate  and  support  the  executive  authority  of
      municipalities to ensure that municipalities perform  their  functions
      effectively.

6.   Recommendation

6.1   The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs,  having   considered   the   request   for   termination   of
      interventions in Xhariep  District  Municipality  and  Mohokare  Local
      Municipality, recommends that the NCOP  approves  the  termination  of
      intervention in both municipalities.

Report to be considered.


