---
title: 'National Assembly - 24 August 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-08-24
---

Tuesday, 24 August 2010
                                    ____

                      ProceedingS of national assembly
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                    Recognition of delegation from Japan


The SPEAKER: Hon members, I wish to recognise the presence in the gallery
of a delegation from Japan consisting of Ms T Matsumoto, MP, the
Chairperson of the Rules and Administration committee and the delegation of
the National Diet of Japan. The delegation is accompanied by His Excellency
Mr T Ozawa, Ambassador of Japan to the Republic of South Africa.
[Applause.] Your Excellencies, we extend a warm welcome to you.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION
Mrs S V KALYAN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates South Africa’s negotiating position on climate
  change in preparation for the Conference of the Parties in Cancun,
  Mexico, in December 2010.

Mr G R MORGAN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House –


     1) debates the killing of wildlife by poachers both in government
        protected areas and on private land; and


     2) comes up with solutions as to how to significantly reduce this
        poaching.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Speaker, ek gee kennis dat ek by die volgende sitting
van die Huis namens die DA sal voorstel:

  Dat die Huis ’n debat voer oor Eskom se vermoë om ’n spesiale lae
   elektrisiteitstarief vir boere te beding tot voordeel van volhoubare
   landbouproduksie in Suid-Afrika.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates Eskom’s capacity to negotiate a reduced
  electricity tariff for farmers specifically to achieve sustainable
  agricultural production in South Africa.]

Mr N SINGH: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

  That the House –


     1) debates the arrival of the first Indian indentured labourers to
        South Africa 150 years ago on 16 November 1860; and


     2) acknowledges their contribution to the country and the role
        government would play in marking this milestone.

Mr B A RADEBE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

  That the House debates the measures that were undertaken to support and
  grow effective small business entrepreneurship as a means to address
  unemployment.

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates the reasons for the suspension of certain rail
  services throughout the country and what solutions can be identified to
  solve this.

Ms N A MNISI: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

  That the House debates reversing the legacy of apartheid spatial planning
   through enhanced integrated transport and human settlement systems.

Mr Z S MAKHUBELE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

  That the House debates how to gear Adult Basic Education and Training so
  as to ensure that it responds better to the skills demand.

Ms M C DUBE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

  That the House debates mechanisms to prevent police killings.

Mr M JOHNSON: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

  That the House debates about finding ways to stabilise food prices in
  order to protect food security and combat hunger.

 CONGRATULATIONS TO MR LAWRENCE DE JAGER FOR SAVING SEVEN CHILDREN FROM FIRE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –

     1) congratulates Mr Lawrence de Jager for his act of bravery in
        successfully saving seven young children from burning in the fire
        that engulfed a house in Steeledale, south of Johannesburg, on
        Wednesday, 18 August 2010;


     2) notes that Mr De Jager battled the flames in order to save the
        young children using only a handheld fire-extinguisher and a garden
        hosepipe; and

     3) praises Mr De Jager for his selfless, heroic conduct and his sense
        of value of human life.

Agreed to.

    MEMBERS OF PUBLIC ASSISTING AT PUBLIC HOSPITALS DURING PUBLIC SERVICE
                                SECTOR STRIKE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


   (1)      notes that over the course of the past week thousands of South
        Africans have turned out at hospitals in Gauteng to assist in
        caring for patients who have been left unattended during the Public
        Service sector strike which commenced last week;


   (2)      acknowledges that without this volunteer assistance the
        hospitals would have been forced to close down, with potentially
        catastrophic results for the 90 babies who had been abandoned by
        nurses at hospitals throughout the province;


   (3)      recognises that throughout the country members of the public
        have heeded the call for assistance in the health care sector and
        have turned out at these institutions in vast numbers to help care
        for the sick and perform essential tasks, including washing bed
        linen and cleaning these institutions; and


   (4)      expresses its gratitude to all members of the public for the
        selfless and essential contribution they have made to these
        institutions and to their country.


Agreed to.

     Welcoming of legal aid Advice Line focusing on civil rights matters

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) welcomes the Legal Aid Advice Line initiative of establishing a
        call centre that will focus on civil rights matters;


     2) notes that the aim of the legal Aid Advice Line is to assist poor
        South Africans with immediate legal advice, and that people earning
        less than R5 000 a month are eligible for assistance;

   (3)      further notes that the Legal Aid Advice Line will not only give
        legal advice to clients but, on certain occasions, will link
        clients to lawyers who will take up their cases; and

   (4)      congratulates Legal Aid for availing legal services to poor
        communities as this initiative will hasten the process of the
        realisation of equality before the law.

Agreed to.

           SENTENCING OF KENYAN FOR ATTEMPTING TO SELL ALBINO MAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

  That the House –


    1) welcomes the sentencing of a Kenyan man, Nathan Mutei, to 17 years
       in jail for trying to sell an albino man to witch doctors in
       Tanzania on Thursday, 19 August 2010;


  (2) notes the unwarranted and gruesome killing of 53 albinos since 2007,
       their body parts having been sold for witchcraft purposes;


  (3) condemns the stereotypes regarding albinos’ body parts as good
       medicine; and


  (4) calls on the government of Tanzania to be harsher on people guilty of
       this practice so that the punishment they receive should act as a
       deterrent to others who are engaged in this barbaric act.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, we have a problem. We did indicate to the ANC
that we were unhappy with the motion because we believe that it needs to be
broadened to the extent that it includes all body parts, not just those of
albinos, but of people in general. This is very limiting in structure, and
we would prefer to see that the whole motion is put again at a later stage,
indicating clearly the point that we have raised. We have put this to the
ANC already.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, apparently there was a discussion on it.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, we are not aware of that
objection, but we are prepared to take a fresh look at that.

                      CITY OF CAPE TOWN CEMETERY BYLAWS
                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N P KHUNOU (ANC): Speaker, the DA-led City Of Cape Town’s proposed
bylaws restricting certain cultural practices in the city’s cemeteries
should be condemned in the strongest terms.

If enacted, the bylaws will, amongst other things, result in family members
of a deceased person being barred from attending the burial of their loved
ones, as only a small number of people will be allowed to enter the
cemetery at any given time.

Furthermore, only vehicles which meet the ridiculous standards set by the
city will be allowed to transport corpses. This is not only a violation of
people’s rights to exercise their cultural beliefs; it deprives them of
their right to bury their loved ones with dignity. One does not have to be
a legal expert to realise that these racist bylaws are aimed at nothing
more than punishing those groups residing in the city who have persistently
rejected the politics of the DA.

The bylaws, which were clearly inspired by apartheid’s segregation laws,
where only the interest and traditions of a particular racial group were
elevated, whilst those of other groups were brutally suppressed, should not
be allowed to see the light of day in any part of the country, including in
those few areas controlled by the DA. The ANC, as it has done with other
similar racist laws in the past, will use every available platform to
challenge the DA’s racist laws.

Furthermore, we call upon residents of the City of Cape Town to stand up
and defend their hard-won freedom. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order!

Ms N P KHUNOU: They should refuse to be used as guinea pigs in the DA’s
experimentation with racist ideas. [Applause.]

       HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS WORKING DURING PUBLIC SERVICE STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Speaker, the DA wishes to thank all those
workers, especially those performing essential services, who have, despite
their grievances and the intimidation by other workers, stayed at their
posts during the current strike. The DA calls on those departments under
whom essential workers fall to take appropriate action against those who
have not only contravened the law by continuing to strike, but who have
also placed the lives and welfare of South Africans at risk as a result.

The right to strike is one of the most essential rights in our labour
legislation and is fully supported by the DA. Equally important is the
right of those people who wish to work to do so if they so choose without
fear of intimidation from unions or their members.

The current strike chaos points to a dual failure by the ANC government,
firstly in its mismanagement of Public Sector labour relations, and
secondly in its poor contingency planning for a strike that has been
looming for a considerable period of time. It is essential that this
administration proactively seeks solutions to the problems caused by the
strike and ensures that the necessary actions are taken against those who
have continued to strike illegally, intimidating other workers and/or
damaging state property. Thank you. [Applause.]

                BREACH OF SECURITY AT NELSON MANDELA’S HOUSE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M S SHILOWA (Cope): Speaker, the revelation by Cosatu General Secretary
Zwelinzima Vavi that the Houghton home of former President Nelson Mandela
was bugged comes as devastating news. The fact that this was done by
whomsoever, in spite of Mr Mandela receiving VIP protection, indicates the
brashness and brazenness within certain structures of the state.

For us as ordinary South Africans, the question arises: if former President
Mandela’s house can be bugged, who else is also being illegally bugged and
how extensively and routinely is this being done? That this is
unconstitutional and an unwarranted encroachment on the privacy of
individuals must set the alarm bells ringing. What other revelations are in
store for us on this intrusion into privacy?

Under the envisaged Protection of Information Bill, such information would
be classified and the shenanigans of state agencies would be concealed from
public view. Our constitutional rights would therefore be rendered
meaningless. It is obvious that any state that uses illegal measures to
perpetrate a crime would classify the information as being sensitive or
state information, and therefore the routine violation of the Constitution
will go unchallenged.

While the government is arguing that it wants to protect state information
in a way that should not infringe unduly on personal rights and liberties,
everyone knows that in its operation the very opposite may prevail. Trying
to get access to information under the Promotion of Access to Information
Act is hard enough; with the new measures even greater secrecy will
prevail.

We call on the government to come clean on this matter and take the country
into its confidence as to why Madiba’s residence was bugged, who actually
bugged it, who gave permission and for what end. Thank you. [Applause.]

  ELECTION OF MMAMOLOKO KUBAYI AS DEPUTY SECRETARY OF THE ANC YOUTH LEAGUE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S T NDABENI (ANC): The ANC congratulates Mmamoloko Kubayi, a Member of
Parliament, on being elected as a deputy secretary of the ANC Youth League
at the Gauteng Provincial Conference which was held over the past weekend
of 15 August. [Applause.]

This is a show of confidence, trust and commitment to the cause of the
struggle, led by the ANC, which has led the people of Gauteng to elect this
comrade to serve on the ANC Youth League’s provincial structures. As the
ANC, we believe that with her experience of service to the struggle for the
attainment of a nonracial, nonsexist, democratic and prosperous society,
this comrade will discharge her responsibilities to her newly elected
position with humility, courage and dedication. [Applause.]

   CALL TO DECLARE TEACHING AN ESSENTIAL SERVICE IN RESPONSE TO TEACHERS’
                                   STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI (IFP): Speaker, the IFP supports the right of workers
to strike as it is an essential part of any democracy. In fact, it was us
in the IFP who organised and established the first veritable black union to
protect workers’ rights during apartheid. [Interjections.]

We did it simply because we have always empathised with the plight of our
workers and their families. We all know that there are good teachers living
on paltry salaries. We know there are dedicated nurses with families,
struggling to make ends meet while caring for our families every day. Every
man and woman of conscience must draw a line where they will stop to have
their own needs met. It seems that for many in this particular strike,
there is no such line, or it extends far beyond the bounds of what is
rational, moral and humane.

The IFP is extremely concerned about this strike and the long-term effects
it will have on the future of our children. Across our country, as I stand
here, many pupils have not been to school in weeks. Our school children are
particularly vulnerable at this time for two reasons: firstly, the upcoming
matric examinations are around the corner and, secondly, with the unusual
long holiday of five weeks to accommodate the World Cup, virtually all
teaching has come to a standstill.

This spelt disaster for all upcoming school examinations. Therefore, the
IFP urgently calls on government to declare teaching an essential service
without any further delay. As South Africans, we want to hold this
government and the President accountable for his commitment to making
education one of the central priorities of this government. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                 CRACKDOWN ON SUSPICIOUS HOUSING CONTRACTORS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J M MATSHOBA (ANC): The ANC-led government is committed to accelerate
the delivery of housing within the context of sustainable human
settlements, to provide housing within human settlements, to provide
quality housing that will turn houses into assets, to create a single,
efficient, formal housing market, and to abolish apartheid spatial
planning, thereby restructuring and integrating human settlements.

Therefore, we welcome the Department of Human Settlements’ crackdown on
dodgy housing contractors. The department has drawn up a shortlist of 20
problematic housing projects, with a total value of R2 billion, which are
currently under investigation. The probes are being conducted by the
National Audit Task Team, appointed by Human Settlements Minister Tokyo
Sexwale in November 2009, and headed by the Special Investigating Unit,
SIU. The SIU’s mandate to investigate corruption in the housing delivery
process was recently extended by President Jacob Zuma, enabling Minister
Sexwale’s task team to continue with its work.

The SIU visited all nine provinces to get an understanding of processes and
to obtain a high-level overview of all projects on the Department of Human
Settlements’ database. Initially, the top ten dodgy contractors in each
province were identified. Further investigation narrowed these down to a
national list of 20, with a total value of R2 billion.

The SIU has been asked to investigate a number of complaints which have
been raised about the National Home Builders’ Registration Council, which
provides a quality-control function to housing contractors. We urge all
departments to follow suit and root out corruption. [Applause.]

    POOR WORKING CONDITIONS IN GAME LODGES BORDERING KRUGER NATIONAL PARK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N T GODI (APC): Mr Speaker, the APC has been receiving a stream of
complaints from workers employed in game lodges, particularly those
bordering the Kruger National Park in Mpumalanga. Game lodges are an
important part of the hospitality industry which serves an increasing
number of people, both South African and tourists. The APC is concerned
that employment conditions and practices pertaining to the African workers
are far from ideal. Workers complain of pre-1994 attitudes and treatment by
the employers, blatant discrimination, paternalistic attitudes, low wages,
unpaid overtime, unfair dismissal and racist promotion practices.

The APC would like to call on the Department of Labour to send inspectors
to these lodges to ascertain their levels of compliance with relevant
legislation. The APC condemns all racist practices and calls on the
hospitality industry, especially game lodges, to desist from treating their
employees like serfs. The APC has every intention of helping to expose
those game lodges that ill-treat our people. We intend to help mobilise
these workers so that they can realise the full benefits and protection of
our country’s laws. The APC believes there should be no let-up in the fight
against exploitation and starvation wages. I thank you.

                 HUMAN TRAFFICKING INTO AND IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs C N Z ZIKALALA (IFP): Speaker, whilst the IFP welcomes the recent
statement by the Deputy Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development,
Mr Andries Nel, that South Africa will soon introduce legislation to fight
human trafficking, the IFP believes that soon is not soon enough. We have
heard countless harrowing stories of women and children who are brought to
South Africa, then sold and transported across the country just to be
treated like slaves and forced into prostitution. The few women who are
lucky to have escaped have told horrific stories about being locked in
their rooms, beaten and, in some instances, having had their identity
documents taken from them.

Furthermore, they were forced to take drugs, all their earnings were taken
from them, and they were given little to eat other than rice. It is clear
that within our borders, human trafficking has become a thriving business
for some of the most ruthless criminals who abuse women and deny them their
basic human rights.

During this Women’s Month, let us recommit ourselves as Members of
Parliament to women’s rights and to ending the suffering of abused women
and children. The IFP believes that the legislation before the
parliamentary portfolio committee that deals specifically with this issue
must be expedited. Our women and children depend on us for their
protection. I thank you.

        ONLINE VERIFICATION SYSTEM TO COMBAT IDENTITY DOCUMENT FRAUD

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs T M A GASEBONWE (ANC): Speaker, the ANC welcomes the announcement by
the Department of Home Affairs that they are working on rolling out an
online identity document verification system that is expected to cut down
on identity document, ID, fraud in the country. The project will give the
South African Social Security Agency, banks, insurers, and retailers, among
others, real-time access to the Home Affairs National Identification
System, Hanis, in order to verify the identities of current and prospective
clients.

Hanis stores South African citizens’ ID numbers, fingerprints and photos.
Accessing Hanis will enable these sectors to conduct on-the-spot
verification of the fingerprints of clients against the information stored
in Hanis. This new system will be up and running before the end of 2010 and
will make it difficult for people who are in possession of fraudulent IDs
to use them. The department signed a memorandum of understanding with the
SA Banking Risk Information Centre in March. This comes in the light of
escalating ID fraud.

The ANC-led government is committed to streamlining the administration of
Home Affairs to ensure that our people can safely use their IDs to access
social services. Thank you.

 PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION’S REPORT ON MR MOSANA,CEO OF EAST LONDON HOSPITAL
                                   COMPLEX

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M WATERS (DA): Speaker, two and half years after my initial request and
after an application in terms of the Promotion of Access to Information
Act, I have finally received a report from the Public Service Commission
about an investigation into the chief executive officer of the East London
Hospital Complex, Mr Mosana.

All the most relevant parts of the report had been blacked out. This is a
tactic reminiscent of the apartheid era. The censored sections of those
most relevant to the DA’s complaint relates to the actual qualifications of
Mr Mosana as well as the other 11 shortlisted candidates. The apartheid-
style censorship makes it impossible for the public to compare the
qualifications of the candidates to that of the job advertised.

The chief executive officer’s position requires, amongst other things, a
recognised postgraduate qualification in financial management or in the
economics field. To our knowledge, Mr Mosana, at the time of his
appointment, was in possession of a Master’s degree in Politics and only
had experience as an ANC councillor in the Buffalo City Council, hardly fit
for the purpose.

South Africa is currently in the grip of a sustained assault on the
constitutional principles of freedom of expression and transparency, most
notably in the form of the Protection of Information Bill. This saga
demonstrates that both these principles had been under threat for some time
preceding the Bill’s formation.
All this Bill has done is to give a formal shape to the ANC’s long-standing
aversion to oversight and accountability. I thank you.

           VIOLENT INCIDENTS DURING PUBLIC SERVICE WORKERS’ STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D A KGANARE (Cope): Speaker, the Public Service strike has now dragged
on for seven days. Poor people in need of urgent and critical care are in
distress. Government and the unions involved ought to have negotiated an
agreement on the minimum service levels upfront. That they did not do so
reflects the failure of leadership from both within government and the
unions.

While Cope reiterates the absolute right of workers to withhold their
labour peacefully, we unequivocally condemn all incidences of violence,
thuggery and destruction of property. This is totally unwarranted and is a
transgression of the law.

During the struggle for freedom, there were many strikes and stay-aways.
During this time, it was always made clear that nurses and doctors would
not be interfered with. What is happening now is completely unacceptable.
The longer the present strike continues, the more it will degenerate into
violence. Therefore, it is imperative for the government and the unions to
speedily resolve the impasse.
It is also a matter of fundamental importance that government negotiate
with the unions in utmost good faith. The accusation that government is
misleading the public is startling to say the least. The Public Service
Association is arguing that employees who qualify for progression
increments are entitled to receive it, regardless of any increase across
the board. They do not see this as an addition to the pay offer.

Cope lays the full blame of the present strike at the door of President
Zuma, Minister Baloyi and Mr Vavi. During the 2007 public sector strike,
they suggested that the fiscus had adequate funds to meet increases and
that they do not understand why government was not paying the increases
demanded by workers. Now workers are expecting delivery on these promises.
They sowed the wind and now they are reaping the whirlwind. Unfortunately,
the arrogant and unfortunate statements made by Minister Baloyi are not
contributing to the resolution of the problem.

As we wait for leaders to lead, we are deeply indebted to the volunteers
... [Time expired.]

                  RAPE AND MURDER OF WOMEN AND YOUNG GIRLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Nksk B N DLULANE (ANC): Somlomo, singumbutho we-ANC sivakalisa uvelwano
sikwakhwankqisiwe zizihelegu zokubulawa koomama ngale nyanga yethu
singamanina. Kwiveki ephelileyo umakoti ophantsi koMasipala waseNyandeni,
kummandla we-O R Tambo, udlwengulwe waxatyelwa ngesinkempe ebeyokutheza
ngaso, kwaye uyangcwatywa kulo Mgqibelo.

Akubanga ntsuku zingaphi, umakhulu oneminyaka engama-85 uxatyelwe wabulawa
ngesinkempe kunye nabazulukwana bakhe  abane, abaneminyaka eli-17, 10, 9
kunye noneminyaka emi-5, ngokulandelelana kwabo. Singoomama asinakho
ukunyamezela ukuthi gqolo kwezihange zibulala ngonyhamnyeko oomama
nabantwana. Sithi huntshu kwabakwantsasana ngokunqakula le migegemba
etyholwa ngezi zenzo zaseNgqeleni. Mabenze kanjalo naphaya kumakoti
waseLibode eNyandeni; bazingelwe de babanjwe. Abantu mabasebenzisane
nomthetho.

Kwizizalwane sithi: “Masilaleni ngenxeba”. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
isiXhosa member’s statement follows.)

[Mrs B N DLULANE (ANC): Chairperson, as the ANC we are shocked by such
cruel conduct as the killing of women during the month we are celebrating
women. Last week, a newly-wed woman in Nyandeni Municipality, under the O R
Tambo District Municipality, was raped and brutally murdered with her axe,
which she was going to use to chop wood; she will be buried this Saturday.

A few days after that incident, an 85-year-old woman and her four
grandchildren, aged 17, 10, 9 and 5 were murdered with an axe. As women we
cannot tolerate the inhumane slaughtering of women and children by
criminals. We congratulate the policemen for their work that led to the
arrest of those criminals who are also suspects in the Ngqeleni murder
case. They must do likewise even to those who murdered the Nyandeni newly-
wed woman; they must be hunted until they are arrested. People must co-
operate with the law.

We express our sincere condolences to the relatives. [Applause.]]

               MORATORIUM ON RECRUITMENT OF POLICE RESERVISTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): Speaker, on Thursday 10 December 2009, the
Minister of Police released a media statement informing people that the
moratorium on the recruitment of reservists had been lifted. He responded
to a DA parliamentary question, saying that the lifting of this moratorium
would allow people who wished to volunteer their services to assist the
police in the fight against crime to do so, as long as they met certain
criteria laid down by the department.

However, it seems as if the Minister’s decision has been overruled by his
very own Secretariat. Minister, wherever you are, are you aware that a
meeting was held in Pretoria, on 23 February this year, between the Head of
the Civilian Secretariat of Police Ms Jenni
Irish-Qhobosheane and Brigadier Kennedy? They decided that, despite the
answer given in Parliament and the subsequent media statement by the
Minister, a decision has been taken by visible policing and personnel that
recruiting and even reinstatement of ex-members will remain on hold.

So, Minister, who do we believe? Should we believe your answer to a
parliamentary question and your media statement or the Secretariat who
decided that there will be no lifting of the moratorium until such time as
determined by the head of that body? Which is this House to believe? Are
they supposed to believe that you have answered the question in that manner
while well aware of the fact that the moratorium had not been lifted at
all, or that you were unaware that these entities felt that they had the
right to overrule your decision?

The DA would like this matter to be cleared up once and for all. Do you or
do you not stand by your statement of 10 December that the moratorium has
been lifted? If you do, why does the Secretariat feel it has the right to
reverse your decision? If not, could you explain to this House why it is
that your answer had been reversed without your knowledge? [Applause.]

                           WOMEN IN SCIENCE AWARDS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M L DUNJWA (ANC): The Minister of Science and Technology, Naledi Pandor,
acknowledged the country’s leading female scientists through the Annual
Women in Science Awards on 13 August 2010. The 2010 Annual Women in Science
Awards are part of the department’s effort to increase the number of women
as female scientists and researchers in the country.

The awards have also been created to increase women’s access to research
professions and to profile successful scientists and researchers as role
models for young women and girls. The ANC supports this initiative and
encourages the enrolment of girl-children in schools, especially the
recruitment of women from poor backgrounds into science.

On its part, the ANC government will continue to improve the quality of
schooling, particularly in maths, science and technology, and language
development. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: The ID did not make use of its opportunity to make a
statement. Does any member of the ANC wish to take up that slot?

                           STATE VISIT TO LESOTHO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms K R MAGAU (ANC): President Jacob Zuma has recently concluded a state
visit to Lesotho by signing several agreements with the landlocked country.
During his two-day visit, an agreement on grants from the African
Renaissance Fund for the implementation of the advanced infrastructure
component of the Metolong Dam and the water supply programme was signed.

Other agreements included a memorandum of understanding on economic co-
operation, a memorandum of understanding concerning co-operation in the
legal field and a declaration of intent on phase two of the Lesotho
Highlands Water Project.

Furthermore, the Prime Minister in a joint communiqué assured President
Zuma of Lesotho’s unwavering support for South Africa’s candidature for the
nonpermanent seat in the United Nations’ Security Council for the 2011-12
term. He also congratulated South Africa for hosting a successful Fifa
World Cup. I thank you. [Applause.]

       HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS WORKING DURING PUBLIC SERVICE STRIKE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HEALTH: Speaker and hon members of the House, I wish to
respond on the issue of government not having contingency plans for the
strike. Obviously, when an event like this takes place, we start pointing
fingers, and the truth might also be lost and replaced by fiction.

I want to clarify a few factors. Firstly, the doctors, being represented by
the South African Medical Association, never took a decision to go on
strike. They are still not on strike. There is no doctor in the Republic of
South Africa who is on strike in any of our hospitals. That is the truth.
All doctors are at work.

Secondly, this was a legal strike, protected by the labour laws under the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, which members are aware of.
Thirdly, as far as nurses are concerned, no nursing union informed us
formally that they were going on strike. Indeed, while lots of nurses are
staying away, they informed us that they were dragged out. We saw some of
them being openly dragged out of their workplaces.

Therefore, for this reason, we did put contingency plans in place. We did
foresee that there was going to be a strike. Let me confess, what we did
not foresee was the sheer brutality and the inhumanity that has been
displayed. I agree, I would never have planned or thought that at any day
in our lives as South Africans I would see people going into theatres and
dragging out people when somebody is undergoing an operation. I never
planned for that, because I never dreamed about it.

Strikes and uprisings existed before in this country from time immemorial.
We were all there during the Soweto Uprisings. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

           VIOLENT INCIDENTS DURING PUBLIC SERVICE WORKERS’ STRIKE
                                     AND
    POOR WORKING CONDITIONS IN GAME LODGES BORDERING KRUGER NATIONAL PARK

                            (Minister’s Response)

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Somlomo, ukusukela kwintetho kaMphathiswa
wezeMpilo, eyona nto emayicace mhlophe kukuba ubundlobongela, ukoyikisa
nokuqweqwediswa kwabantu akuvumelekanga. Abo benza oko bonyelisa idabi
labasebenzi. Siyabacela ukuba bazikhwebule kule mikhwa nakule mikhuba.
Iinkokeli zabasebenzi mazazi ukuba ingxubakaxaka efana nale isonjululwa
kuphela  eqongeni lothethathethwano. Ukukhwaza nokwenza amanyala
namanyundululu akuzuyisombulula ingxaki abajongene nayo abasebenzi.

Kananjalo, ukuthwaxa nokuthuka uMongameli uZuma akusayi kuyisombulula le
ngxaki. Nabo ke balapha kule Ndlu yasePalamente abathi,“Zuma, Zuma”
amaxesha ngamaxesha abancedi nganto. Umntwana wabantu kufanel’ uba
uyaziluma nalapho akhoyo ngalo mzuzu.

Ndiyavumelana nawe mntwana kaGodi ukuba abahloli mabaye kwezi ndawo
zingcungcuthekisa abasebenzi. Ndicela ke ungemki apha ungandinikanga
amagama ezi ndawo zishishina ngokuqeshisa ngendawo yokulala nokuchitha
ikhefu ukwenzela ukuba sizigqogqe, ngoba bonke abaqeshi abangcungcuthekisa
abasebenzi bamele ukuba nabo bangonwabi. Ayilolizwe nje elithengisa
iibhanana eli, lilizwe labantu. Lilizwe lethu eli kwaye siyalithanda.
Asinandawo iyenye esiza kuya kuyo; siphelele apha eMzantsi Afrika.
[Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa Minister’s response follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Chairperson, referring to the speech by the
Minister of Health, the only thing that must be made clear is that crime,
the terrorising and hijacking of people, is not acceptable. Those who are
doing that are demeaning the workers’ struggle. We ask them to abstain from
that behaviour. Shop stewards must know that problems like these are only
solved through negotiations. To make a noise and do horrifying things is
not going to solve the problem which the workers are faced with.

Therefore, to badmouth President Zuma and to swear at him will not solve
the problem. And those who are here in this august House who are calling
out, “Zuma, Zuma” all the time are of no help. I think the President is not
happy where he is at this present moment.

I agree with you, Mr Godi, that inspectors must visit those places where
workers are being ill-treated. I ask you not to leave before giving me a
list of the bed and breakfast places and hotels so that we can investigate
them, because all employers who are ill-treating their employees must also
be prosecuted. This is our country and not a banana republic. This country
belongs to the people. This is our country and we love it. We have nowhere
else to go; South Africa is all that we have. [Applause.]]


                        TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL


                               (Introduction)

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Mr Speaker, fellow Cabinet Ministers, Deputy
Ministers, and hon members, I have pleasure in presenting the Taxation Laws
Amendment Bill of 2010. This Bill represents the annual revisions to the
existing tax legislation. As required by the Constitution, two Bills are
required for tax legislation. The first Bill is the money Bill, which
contains changes to total tax liabilities as a result of changes to tax
rates and/or the tax bases. The second Bill covers other tax matters,
mainly relating to tax administration.

Let me ponder or reflect upon our current economic environment for a
moment. Taxation in the South African economy is crucial to our fiscal
sovereignty and our ability to fund government expenditure through tax
revenue. However, the recession over the last two years has resulted in a
massive drop in revenue last year of almost R68,9 billion, which was less
that what we had budgeted for. This resulted in the tax on gross domestic
product, GDP, ratio dropping from almost 27% to about 24,4%. It is still
going to take us another three to five years – let me repeat that it is
going to take us another three to five years to recover to the tax GDP
ratio of 28% that we had enjoyed in 2007-2008.

The GDP figures released today indicate a growth of 3,2%, and the leading
indicators released by the Reserve Bank also indicate, regrettably, an
uncertain economic climate ahead of us. However, let’s be positive and hope
that the prediction that our economy will still grow by 3% for the
remainder of this year, for the year as a whole, happens to be true.

The Bills give effect to the tax proposals announced in February when we
presented the 2010 Budget. After an intensive consultation process,
including taking public comments on an initial draft set of Bills as well
as hearings in Parliament, many of the initial proposals have been amended,
and we have responded to the submissions that have been made to us. This,
Mr Speaker, demonstrates the power of Parliament and of public
participation to amend money Bills such as these tax Bills. It is also a
process where we demonstrate the extent to which we listen to the concerns
of stakeholders and accommodate such concerns to the extent that they are
legitimate. Of course, if we took all of the concerns into account, we
wouldn’t have much tax to collect. Not too many people are listening, so
you can’t even respond to that. It wouldn’t be fair. But you are not
listening either.
Given the complexity of tax legislation, the National Treasury and Sars
also published a detailed explanatory memorandum to explain the Bill. This
assists greatly, as the Bills are largely amendments to existing Acts of
Parliament, which are fairly complex, such as the Income Tax Act, Value-
Added Tax Act and the Customs and Excise Act.

The proposed Bills provide personal income tax relief for individuals,
which you have already had in your pockets - and other South Africans have
had it as well - and closed various tax loopholes so as to ensure an
equitable tax system. Both tax Bills contain a mixture of limited tax
relief measures needed to overcome commercial blockages and anti-avoidance
measures needed to protect the tax base. You might be interested to know
that the closing of tax loopholes has now become an international concern
and something that we also will focus on much more seriously in South
Africa.

Severance packages paid by employers, and this is the first of the changes
that we have in this Bill, will receive the R300 000 exemption, and
preferential rates tables that currently are available for lump sum
retirement savings payments. These lump sum savings payouts will also be
available for severance packages. In other words, severance packages and
retirement savings payouts will be treated on the same basis. This is
fairly important given our current environment where almost a million
people have lost their jobs. This measure will assist those receiving
severance packages from employers. A number of other measures are intended
to provide relief for various forms of lump sum pension payouts so that
taxpayers can more readily access their full retirement savings after
retirement.

However, the tax system fortunately is not designed to comfort those who
seek to exploit loopholes, no matter how well- entrenched those loopholes
have become. In this vein, practices continue to exist that seek to provide
certain employees with salary packages containing undue tax advantages.
These undue tax advantages leave a select group of employees with a lower
tax burden than members of the general public who receive their salaries in
cash.

These Bills aim to provide a more equitable tax treatment for those
benefiting from employer-provided motor vehicles. While the current tax
rules correctly treat this free use of a motor vehicle as a taxable fringe
benefit, the proposed amendment increases the tax charge to reflect fully
the value of the economic benefit received by the employee.

The second major change refers to South Africa as a regional gateway to sub-
Saharan Africa. South Africa is an ideal location for multinationals to
base their regional operations for investments into sub-Saharan Africa.
South Africa offers world-class financial services, regulatory architecture
and infrastructure as well. We have a modern economy, wonderful weather and
other natural attractions that make South Africa a desirable location for
foreign expatriates seeking assignments on a long-term basis. Certain
domestic tax anomalies, the exchange control regime and fierce competition
from certain low-tax countries remain stumbling blocks to South Africa
taking full advantage of the opportunities that are available. To remedy
this situation, the proposed amendments remove various tax hurdles that a
multinational company would face if it bases its regional headquarters in
South Africa. We are also revising exchange controls to support such
initiatives.

Another important area of innovation relates to the growing use of Islamic
financing, which contains certain prohibitions in respect of finance. This
includes prohibitions against interest, immoral substances and lack of
transparency in respect of investment. The tax system’s lack of recognition
of Islamic finance is an issue, as it focuses mainly on traditional forms
of finance. The proposed amendments will level the playing field in respect
of certain Islamic financial products when undertaking savings and
investments and when attempting to access bank finance.

The third area refers to cross-border issues. To attract foreign investment
into our country, we exempt foreign investors based in South Africa from
tax on interest received or accrued from their operations outside of our
borders. It now appears that this particular exemption for cross-border
interest is far wider than the global practice. More specifically, the
current exemption covers nearly all forms of interest, except if the
foreign investor has substantial presence within South Africa. As a result,
billions of rands are flowing out of South Africa without any tax being
paid on them.

The proposed amendment will close this gap by narrowing the cross-border
interest exemption, mainly to mobile international capital, such as listed
government and corporate bonds, given the sensitivity of these global
bonds. Most other forms of cross-border interest payments will become
subject to a 10% withholding charge. Unfortunately, this amendment will be
delayed until 2013, because this shift in taxation of cross-border interest
will require the renegotiation of certain tax treaties and the
implementation of an administrative mechanism to allow for a withholding
regime.

The next area is the carbon dioxide emissions tax. I suggest that all of
you listen carefully to this, particularly when you are going to buy your
new car. The proposed carbon dioxide vehicle emissions tax forms part of
this year’s tax proposals, although it is not included in the Bills tabled
today. This tax will be imposed in terms of amended schedules and rules to
the Customs and Excise Act. As with other tax proposals, we have consulted
with relevant stakeholders, including the industry itself. After some
initial misunderstanding, I’ve met with the largest motor car industry
chief executive officers last week and confirmed that the carbon dioxide
vehicle emissions tax on passenger vehicles will proceed as scheduled on 1
September 2010. [Interjections.]
Mr M J ELLIS: What size car do you drive?

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: That you’ll know later, Mike. However, I have also
taken into account some concerns of the industry, and agreed that the tax
on double cabs will be delayed slightly, coming into effect on an agreed
date in a few months’ time. It is the intention that this tax will be
extended to all other light commercial vehicles at a later date. I should
add that we have a complete and comprehensive approach to the environmental
taxes. Work in this area began in 2003, including a paper on environmental
fiscal reform published in 2006, and the discussion paper on carbon taxes
that will be published shortly.

Though not implemented this year, we are considering the implementation of
a carbon dioxide vehicle emissions tax on all cars - new and old. This will
be implemented by reviewing our approach to vehicle license fees, which are
implemented by provinces. As we improve our public transport, we could also
impose higher fuel levies and demand better quality of fuel than we have in
South Africa at present. All in all, there is a place for all of these
mechanisms if we want to reduce the emission of green house gases and
ensure that we leave our children with a better legacy when it comes to air
quality and reducing the risks of climate change.

The next area is the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Royalty Act, which
came into effect for the first time on 1 March 2010. The South African
mineral and petroleum royalty system imposes a royalty charge on a gross
basis with the rate increasing or decreasing depending on company
profitability. This varying rate allows for South Africa, as a whole, to
enjoy relatively higher yields during the boom years while providing
partial relief during lean years.

Some key anomalies that were identified during the past few months have
been remedied. These include the introduction of roll-over relief, which is
intended for the many smaller mining operations that can roll the royalty
over to other parties. These are the parties who will refine and otherwise
upgrade the minerals. In addition, the minimum specified first saleable
condition for certain minerals has been adjusted. These revised minimum
conditions relate to iron, ore, coal, vanadium and sand aggregates.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Deputy Minister of Finance, who is
listening very carefully, Mr Nene, the National Treasury and Sars officials
for drafting the Bill, members of the public for their comments on the
Bills, and the Standing Committee on Finance under the leadership of Mr
Mufamadi for the sterling work that they have done in shaping the Bill as
we have it today.

Last but not least, Sars is extremely gratified with the response of
taxpayers in filing their tax returns for 2010. So, thanks to all of you as
well. To date, 1,3 million returns have been filed compared to only 950 000
returns for the same period last year. This is an increase of 32% year on
year. Ninety eight percent of the returns have come in electronically,
which means we deal with very little paper now. That is a huge advance for
South Africans. Both Tax Bills, Mr Speaker, strike a careful balance
between tax relief and the broadening of the tax base.

I hereby table the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill 2010 and the Voluntary
Disclosure Programme and Second Taxation Laws Amendment Bill, 2010 for the
Assembly’s consideration. Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: The Taxation Laws Amendment Bill will be referred to the
Standing Committee on Finance for consideration and report.

       CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL OF PROTOCOL AMENDING THE
    CONVENTION BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND
   THE GOVERNMENT OF IRELAND FOR THE AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION AND THE
      PREVENTION OF FISCAL EVASION WITH RESPECT TO TAXES ON INCOME AND
                        CAPITAL GAINS, WITH PROTOCOL

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL OF PROTOCOL AMENDING THE CONVENTION
   BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA AND THE KINGDOM OF SWEDEN FOR THE
   AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION AND THE PREVENTION OF FISCAL EVASION WITH
                         RESPECT TO TAXES ON INCOME

There was no debate.

Protocol amending the Convention between the Government of the Republic of
South Africa and the Government of Ireland for the avoidance of double
taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on
income and capital gains, with protocol approved.

Protocol amending the Convention between the Republic of South Africa and
the Kingdom of Sweden for the avoidance of double taxation and the
prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income approved.

The House adjourned at 14:59.
                                 __________


                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS


                           FRIDAY, 20 AUGUST 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills
      1) The Minister of Home Affairs


          a) Local Government: Municipal Electoral Amendment Bill [B 27 –
             2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory
             summary of Bill and prior notice of its introduction published
             in Government Gazette No 33478 of 20 August 2010.]


              Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Home
              Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
              Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
              Joint Rule 160.


              In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the
              classification of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within
              three parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report of the Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public
        Office Bearers for 1 January 2009 to 31 December 2009.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

  1. Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the  Protocol  Amending
     the Convention between the Republic of South Africa and The Government
     of Ireland, dated 04 August 2010

      The Standing Committee on Finance, having considered the  request  for
      approval by Parliament of the Protocol amending the convention between
      the Republic of South Africa and The Government  of  Ireland  for  the
      avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with
      respect  to  taxes  on  income  and  capital  gains,  with   protocol,
      recommends that the  House,  in  terms  of  section  231  (2)  of  the
      Constitution, approve the said Protocol.

      Report to be considered.

   2. Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the  Protocol  Amending
      the Convention between the Republic of South Africa and The Kingdom of
      Sweden, dated 04 August 2010.

      The Standing Committee on Finance, having considered the  request  for
      approval by Parliament of the Protocol amending the convention between
      the Republic of South  Africa  and  The  Kingdom  of  Sweden  for  the
      avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with
      respect to taxes on income, recommends that the  House,  in  terms  of
      section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve the said Protocol.

      Report to be considered.

   3. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Tourism  on  Tourism,  Sport  and
      Mega-Events Summit, dated 1 June 2010

The Portfolio Committee on Tourism, having been invited and participated  in
the  United  Nations  World  Tourism   Organisation   (UNWTO)/South   Africa
International Summit on Tourism,  Sport  and  Mega-Events  held  in  Sandton
Convention Centre,  Johannesburg,  from  24-26  February  2010,  reports  as
follows:

1. BACKGROUND TO THE SUMMIT

With a new year unfolding and economic recovery underway across  the  globe,
the UNWTO/South Africa International  Summit  on  Tourism,  Sport  and  Mega
Events, aimed to bring together leaders of  global  tourism  communities  to
explore the impact on Sport and Mega Events on tourism.
Conscious of the vital role of tourism in  supporting  resilience,  stimulus
and transformation to a green economy, the UNWTO introduced a  ’Roadmap  for
Recovery’  which  identifies  the  nexus  between  the  travel  and  tourism
sectors,  which  can  more  effectively  contribute  to  international   and
national actions in interconnected areas.

Globally, sport and mega-events play a  powerful  role  in  stimulating  the
tourism economy. The year 2010 will be no exception, seeing major sport  and
cultural events hosted around the world.  This  will  begin  with  the  2010
Winter Olympics in February in Canada, and mega-events will  occur  in  each
and every month of 2010 in different global locations, showcasing  sporting,
cultural and economic excellence and opportunity.

Moreover, it is increasingly apparent that these events will not  only  have
to respond to the  changing  global  sustainability  norms  and  development
imperatives, but can themselves be powerful  communicators  and  drivers  of
change.

The world’s leading experts, industry  leaders  and  tourism  ministers  who
attended the inaugural International Summit  on  Tourism,  Sport  and  Mega-
Events intensified the emphasis  on  the  global  need  for  tourism  sector
success to boost global economies.

DELEGATION: A multi-party delegation was led by the  Committee  Chairperson;
Mr D.M Gumede (ANC) included Ms X.C Makasi (ANC) and Mr G.R  Krumbock  (DA).
Support staff included: Mr J. Boltina (Committee Secretary and Ms  J.  Ntuli
Researcher).

The UNWTO/South Africa International Summit  on  Tourism,  Sport  and  Mega-
events was officially opened by the  President  of  the  Republic  of  South
Africa on Thursday, 25 February 2010.

1.1   Mr Jocob Zuma, President of the Republic of South Africa

The President welcomed participants to South Africa  in  what  he  called  a
“seminal year for the country and tourism sector in particular” as the  2010
hosts of the greatest soccer spectacle on earth, the  FIFA  World  Cup.  The
president stressed that, as global economic confidence is  slowly  built  up
again and spreads across the  globe,  the  time  has  come  for  nations  to
reconstruct, rebuild and reignite their economies  and  travel  and  tourism
sectors.

South Africa’s 2010  vision  was  to  build  more  than  stadia,  roads  and
airports, but  also  to  build  the  nation’s  legacy  as  champions.  South
Africans realised that  they  are  not  only  working  towards  30  days  of
football, but are in fact building the country.

The tourism industry is one of  the  fastest  growing  industries  in  South
Africa, and the sector holds huge potential for job creation,  and  as  both
driver and beneficiary of large-scale infrastructure  investment.  Tourism’s
contribution to the gross domestic product (GDP) will grow  meaningfully  in
the next five years. However, to unlock potential of tourism  as  a  sector,
South Africa will need to build on its existing successes, whilst  exploring
new frontiers for growth and development.

The importance of mega-events  to  the  South  African  nation  extends  far
beyond the events  alone,  in  that  they  offer  the  opportunity  to  work
together to strengthen the country’s tourism industry,  economy,  employment
capacity and skilled workforce, appeal to investors and  of  course,  global
image and identity.

These events aid the country in its pursuit of excellence, and its drive  to
become an ever stronger nation.

1.2   Mr Taleb Rifai, Secretary-General of the UNWTO

The contribution of  the  tourism  sector  is  its  ability  to  tackle  two
challenges facing the global community, namely supporting  the  recovery  of
the world economy, and the greening of tourism in order  to  pursue  a  more
balanced, sustainable and fair growth.

Noting that global challenges, such as the economic crisis,  climate  change
and poverty alleviation, require global  solutions,  the  Secretary  General
expressed his conviction that tourism can play a much  more  important  part
in addressing these  challenges,  as  outlined  in  the  UNWTO  Roadmap  for
Recovery and its  agenda  for  boosting  tourism’s  contribution  to  global
economic resilience, stimulus and transformation to the green economy.

The UNWTO would continue to remind the world that travel  and  tourism  mean
exports, infrastructure development, investment, but particularly  jobs.  In
this regard, the international community  must  do  everything  possible  to
galvanise  job  creation  within  the  tourism  sector.  Tourism   and   the
contribution of sports and mega-events enhances economic development,  which
have  benefits  such  as  the  national  image,  new  infrastructure,  urban
regeneration and development, a more responsive trained  skilled  workforce,
and tourism positioning.

One of the major challenges is to ensure  that  mega-events  have  a  legacy
strategy, and are  part  of  a  nation’s  long-term  development  plan.  The
important social and human ’legacies’  that  are  being  deliberately  built
into mega-events, which go beyond  economic  benefits  and  challenges,  are
becoming critical components  of  any  successful  bid,  including  regional
integration, community building and sustainability.

1.3   Mr Mathinus van Schalkwyk, Minister of Tourism

New opportunities were emerging in the arena of  sports  tourism  and  mega-
events, and such events are powerful vehicles for economic  growth  as  well
as the travel and tourism sector development.

Among the benefits, the Minister highlighted increased foreign arrivals  and
yield, stimulated investment and trade, accelerated  employment  and  skills
development, flattening of  the  seasonality  curve,  increased  destination
competitiveness, and building of the destination brand.

Despite all of the excitement attached to sports  tourism  and  mega-events,
these are certainly not risk-free, and successfully securing  and  executing
sports tourism and mega-events  does  not  guarantee  a  successful  impact.
Costs can outweigh the benefits,  and  these  costs  can  range  from  empty
stadia and displaced tourists, to angry  locals  questioning  the  rationale
behind investing in broadcasting centres  instead  of  education  or  health
care  facilities,  and  massive  debt  left  behind  after  the  crowds   of
spectators have returned home.

The Minister challenged  the  leaders  of  the  global  travel  and  tourism
community to create a framework for  sports  tourism  and  mega-events  that
will empower and encourage every nation, regardless of size, to  rigorously,
yet responsibly harness the opportunities presented by these events.

The Minister expressed the hope that delegates will leave the summit with  a
clear vision of how to attract and utilise such events to build tourism  and
travel sectors worldwide, and nurse the fragile global economy back to  full
strength.

2.    SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS

Mega-events are critically  positioned  in  marketing,  decision-making  and
strategy development of tourism destinations. The value of a  mega-event  id
determined by the success of the event in its own right, in  terms  of  what
the event does for the host country or city and whether  the  host  location
is left better off  after the event than before.
Looking back at  past  events,  it  is  clear  that  successful  events  and
strategies varied according to the set of circumstances that  influence  the
host’s  unique  development  goals.  It  becomes  evident  that  the   local
organising committee of a mega-event and its supporting network  are  indeed
challenged to realise a net benefit for the social,  economic,  natural  and
cultural dimensions of the host country.

The colloquium  on  mega-events  examined  the  dimensions  of  hosting  and
managing  mega-events.  Participants  benefited  from  the  experiences   of
international and South African organisers and researchers  who  have  lived
the conceptual and practical realities of mega-events.

This report thus outlines the main ideas, points and  issues  that  surfaced
during the proceedings and is structured according to each  session  of  the
programme that was followed. A detailed summary of  each  presentation  will
be presented and the key issues/concerns will be summarised at  the  end  of
each session as well as in the conclusions at the end  of  the  report.  The
report was compiled through a combination of abstracts, notes  taken  during
the colloquium, author presentations and recordings.

SESSION 1: IMPACT OF MEGA-EVENTS ON SUSTAINABLE TOURISM

2.1   Opening remarks by moderators

Ms Aneme Malan and Professor Daneel van  Lill  outlined  the  theme  of  the
colloquium by highlighting  the  fact  that  mega-events  require  long-term
planning in order to achieve the grand vision’ for  the  event  as  well  as
’grand picture’, that is, legacy and beyond.  They  also  acknowledged  that
mega-events of the calibre  of  the  FIFA  World  Cup,  present  substantial
opportunity cost to any nation, city or region wanting to host it. In  light
of this, Prof. van Lill proposed  the  key  question  which  the  colloquium
sought to answer:
What should a developing country like South Africa account for in the  mega-
events arena in making it more sustainable? This question set the  tone  for
a very enlightening colloquium.

2.2   Tourism, Sport and Mega-Events  Sustainability:  Contributing  to  the
Roadmap for Recovery

Presenters highlighted that mega-events can provide much needed benefits  to
local areas and especially  to  small  business  operations.  However,  they
don’t always necessarily deliver on  the  promises  that  are  made  in  the
initial bidding and planning phases. These mega sporting events such as  the
FIFA World Cup can essentially underpin tourism for a destination  in  three
very critical areas, namely sport, culture and business  tourism.  They  may
also create links internationally that could initiate future  opportunities.


Events of this nature have been around since 776 BC since the first  Olympic
Games and are traditionally seen to be the domain  of  developed  countries.
However, the role of developing nations has begun to emerge.  The  range  of
associated impacts, whether it be positive or negative needs to be  properly
managed so as to avoid the  ’spaceship’  analysis,  leaving  behind  ‘burnt’
ground. Mega-events are often criticised  for  low  level  employment,  high
levels of post-event debt, brand tarnishment, etc. Thus, it is  critical  to
plan for and manage these effects so as to yield the most positive  possible
outcome. It is important to note  that  the  impacts  associated  with  such
events are beyond merely economic as social and  environmental  impacts  are
very often overlooked.

In making these events a reality through the planning process, a  community-
based long term approach to planning should be used as there is  a  need  to
plan beyond the actual event. The mega-event should be seen as  a  milestone
and not an end goal in themselves. However, realistic goals  should  be  set
from the word go and it is important to ask the right contextual  questions,
such as: ‘Is it right for us?’, ‘Is the time right?’  and  ‘Are  we  setting
ourselves up for failure?’

There are various other considerations that host countries  need  to  ‘sleep
on’ in weighing the pros and cons prior to bidding  with  the  intention  of
winning. These include the costs  and  funding  of  the  event  itself,  the
potential to create expertise and build capacity (but  will  small  business
suffer in the process?), how the community will be engaged  in  the  process
in the long  term,  the  extent  of  technological  accessibility,  sourcing
sponsorship, the enormous cost of ensuring safety and security, the role  of
the media in portraying  the  intended/required  image,  sustainability  and
climate change implications, and the creation of a legacy which  often  gets
lost in the process. Evaluation  before,  during  and  after  the  event  is
critical to tracking developments towards a  legacy  that  can  sustain  the
associated benefits of Mega-events. A knowledge  portal  of  Mega-events  is
suggested as a key link to accessing lessons learned from other nations  and
should be administered by a mega organisation such as the UNWTO.

Many host destinations  are  simply  not  sufficiently  strategic  in  their
approaches  to  planning  such  an  event,  leaving   the   external   event
promoters/owners with significant leverage and influence. If host  countries
are to maximise the benefits, a shift away from  a  narrow  and  short  term
marketing vision to a more long term vision, is essential.

2.3   South Africa’s National Tourism: Imperatives to manage tourism  beyond
2010

Ms Gillian Saunders indicated that currently, the hype around the FIFA  2010
World Cup is centred around focusing on a strategy for post 2010. The  event
itself needs to form part of the ‘bigger picture’.  In  contextualising  the
event itself, there are  a  number  of  impacts  that  can  be  highlighted.
Foreign tourism will expect to receive an estimated 487 000 visitors to  the
event, equating to 5.2% more tourists in 2010 from a projected base of  10.7
million tourists. This volume would induce  an  estimated  R8.5  billion  in
foreign spending. It  is  important  to  note  however,  that  South  Africa
already receives on average 965 000 foreign visitors (of which 250  000  are
air arrivals) monthly. Judging from the existing base, it is  expected  that
South Africa would ideally be able to cope  with  the  surplus  volumes.  In
terms of domestic tourism, there is an expected 1  million  spectators  with
1.5 to 1.7 million tickets sold to locals (1.26 million  in  Germany,  2006)
and an estimated 115 000  domestic  tourists.  All  this  economic  activity
opens up opportunities for various tourism and related enterprises  such  as
the accommodation  sector,  airlines,  transport  hire,  travel  agents  and
booking services, retail, the hospitality sector, foreign  exchange,  and  a
variety of attractions, entertainment, and the industry suppliers.

Despite these significant changes and opportunities, the issue of a  tourism
legacy lingers and needs to be  addressed.  If  properly  planned,  such  an
event  could  leave  the  destination  better  known  and  understood   both
internationally and domestically.  The  opportunity  could  also  leave  the
destination with larger and better  transportation  fleets,  better  tourism
information provision, improved  destination  management,  improved  support
services and  supply  chains,  increased  accommodation  stock,  and  induce
national pride while creating a better service ethic. This  mega-event  also
presents a crucial marketing opportunity.

An expected 26 million cumulative TV viewers, 18 850 media  representatives,
and 350 000 to
480 000 visitors provide an enormous opportunity  for  exposure  to  profile
and reposition South Africa globally. This  is  not  excluding  the  various
news broadcasts, documentaries, and social networking which contain  content
regarding South Africa and/or the event before, during and  possibly  after.
On the National Brands Index for instance, South Africa (ranked 37 in  2008)
has more room to move up than its predecessor, Germany (ranked 1  in  2008).
Therefore, the exposure is critical. The exposure is also an opportunity  to
grow existing tourism sectors as well as attract new markets.

In managing tourism beyond 2010, the South African  National  Department  of
Tourism is currently revising its National Tourism  Strategy  that  aims  to
inspire and accelerate the  responsible  growth  of  tourism.  Some  of  the
strategy highlights includes a new set of  strategic  thrusts  such  as  the
development of new  markets  and  specific  attention  to  growing  business
tourism and events. A bold  action  plan  includes  the  revision  of  South
African Tourism’s mandate to include the development and attraction  of  new
markets. Support  for  future  events  is  evident  in  the  planning  of  a
potential  national  convention  and  events  bureau  responsible  for   the
development and  marketing  of  business  tourism  and  events  through  the
coordination and support of bids. An investigation  into  the  establishment
of a bidding fund  to  encourage  and  support  future  events  of  national
importance is also a planned bold move.

2.4   South Africa’s image  amongst  African  fans  and  factors  that  will
influence their participation during the 2010 FIFA World Cup:  The  Case  of
Cameroon

Mr Maloney Tichaawa and Professor Kamilla  presented  research  findings  in
the case of Cameroon. Most research being conducted on the FIFA  2010  World
Cup is focused around economic impacts and political economy,  with  limited
focus on social impacts and little to  no  research  on  African  fans.  The
event has been positioned as an ’African event’ but many African  fans  have
been excluded from research or the event itself. The  latter  is  due  to  a
variety of  reasons  such  as  limited  funds,  access  to  information  and
ticketing, as well as travel constraints. The objective of  this  study  was
to determine the profile of African fans, in particular  those  in  Cameroon
who intended to attend the event, and their  current  perceptions  of  South
Africa’s image as well as to  ascertain  the  factors  that  will  influence
Cameroonian fan participation at the event. The target  population  included
soccer  fans  (n=780)  and  other   football   stakeholders   in   Cameroon,
particularly in the study areas of Buea and Limbe (English speaking  areas).


In terms of the demographics of the sample population, the majority of  fans
were aged between 21-30 (52.1%) and 31-40 (23.6%), made  up  of  77.6%  male
fans. A large percentage (40.5%) of which, earn an  average  monthly  income
of less than R1000.00 monthly followed by  36.2%  earning  between  R1001.00
and R4000.00 monthly. Employment amongst the fans  was  relatively  positive
in the sense that 38.2% and 32.7% were engaged in full-time  employment  and
some self-employed, respectively. Of those fans (n=273) that indicated  that
they would attend the 2010 event, 80.6% were male, and were  on  average  31
years old in full-time or self-employment, and  earned  an  average  monthly
income of R3201.75. Only 4.53% of the respondents indicated  that  they  had
previously travelled to a FIFA World Cup tournament.

With five other African qualifying nations (excluding South Africa),  ticket
sales to these nations are alarmingly  low.  The  respondents  (n=320)  that
indicated that they would not attend the event did  so  because  they  would
not be able to afford to purchase tickets (35.3%),  travel  costs  would  be
too high (34.1%), were not interested in soccer (13.8%), or prefer to  watch
it on TV (11.6%). Xenophobia (2.2%) and crime (0.3%) featured  very  low  on
the factors influencing their non-attendance.

An overwhelming majority  (90%)  of  the  respondents  indicated  that  they
support South Africa as the host nation.  Respondents  also  indicated  that
they perceived  South  Africa  to  be  a  country  with  excellent  stadiums
(33.26%), being the most developed country on the continent (20.8%),  having
a high rate of HIV/AIDS (16.9%), being a driver of the  African  Renaissance
(11.81%), and having an underperforming national soccer  team  (8.9%).  Once
again,  xenophobia  and  crime  featured  very  low   at   1.3%   and   3.6%
respectively.
Almost  40%  of  fans  said  they  would  attend  the  event,  reflecting  a
significant increase in  potential  Cameroonian  fan  participation  in  the
event when compared to previous attendance.  Although  the  media  tends  to
focus on factors such as xenophobia and crime, the cost and  inaccessibility
to tickets as well  as  high  travel  costs  seem  to  be  more  restricting
factors.   Accessibility   to   ticketing   processes,   especially   online
applications and payments  made  it  very  difficult  for  African  fans  to
increase their representation. As a  host  country,  South  Africa  receives
generally positive perceptions  from  the  rest  of  the  continent.  It  is
recommended that organisers should consider travel and cost  constraints  to
African  fans  and  adopt   appropriate   strategies   to   increase   their
representation. In this  sense,  it  is  also  recommended  that  organising
committee and FIFA should ensure the management and  provision  of  adequate
pragmatic –based information to media as a  means  to  boost  the  country’s
image abroad.

  3. SESSION 2A: LEGACY OF MEGA-EVENTS

3.1   Small-scale sport tourism as a sustainable legacy  of  mega-events:  A
key component of a successful national sport tourism strategy

Professors Heather Gibson, Kiki Kaplanidou and Brijesh  Thapa  reflected  on
the topic. The shortcomings of economic expectations have raised  a  lot  of
questions  around  the  notions  of  legacy,  sustainability  and  strategic
leveraging. Researchers now suggest that mega  events  should  be  leveraged
over both the short and the long term. The focus thus needs to shift  beyond
just mega events but towards a wider range of  sport  tourism  participation
opportunities that can be found in smaller-scale  events.  This  study  uses
data collected from five youth sport events organised by a local  US  sports
commission over 18 months to  show  that  such  events  have  a  significant
contribution  to  increasing  tourist  numbers  to  communities  during  low
seasons, create social capital from volunteer opportunities and the  use  of
existing infrastructure, and decreasing environmental impacts.
The accumulation  of  associated  benefits  from  small-scale  sport  events
provides  important  leveraging   opportunities   for   tourism   in   local
communities similar to those brought about by mega  events.  However,  there
is  a  need  for  the  efficient  and  effective  utilisation  of   existing
infrastructure or those left behind by mega events, the  passing  of  skills
and image of a community for the development of sport tourism.  Youth  sport
events have been identified as  important  ways  to  attract,  maintain  and
engage a sport tourist market. Youth sport events  tend  to  attract  larger
travel parties due to parents and  other  family  members  accompanying  the
participants.  They  therefore  have  a  greater  impact  with  regards   to
overnight stay and spending.

The purpose of this study was to examine spectator behaviours of five  small
youth sport events hosted by a local  sports  commission  over  a  two  year
period. The aim was to profile  the  average  spectator  at  each  of  these
events, as well  as  collect  data  on  the  length  of  stay,  room  night,
expenditure patterns,  overall  direct  spend  for  each  event,  any  other
activities that spectators took part in, primary motivations  for  attending
these events and to determine the event evaluation related  characteristics.
Intercept surveys were  used  between  January  2008  and  August  2009  and
sampled five small-scale sport events, namely: Soccer (n =476), Softball  (n
= 199), Swimming (n =230), Track & Field (n = 125),  and  ESynchro  Swimming
(n=179). Questionnaires consisted of fixed choice and  open-ended  items.  A
data analysis to determine frequencies was done.

Participants of these events were mostly girls aged between 6 and 19  years,
with the exception of the swimming  event  that  had  a  participant  of  22
years. The events ranged between 3 and 7  days  long.  The  spectators  were
also largely female and were mostly  aged  in  the  mid  40s.  Their  income
mostly ranged above US$80 000 a year  and  were  relatively  well  educated,
with a majority white population representation with the  exception  of  the
majority African American population at the Track and Field event.
The average length of stay ranged between 3 and 7 days and  overnight  stays
far outnumbered day visits. Hotels and motels were the popular  choices  for
accommodation. Total expenditure ranged from approximately US$110 to  US$230
per day trip  and  between  approximately  US$450  and  US$830.  Motivations
mostly revolved around supporting their children who were  competing.  Other
activities included traditional activities  of  dining,  shopping,  VFR  and
attending  university  sport  events.  The  overall  revisit  intention  was
relatively high. Other data provided by Gainesville Sport  Commission  shows
more social aspects that are  associated  with  these  events,  particularly
with volunteers who could potentially be  a  selling  point  for  attracting
more events in the future.

Overall, the positive benefits are largely economic,  although  many  social
benefits derived from sport events of  this  scale  are  also  evident.  The
events provide business for the local community. The support data  from  the
sports commission highlights the social opportunities  for  local  residents
as  volunteers.  The  use  of  existing  infrastructure  could   lower   the
environmental, social and economic  costs  of  future  events.  Mega  events
could thus pave the way for small-scale  events,  leaving  behind  a  strong
legacy  of  a  strong  community  image,  increased  capacity  and  improved
infrastructure. Thus,  community  resources  could  be  a  strong  point  in
attracting future events and making them more sustainable.

  2. The potential contribution of  the  2010  FIFA  World  Cup  to  climate
     change: An exploratory study among tourism industry stakeholders in the
     Tshwane Metropole of South Africa

Professor Ernie Heath and Ms Ilana Otto indicated that  climate  change  has
become a global agenda and mega events are now looked at to take  cognisance
of the  reality  of  challenges  of  this  phenomenon.  As  such,  extensive
emphasis has been placed on the environmental sustainability of such  events
with  a  call  for  the  development  and  implementation  of  environmental
management guidelines. This study explores  the  potential  impact  of  mega
events on climate change, with particular reference to the 2010  FIFA  World
Cup.  In-depth  personal  interviews  were  conducted  with  a   number   of
stakeholders in the Tshwane Metropole. Stakeholders included the public  and
private tourism sector, tourism  experts,  environmental  experts,  and  the
Tshwane Municipality’s 2010 Organising Committee.

In terms of climate change, the  study  found  that  the  main  contributing
factors were CO² emissions within the tourism  industry,  ignorance  of  the
tourism industry and the production of goods and services.  The  2010  World
Cup presented areas of concern regarding transportation  (geographic  layout
of  the  event,  increased  air  travel,  and  the  lack  of   safe   public
transportation   resulting   in   higher   emissions),    construction    an
infrastructure (concentrated pockets of CO² emissions)  and  the  escalating
tourism activities (greater sphere of tourism industry operators).

There seemed to be a higher level of  consciousness  when  daily  operations
were linked to a mega event such as the 2010 world cup. Impacts need  to  be
considered in a more holistic manner when looking for  solutions.  There  is
therefore  a  need  for  an   umbrella   strategy   for   the   development,
implementation  and  sustaining  of  environmental  strategies,  plans   and
guidelines that need  to  be  filtered  through  the  tourism  value  chain.
Communication and understanding of the responsibilities of  stakeholders  as
well as  a  move  toward  more  coordinated  efforts,  was  also  viewed  as
critically important.

Since the study, a carbon footprint calculation of the 2010  world  cup  was
conducted but still excluded aspects such  as  restaurants,  activities  and
attractions, and retail shopping as was the case with the  calculations  for
the 2006 world cup. The umbrella strategy has been addressed and covers  six
key areas but only addresses the areas that account  for  about  9%  of  the
possible carbon footprint of the 2010 world cup. According to this plan,  it
is now the responsibility of each host city to develop and  implement  their
own green goal plan  and  ensure  that  it  is  communicated  to  all  their
stakeholders.  The  Tshwane  Metropole  already  has  a  2010  environmental
management plan that was  launched  in  2007.  Their  Green  Goal  Plan  was
launched on 24  February  2010  and  includes  an  awareness  and  marketing
campaign for minimising waste, promoting recycling and improving energy  and
waste efficiency.

The study only focused on the Tshwane Metropole as one of the  host  cities.
If the true environmental impacts are to be known, an  investigation  within
the broader context of South Africa would  have  to  be  done,  taking  into
consideration all contributions and sectors. The greening of  a  mega  event
doesn’t just happen during the event and at  the  sporting  facilities.  For
true  sustainability,  organisers  will  have  to  develop   and   implement
environmental plans and strategies well in  advance.  By  incorporating  and
adopting the concepts of the  Green  Police,  organisers  will  be  able  to
address environmental impacts holistically, engaging  all  stakeholders  and
especially the local communities, ensuring that there is a true  culture  of
sustainability within these cities.

 3. The contribution of cultural and heritage tourism within the context of
    the 2010 FIFA World Cup

Ms Tania Steyn and Professor Ernie Heath said Culture and Heritage  form  an
eminent part of any mega event, especially  a  soccer  world  cup.  However,
many organisers do not look at culture  and  heritage  in  a  strategic  and
systematic  manner.  Lack  of  information  has  limited  destinations  from
leveraging the culture and heritage tourism opportunities presented by  such
events. This study  set  out  to  explore  the  potential  contributions  of
cultural and heritage tourism within the context of a mega  event.  It  also
examines best practice mega event case studies.

Closing and opening ceremonies are possibly  the  biggest  opportunities  to
broaden and enhance the actual event  offering.  Culture  and  heritage  are
important contributors to these ceremonies which  can  be  highly  lucrative
and symbolic. They provide an opportunity to showcase a  country’s  identity
and to celebrate other cultures too. The  ceremonies  at  the  2000  Olympic
Games in Sydney  produced  what  spectators  felt  was  a  very  ‘heartfelt’
demonstration that really captured the spirit of Australia. The  performance
of the song ‘Barcelona’ at the 1992 Olympics in  Barcelona  also  created  a
specific and very heartfelt image. They also require  substantial  financial
investment,  such  as  in  the  case  of  the  2006  Commonwealth  Games  in
Melbourne, Australia where they totalled $50 million.  The  role  of  formal
cultural programmes is often more associated  with  the  Olympic  Games  but
have provided a good example of the integration  of  culture,  heritage  and
sports. Initiatives such as cultural Olympiads, festivals,  and  gastronomic
feasts have been successful in a number of mega events. Even the  fan  parks
experiences provide an excellent opportunity to showcase  culture  and  also
include women such as in the case of the 2006 German soccer world cup.

Opportunities to project images about the  host  destination  can  also  add
value to  the  marketing  thrust  of  the  destination.  The  role  of  non-
accredited media centres has also become more important.  Whilst  accredited
media usually focus on reporting on the games and  the  actual  event,  non-
accredited media provide the opportunity to showcase other  aspects  of  the
destination’s  culture  and  heritage.  There  is  also  the  challenge   of
strategically including the event into the overall destination mix,  whereby
strict itineraries for  instance,  often  inhibit  visitors  from  exploring
different aspects of the destinations. This  was  the  case  with  the  1999
Rugby World Cup in Wales.

A host community that is excited about  the  event  and  is  positive  about
tourism  could  enhance  the  tourist  experience  and  contribute  to   the
competitiveness of the destination. The 1995 Rugby World Cup is one  of  the
best examples of this and 2010 could  present  the  same  opportunity.  Such
events could also contribute  to  the  creation  of  cultural  and  heritage
tourism business and entrepreneurial opportunities. It is however  important
to manage expectations and ensure that local businesses can provide what  is
needed. The 2007 Cricket World Cup  for  instance  had  a  strong  focus  on
community development and on product development. In  contributing  to  city
regeneration, Barcelona is possibly one  the  most  cited  examples  and  in
South Africa, the question of whether  city  clean-ups  are  only  temporary
remains in the air.

There are also several critical success factors that need to be  taken  into
account by all stakeholders. The public sector needs to provide  support  in
creating a strong sense of leadership  and  a  shared  vision.  An  enabling
environment and access to information and  funding  is  also  important,  as
well as the development of a legacy strategy. The private  sector  needs  to
create appropriate and innovative tourist experiences, as well as  create  a
strong service culture  through  training.  Communities  also  need  to  get
involved and reflect cultural expressions that are real and true. The  youth
have also been identified as a critical  part  of  the  process.  The  media
needs to be a key strategic partner in sharing positive  stories  that  link
culture and heritage to the sport event. In doing so,  sustainable  legacies
can be created for the host destination.

4. Trampled by the gold rush: Managing the downside of the 2010  FIFA  World
   Cup

Ms Jacqueline Asheeke, Chairperson of the  Federation  of  Namibian  Tourism
Associations argued that the 2010 FIFA World Cup is going to be  a  landmark
event for the African continent, and above all is a  chance  for  Africa  to
earn respect in the international arena. The world cup fever  is  definitely
rising with  the  expectation  of  the  average  man  on  the  street  being
exceptionally high. Namibia faces a critical  situation  whereby  the  world
cup will occur exactly at their peak season that runs from June  through  to
August. Their challenge is to make the most of the ‘gold dust’ that is  left
behind from the  ‘gold  bars’  that  South  Africa  will  enjoy.  Therefore,
Namibia needs to find its own way to benefit  from  the  ‘gold  rush’  which
such an event presents.

In 2007, the Namibian Cabinet approved a committee to work on getting  ideas
about what Namibia could  do  about  the  world  cup  for  its  own  tourism
industry. Namibia is a small country, spanning roughly 845 000km  and  being
home to roughly 2 million people. Tourism is  the  country’s  third  biggest
income earner with  the  travel  and  tourism  economy  accounting  for  3.6
billion Namibian Dollars and was projected to  jump  to  an  estimated  7.11
billion in 2007. A total of 928  912  tourist  arrivals  occurred  in  2007,
which is a substantial number for a small population. The fourth quarter  of
2008 was a  wake-up  call  for  the  global  economy  and  Namibia  saw  its
tourists’ arrivals dip below the 900 000 mark. Occupancy rates in 2009  were
also predicted to drop between -2% to -5% where visitors were  booking  much
later than usual. Hunters and air charters, and SMMEs took the biggest  hit.


One of the biggest concerns about the world cup for Namibia is that  of  the
availability and cost of air tickets for its usual  high  spending  overseas
tourists who make up roughly 27% of air  arrivals.  Air  Namibia  brings  in
roughly 36% of these air arrivals and have realised the need to  accommodate
this problem. Without these  higher  spending  tourists,  Namibia’s  71  000
direct and indirect tourism  jobs  are  in  severe  danger.  Tour  operators
cannot get bookings and people are starting  to  book  elsewhere.  There  is
also a concern about the damaging  effects  to  the  47%  return  rate  that
Namibia currently enjoys, which may cut into future repeat visitors.

However, there is a silver lining. Marketing  campaigns  are  under  way  to
attract tourists shortly after the peak  season  to  come  to  Namibia  from
August to October through creative packaging and pricing. Overall, there  is
a massive opportunity for Africa to reverse the many  negative  images  that
are portrayed in  the  international  media.  Namibia  is  also  looking  to
attract key media through targeted media invitations to  develop  more  long
term relationships. Displaced South Africans will also  be  targeted.  These
strategies all form part of the strategy to survive the gold rush, while  at
least making something of the gold dust that is left in the wind.
 5. Identifying and putting measures  in  place  to  improve  tourism  from
    opportunities presented  by  hosting  an  international  mega-event:  A
    provincial government approach

Ms Modjadji Seabi said  provincial  governments  are  key  role  players  to
ensure that opportunities from mega events are leveraged. The  opportunities
include: building a strong labour pool and to address the  issue  of  safety
and security as critical to ensure a positive legacy. This paper  looked  at
the key measures that needed to be put in place in order to improve  tourism
from the opportunities presented by hosting  an  international  mega  event.
Mega  events  have  thus  emerged  as  strong  global   drivers   of   human
development. South Africa already has good policies in  place  at  both  the
national and  provincial  levels.  Provincial  government  levels  can  also
support initiatives that the  country  or  province  hopes  to  work  on  or
achieve.  Gauteng,  for  instance  is  South  Africa’s  number  one  tourism
performer  with  the  highest  share  of  tourists  arrivals   and   tourist
expenditure received.

The South African National Tourism Strategy is currently being  revised  but
the  trouble  with  such  broad  strategies  is  that  they  often  do   not
accommodate the specific needs of individual provinces.  Thus,  there  is  a
need for a more focused  strategy  at  each  provincial  level.  Safety  and
security, and human resource development are key drivers of a  destination’s
sustainability. Safety and security, for instance can in fact  be  a  driver
of a destination’s image creation and perception. Skills within the  tourism
industry are usually focused on the traditional mainstream tourism  activity
(i.e. hospitality and accommodation).

The issue of safety and security during the 2010 FIFA  World  Cup  has  been
addressed by promises of an increased police force and the collaboration  of
the South African military service. However, what  is  the  long  term  plan
once the event is done? The 2008 unemployment rate figures indicated  a  23%
unemployment rate, with Gauteng  being  almost  the  same  as  the  national
average at 22%. There is a clear skills gap that needs to be addressed.

Competitive index figures show that South Africa is ranked  60  overall  out
of 130 countries. They are also ranked 123 overall in terms  of  safety  and
security, as well as in human resource development at 118  out  of  the  130
countries. There is clearly a lot of room for improvement. Tourist  arrivals
are also a concern where the 2006 world cup in Germany saw  an  increase  in
tourist arrivals of 1 million, but what  will  be  the  situation  in  South
Africa?

There are a few cases where the issue of safety and security  was  addressed
by the introduction of a tourism police force. Perhaps  this  could  address
some of the job creation issues as well as safety and  security  issues  for
South Africa.

The overall impact is that there will  be  job  creation  if  provinces  and
countries plan and strategically manage the mega event  as  well  as  beyond
the  event.  An  improvement  on  safety  and  security  would  improve  the
competitiveness of the destination.

 4. SESSION 2B: SOCIAL DIMENSIONS OF MEGA-EVENTS

4.1   World Cup 2010, branding, bonding and bridging: Internal and  external
    perceptions of South Africa

Professor  Norbert  Kersting  from  the  Department  of  Political  Science,
University of Stellenbosch presented a paper on the topic. The paper  argued
that Mega sport events have many  key  functions  and  impacts.  Building  a
national identity is one such key function which can effectively bridge  old
social milieus and bonds within social  groups.  Germany  and  South  Africa
present interesting cases in that their  national  identities  provide  very
sensitive research fields due to their respective  political  histories.  In
Germany for instance, the 1936 Olympic Games was misused for  propaganda  by
the Nazi regimes. In post apartheid South Africa, a ‘rainbow  nation’  image
highlighted a strong heterogeneity and was strengthened by  the  1995  Rugby
World Cup victory and the subsequent African Cup of Nations. The  2010  FIFA
World Cup provides  South  Africa  with  the  opportunity  to  redefine  the
current national brand as well as to  showcase  their  industrial  capacity,
infrastructure and attractiveness as a tourism destination, and  polish  its
position and role in Africa. The internal bonding  and  bridging  of  social
milieus is probably the most unequal society in  the  world,  is  very  much
connected to the branding opportunities provided by such events.

The Anholt National Brand Index revealed that 93% of  Germans  believe  that
Germany had a ‘better image’ after the 2006 World Cup. Germany was  seen  as
a high-tech nation but not as a tourist  destination  prior  to  the  event.
Safety concerns were misconceptions  and  misrepresented.  Social  marketing
campaigns were then put in place to change this image. South Africa  on  the
other hand, lags behind in its image. It is not seen as a high-tech  country
and a lot of bad news is distributed  by  the  media,  painting  a  negative
picture even though Africans are generally perceived as friendly,  open  and
with high levels of solidarity. The knowledge about South Africa is high  in
countries such as Australia, the UK and New  Zealand  due  to  relationships
through other sports (e.g. cricket and rugby), as well as  historical  ties.
However, there is potential  to  create  and  strengthen  other  connections
while improving the country’s image.

National identity is seen as a  kind  of  ‘in  group’  solidarity  which  is
related to ‘out group’ hostility. In building a national identity, the  idea
is to develop civic pride as a kind of benign patriotism. National  identity
is also based on interpersonal trust, where bonding in South  Africa  within
social groups is quite strong but the  bridging  between  social  groups  is
very weak. The previous government  under  Thabo  Mbeki  had  advocated  the
bridging between social groups with a focus on bridging across Africa  as  a
way to achieve and African Renaissance or  capture  the  spirit  of  Africa.
Various indicators of national identity provide a feel as to where  national
pride comes from among the population. In South Africa, this pride is  built
especially  on  achievement  in  sport  (44%),  its   history   (38%),   and
achievement in arts and culture (29%), among others. The issue  of  the  May
2008 xenophobic violence,  however,  has  resulted  in  some  concern  about
safety and security of foreigners. Although the perception might not  be  as
bad as expected at present due to possible ‘window  dressing’  in  light  of
the event, it is an internal problem nevertheless and needs to be  addressed
accordingly.

Social marketing campaigns proved to be beneficial for  Germany  where  they
encourage investing and research in Germany, as well as collaborations  with
FIFA to promote fair play. Through the use of viewing areas  or  fan  areas,
Germany was able to demonstrate a  socially  cohesive  nation,  as  well  as
being friendly and open as  a  nation.  In  South  Africa,  the  ‘spirit  of
Africa’ campaigns  have  reached  millions  of  viewers  across  the  globe,
creating a feel for an African event. Anti-racism campaigns  throughout  the
2009 FIFA Confederations Cup and other sports also form part of  the  social
campaigns promoting social cohesion. The public viewing areas in  2010  also
provide South Africa with the opportunity to engage with  tourists  and  can
demonstrate a  peaceful  and  multicultural  society  through  bridging  the
social milieus.

National re-branding and social cohesion (bonding and bridging) should  thus
be the main goals for the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South  Africa.  There  will
be  little  relative  attendance  from  overseas  fans  but  there  will  be
extensive media coverage to showcase  an  ’African’  World  Cup.  Patriotism
campaigns should transcend  values  through  team  spirit,  inclusion,  etc.
Thus, the event will essentially provide  South  Africa  an  opportunity  to
create a new narrative of a multicultural society with a focus  on  bridging
and bonding.

4.2   Resident’s perceptions of the 2010 FIFA World Cup: A case study  of  a
suburb in Cape Town

Professor Kamilla Swart and Mr Dion Chain also presented case study  results
which indicated that sport tourism events are  increasingly  being  included
in national development and tourism strategies.  However,  the  major  focus
has been on economic impacts and infrastructure while little  attention  has
been paid to the social and cultural impacts. Research  on  the  perceptions
of residents has been very limited. The  objective  of  this  study  was  to
evaluate resident’s level of awareness and  perceptions  of,  and  attitudes
towards the 2010 FIFA World Cup and the Green Point  Stadium  (now  referred
to as the Cape Town Stadium) location.  The  secondary  objectives  were  to
establish if stakeholders are communicating regularly and  effectively  with
residents and explore resident’s levels of support for the event.

The study targeted the population of residents  living  within  1km  of  the
stadium. The  respondents  totalled  344.  The  research  was  conducted  by
interviewers’ using questionnaires based on a  spatially  stratified  random
sampling method between June and July  2009.  In  terms  of  the  respondent
demographic profile, 54.7% were male, 53.0% were white,  26.7%  African  and
ages ranged between 19 and 85 years with an average age of 40.7  years.  The
respondents  were  fairly  educated,  with  67.1%  holding   a   post-school
qualification, earning an average income  of  R10  092.00  and  being  self-
employed (15.4%), retired (13.1%), or as administrators/managers (12.8%).

An overwhelming majority (99.4%)  indicated  knowledge  of  the  forthcoming
event. All the respondents were aware  of  the  local  competition  stadium.
However, awareness of the local training stadium was  very  low,  with  only
39.5% indicating awareness  of  the  stadium.  Support  for  the  event  was
relatively positive with 50.9% indicating an intention to attend the  event,
87.2% indicating  that  they  would  follow  the  event  on  TV,  and  60.8%
indicating an intention to make use  of  the  public  viewing  areas  and  a
willingness to pay an average of R67.00 for entry to the facility.

There  was  a  59.9%  agreement  among  residents  that  stakeholders   were
effectively communicating with them  and  the  need  to  use  a  multi-media
approach to the communication  was  also  highlighted.  Although  there  was
initial opposition from residents with regards to the stadium, 75%  were  in
agreement with the location of the Cape Town stadium. There was  an  overall
positive  response  about  the  economic  benefits,   social   impacts   and
perceptions on infrastructure developments, as well  as  the  management  of
the event. However, there were concerns  among  residents,  especially  with
regards to crime, safety and security, inadequate transport  infrastructure,
and the very high cost/affordability of the event.

It was clear that there are high levels of awareness around  the  event  and
the competition venue but very little towards the training venue. There  are
high expectations for the  economic  benefits  and  social  impacts  of  the
event, with the primary concerns of crime, safety and  affordability.  There
is a need for increased  community  participation  and  involvement  in  the
planning and management of the event and  venue.  Longitudinal  research  is
also recommended to evaluate any changes in the  perceptions  and  attitudes
of residents in future.

4.3   The FIFA World Cups potential to induce civic pride and integration

Professor Wolfgang  Maening’s  (Department  of  Business  and  Economics  at
Hamburg University, Germany) paper investigates  if  a  nation’s  contingent
value of hosting a  mega-event  depends  on  past  experience  with  implied
benefits. Data from ex-ante and ex-post queries were used and the 2006  FIFA
World Cup in Germany was used to  address  this  question.  The  study  also
looked  at  how  collective  experience  could  accelerate  the  convergence
between  the  two  parts  of  Germany  (west  and  east).  Relatively  novel
econometric methodologies  (contingent  valuation  method  –  counterfactual
scenarios) were used.

Civic awareness has been said to justify government  subsidies  as  valuable
civic returns. Recent studies on civic  awareness  focus  on  voter  turnout
among other elements of election procedures as a good proxy or  variable  to
measure civic activity or awareness. However,  this  is  not  necessarily  a
well suited measure as German  history  indicates  that  voter  turnout  was
already relatively high during the 1930s and was actually relatively  higher
than in the last recent years. Civic awareness also  requires  some  element
of experience but there is concern as to how this can be measured.  Age  and
individual histories aren’t really good proxies in this regard either.  What
really matters though is the value of government services and the  awareness
around  this.  In  this  sense,  the  key  question  is   ‘can   individuals
effectively  assess  and  correctly  interpret  this  value?’  If  this   is
possible, then an increase in  civic  awareness  could  intensify  political
competition.

Integration in this paper refers to the integration  of  the  two  parts  of
Germany. A study on the  preferences  of  pro-state  provision  of  services
indicated that the two parts held profoundly different views.  However,  the
impact of singular events such  as  hosting  the  FIFA  World  Cup  and  the
introduction of the Euro for instance may actually serve to  accelerate  the
convergence between the two parts as opposed to a linear trajectory.

When asked about their willingness to pay for the World  Cup  to  remain  in
Germany by using counterfactual statements, less  than  20%  of  respondents
had a positive willingness to pay (WTP) prior to  the  event.  This  matched
the existing pessimistic attitude towards the World Cup that was fuelled  by
fears of bird flu, Neo-Nazi habitats  and  ‘no-go’  areas  that  were  being
discussed. Thus, there wasn’t as much positive  hype  or  excitement  around
the event as is currently evident in  South  Africa.  The  average  WTP  was
€4.26 per person, the average WTP of individuals with  a  positive  WTP  was
€22.9 per person. The aggregated WTP over the German population as  a  whole
(82 million)  indicated  a  WTP  of  €351.5  million.  After  the  cup,  the
aggregated WTP jumped up to €830.8 million but the individuals  who  already
had a positive WTP did  not  change  much  which  means  that  the  jump  in
aggregate WTP came from the respondents that did not  have  a  positive  WTP
prior to the event. The latter respondents largely came  from  East  Germany
so they could not assess it prior to the cup because they did not  have  the
experience of hosting such an event. High levels of education  also  allowed
people to anticipate the value of hosting the event.

Significant marginal  effects  also  influenced  individual’s  WTP  such  as
‘sheepskin’ effects of one additional year  of  school  and  one  additional
year spent as an adult in the old  communist  system,  for  instance.  These
marginal effects showed a positive change in WTP. Thus,  mega  sport  events
are experience goods with associated civic returns and a  positive  attitude
towards the good,  as  well  as  age  and  other  ‘sheepskin’  effects  also
influence the support for such an event.  The  paper  therefore  found  that
civic pride induced  by  such  a  collective  experience  can  significantly
accelerate the convergence of  East  German  preferences  to  those  of  the
western counterparts.

4.4   Mainstreaming children’s rights  and  child  protection  within  mega-
event discourse and practice

Ms Jennifer Seif and Ms Kate Finlay shared  their  thoughts  on  the  topic.
Focus on the triple bottom line effects of mega  events  have  largely  been
swayed towards economic aspects  with  particular  emphasis  on  public  and
private sector investment, job creation and the  growth  of  future  tourist
arrivals.  However,  this  uneven  focus  has  been  called  into  question,
especially by environmentalists. The  social  effects  and  risks,  however,
especially with regards to vulnerable members of society, namely  women  and
children, have largely been ignored. This paper set  out  to  explore  these
social risks, using the 2010 FIFA World Cup as a case study.

The social impacts of mega events as commonly known have both  negative  and
positive aspects. On the one hand, tourism and these mega events can  result
in a new social infrastructure, the protection  of  cultural  heritage,  the
development of skills and  capacity,  improve  cross-cultural  understanding
and increase the self-esteem of hosts. However, on the other  h  hand,  they
can also result in increased inequality,  the  commoditisation  of  culture,
sexual exploitation, ‘child sex tourism’, and child labour.

Children are one of the most vulnerable sectors of society and their  rights
are both protected and violated by tourism development. The opportunity  for
child exploitation also presents itself in the tourism industry.  The  risks
to children are also aggravated by issues related to poverty and  inequality
and  HIV/AIDS.  Studies  in  this  sense  have  traditionally   focused   on
commercial sexual exploitation of children (CSEC). The tourism  industry  is
not responsible itself for child exploitation but does acknowledge  that  it
could potentially provide an enabling environment by its very  nature  (i.e.
travel and the movement of children, etc) and would like to be part  of  the
solution. ECPAT has  recognised  South  Africa  as  an  emerging  child  sex
tourism hotspot, which is concerning.

Given this issue, the global tourism industry has responded by  focusing  on
prevention  through  industry  training,  raising  awareness,   and   public
campaigning. The UNWTO has  set  up  a  task  force  on  the  protection  of
children. Voluntary instruments have also been implemented such as the  Code
of Conduct (a.k.a ‘The Code’) which has been signed  by  1000  companies  in
the last ten years. There have also been other actions in destinations  such
as campaigns and national call centres. The trend  in  the  last  couple  of
years  has  been  better  cooperation  between  law   enforcement   agencies
globally.

Germany is a source, transit and destination  country  for  men,  women  and
children for the purposes of sexual  as  well  as  non-sexual  exploitation.
Prior to the 2006 World Cup, studies predicted that over 40 000 women  would
be trafficked into Germany  for  sex  work.  Thus,  German  law  enforcement
authorities, together  with  government,  international  organisations,  and
NGOs developed specialised  strategies  to  prevent  and  investigate  human
trafficking during the event. Such initiatives  included  the  participation
of soccer stars in campaigns, the joint team UNICEF initiative, and the  Red
Card to Child Labour, among others. An impact  study  by  the  International
Organisation on Migration (IOM)  found  that  the  estimated  40  000  women
expected to be trafficked was  unfounded  and  that  an  increase  in  human
trafficking did not occur. Early planning was clearly effective. There  were
however, recommendations that a better coordinated effort be  put  in  place
with one comprehensive campaign that would  be  aimed  at  different  target
groups and could thus be more effective and sustainable.

In South Africa, human trafficking is both  a  national  and  trans-national
problem and hotspots include Cape  Town,  Durban,  Johannesburg,  Nelspruit,
Polokwane and Port Elizabeth. The country has been placed  on  the  ’Tier  2
Watch List’ by the US Department of Trafficking in Persons. The  reality  is
that in South Africa, an estimated 400 000 children are  involved  in  child
labour, there are an estimated 30 000 child prostitutes and  10  000  street
children. Risk factors for child sex tourism during the 2010 FIFA World  Cup
include: poverty and expectation of  economic  gain,  increased  demand  for
child labour, increased demand for sexual services,  increase  in  organised
crime, increased  consumption  of  alcohol,  closing  of  schools,  and  the
relaxing  of  border  control.  The  South  African  Department  for  Social
Development  therefore  put  measures   in   place   for   the   2009   FIFA
Confederations Cup such as the provision of call centres and social  workers
on call, as well as places of safety and child friendly zones at fan  parks.
However, these measures are  largely  focused  on  stadia,  effectively  not
addressing many other risk areas.

International  attention  can  therefore  boost  local  efforts  and  put  a
spotlight on social issues. There is a strong need for the inclusion of  the
protection of children in mega  event  legacies  and  can  be  done  through
better  coordination,  higher  awareness  levels,   improved   institutional
capacity and sustainable prevention mechanisms, particularly  in  developing
countries.

4.5   Mega-events sustainability: Youth Development and social cohesion

Mr Mthobisi Mkhize,  Chief  Executive  Officer:  Umvithi  Youth  Development
Consultants posed the question on the accommodation  of  the  youth  in  the
process of planning? This is a key question to answer as the development  of
the youth could potentially contribute to the  sustainable  legacy  of  mega
events. This is especially so in  rural  and  disadvantaged  communities  in
South Africa. Such development programmes and initiatives  could  positively
affect social cohesion among these  communities,  while  creating  awareness
and encouraging community involvement. Ongoing  youth  development  projects
and partnership campaigns could assist in the  development  of  ’Ubuntu’  or
unity of the community, as well as being tools for poverty alleviation.

Umvithi Youth Development consultants believe  that  a  potential  state  of
social cohesion in South Africa is still being challenged by  ignorance  and
loss of cultural values and as a result of  the  introduction  of  practices
such as information technology, and unequal means of living. In this  sense,
the youth are seen as an offspring  of  a  developing  and  growing  nation,
without which there would be no future. However, the youth need  to  feel  a
sense of pride and ownership of their cultural values so as to  see  a  need
to hold on to them for the future.

Strategies and approaches need to be designed in order to restore  the  lost
values among the youth and need  to  be  common  to  all  means  of  tourism
development.  This  commonality  will  unite  all   youth,   despite   their
background or environment. Arts, culture and humanity have  been  identified
as three key  aspects  in  highlighting  this  commonality  while  embracing
differences. These aspects need to be introduced from infancy and  be  woven
into our daily practices in order to instil a sense of  pride  and  guide  a
nation into the future.

5.    SESSION 3A: MEGA-EVENT IMPACT ASSESSMENT

5.1   The comprehensive economic impact assessment of mega-events

Professors Maening, Tilley and Baade argued in their joint paper  that  when
preparing to host a mega event such as the likes of the  Olympic  Games  and
the FIFA World Cup, promoters ensure all parties involved are aware  of  the
numerous benefits that hosting  such  an  event  could  bring  to  the  host
nation. However, calculations that have been done to support these  benefits
very often overstate the positive and often don’t accommodate for  undesired
effects. New studies have  emerged  that  take  into  account  wider  socio-
economic effects of these mega events so as to account for their  impact  on
a country’s whole economy. These studies go beyond  traditional  indicators,
tourist arrival figures, lengths of stay and expenditure  to  also  look  at
the impact of displacement and crowding-out effects.  There  is  a  need  to
combine these studies into one useful  methodology  for  policymakers.  This
paper looks into key findings  and  methodologies  of  these  studies  as  a
unique framework for tracking larger  tangible  and  intangible  impacts  in
light of the 2010 FIFA World  Cup..  The  proposed  goal  is  to  ultimately
develop a model to be used as a more accurate tool for decision  makers  and
planners of mega events.

Economists are constantly trying to improve the methods they use to  measure
how such events impact the economies of nations. Analyses are  usually  down
through either a prospective analysis  or  a  retrospective  analysis.  Both
analyses have their own  associated  limitations.  Prospective  analysis  is
essentially a prediction of the impact of an event.  This  is  hazardous  as
there is no good model for predicting or understanding how  urban  economies
work. There is also no such model to analyse mega events, which is  probably
due to their relatively small impact in comparison to the large and  diverse
urban economies in which they take place. The task for  the  economist  then
is to find the proverbial ‘needle in the haystack’. Part of the  problem  of
prospective analyses is that the models used to calculate these impacts  are
somewhat primitive and lack depth. Gross spending analysis thus limits  this
problem even further. Net spending analysis is recommended in order to  take
into account not only the additional  spending  that  occurs  but  also  the
spending that is replaced. These first  round  errors  are  then  compounded
when a multiplier is fixed to the  first  round  impacts  which  results  in
estimates that are far off the mark. Some  of  these  first  round  problems
include  spending  of  non-residents,  spending  of  residents,  opportunity
costs, infrastructure costs, financial inflows and outflows, and  contingent
valuation (i.e. psychic changes such as quality of life).

Retrospective analyses  refer  to  ‘after-the-fact’  impact  analyses.  Once
again, mega events are small relative to the economy so teasing out what  it
really is that was  impacted  by  the  event  becomes  complicated.  Another
problem  is  that   statistical   significance   or   confidence   intervals
discussions aren’t  effectively  communicated  when  deciding  on  how  much
government spends on such events. The specification of  dependent  variables
is a tough task and needs to be better specified.

When considering strategies for reasonable  estimates  of  economic  impact,
one of the most important initial  steps  is  to  reduce  the  size  of  the
‘haystack’. Tax data on smaller areas in this regard is particularly  useful
in working with a smaller ‘haystack’  and  allowing  the  identification  of
some issues that would otherwise not be possible. However, impacts may  well
be beyond the traditional economic impact indicators  that  economists  look
for and the importance of contingent valuation is growing.

A key challenge for economic policymakers and planners is to  translate  the
academic work of economists  into  useful  policy  making  to  maximise  the
benefits of these events. In South Africa, it would be  important  to  probe
and explore the impact on the whole  country  and  not  just  the  immediate
tourism sector as there is a big question about ‘who gets what’ in terms  of
what these mega events are actually doing for South Africans at large.  Both
direct and indirect  country-wide  impacts  are  also  important  for  these
evaluations. The intangible and ‘feel good’ aspects of such assessments  are
often not accounted for but form part of a  more  holistic  evaluation.  All
these aspects would then need to be  combined  toward  a  holistic  national
strategy for mega events.

The proposed study based on this body of theory would thus take  a  look  at
2010 FIFA World Cup™ data  on  five  of  the  provinces  that  are  directly
involved in the events, including  host  cities  and  non-host  cities.  The
legacy of past events hosted in South Africa would also then paint a  bigger
picture as to how these events were run and the impact that  they  had.  The
study will have eleven variables, which looks at:

      • Tourist arrivals, stays and expenditures.
      • Hotel occupancy (predicted vs. actual).
      • Aggregate consumer spending (taxable sales).
      • Changes in consumer spending (displacement).
      • Geographical spread of tourist.
      • GDP, GGP and income generated for host cities (legacy growth).
      • Employment (short and long term).
      • Costs of living and property prices.
      • Curio sector.
      • Public expenditures and opportunity costs.
      • The intangibles or ‘feel good’ aspects.

5.2   Impact of mega-events on visitor arrivals

Mr Johan Fourie and Ms Maria Santana-Gallego explained that  the  literature
around mega events points out the growing appeal of hosting mega events  due
to their perception as a truly global  experience  and  their  potential  to
provide lucrative opportunities for countries. However,  scholarly  interest
since the 1990s has been less enthusiastic about the  possible  returns  for
countries  where  ex-ante  and  post  analyses  indicate  an  overoptimistic
prediction of  these  benefits.  If  countries  don’t  actually  benefit  as
predicted or expected, why do they still bid to host these events? There  is
a growing body of  literature  that  indicates  countries  bidding  for  the
purpose of the  ‘feel  good  factors’  or  accredibility  for  international
trade. Many countries have  actually  benefited  significantly  from  merely
bidding without having to carry the immense financial costs of  hosting  the
event. Mega events nevertheless, present a very rare  opportunity  for  many
host cities and although the associated benefits  may  seem  lucrative,  the
fact that countries even decide to bid  for  them  indicates  that  the  net
benefits by far outweigh the costs.

This study uses a standard gravity model of bilateral tourism flows  between
134 countries from 1995 to 2006 in order to measure one of the  most  direct
benefits derived from such events, the increase in tourist arrivals  to  the
host country. Predictions and expectations that such an event will  increase
tourist arrivals are put into question  by  a  growing  body  of  literature
which points out the need for a careful look into possibilities  of  tourist
displacement. Such displacement refers to  ‘regular’  tourists  that  change
their behaviour during a mega event by changing  their  trips  to  either  a
different location or time, which may effectively result in  a  net  tourism
gain or net loss. The results of the study suggest that the net  gain  (size
of displacement) is dependent on the type of  mega  event  (not  necessarily
size),  the  participating  countries,   the   host   countries   level   of
development, and a number of event specific factors.

Mega events that were included in the analysis included the  Summer  Olympic
Games (SOG - 1996, 2000, 2004), Winter Olympic  Games  (WOG  -  1998,  2002,
2006), FIFA World Cup (FWC - 1998, 2002,  2006),  Rugby  World  Cup  (RWC  -
1995, 1999, 2003), Cricket World Cup (CWC  -  1996,  1999,  2003),  and  the
British Lions Tour (Lions - 1997, 2001, 2005). The  baseline  estimates  for
the effect of mega events on tourist arrivals showed an overall increase  of
8% in tourism. However, there were many variations  both  between  the  mega
event categories and within them. The SOG increased tourism by 15%, the  FWC
by 10%, the CWC by 14%, and the Lions tour by  15%.  The  WOG  and  the  RWC
however, indicated a decrease in tourism by  5%  and  9%  respectively.  The
decrease caused by the RWC was due to data problems for the 1995  RWC.  Even
variations  within  the  categories  varied  where  the  SOG  for  instance,
indicated a decrease in tourism for the 2004 games in Athens of 30%  in  the
same year of the event, which could be detrimental to  a  country’s  tourism
earnings and the industry as a whole.

The effect of participating  and  non-participating  countries  also  showed
significant differences. Where participating countries increased tourism  to
the host country by 24% on average, there was no significant  difference  by
non-participating countries. Thus,  it  is  important  to  think  about  the
nature of the event and which countries it is likely to attract to the  host
nation prior to bidding for the event. This could present an opportunity  to
grow existing markets and be exposed to new potential  future  markets.  The
question of significant impact as a mega event bid winner  or  loser  showed
strange  results  where  there  was  very  little  significant   statistical
variation and needs to be  looked  at  in  greater  detail.  The  difference
between tourist arrival impacts from mega sporting  events  and  other  mega
events (i.e. trade fairs, international summits  and  UNWTO  meetings,  etc)
indicated that the 2002 WSSD (World Summit of Sustainable  Development)  for
instance showed a 10% increase and UNWTO meetings showed a 28% increase.

Mega events by  and  large  increase  tourism  but  there  is  still  little
evidence of the  effects  of  displacement  or  crowding  out  of  ‘regular’
tourists. There are also large differences between these mega  events  which
depend on the country’s size,  the  size  of  the  event,  timing,  and  the
participating countries. There is also some evidence that  mega  events  act
as a signal for some countries and that non-sport mega events  may  actually
have a similar impact to sport mega events.

5.3   Impact assessment as a  critical  ingredient  of  sustainable  tourism
events: The case of KwaZulu-Natal

Mr James Seymour and Mr Wayne Tifflin shared their research results  in  the
case of KwaZulu-Natal

Mega events form a key part of the whole concept of a destination,  as  well
as its management and competitiveness. Such events present  the  opportunity
for innovation in competitive strategies and can  ultimately  contribute  to
the success and sustainability of a destination.  The  useful  insights  and
indicators provided by impact assessments are  critical  to  the  management
and  sustainability  of  these  events  and  their  host  destinations.  The
destination management organisation of the  province  of  KwaZulu  Natal  in
South Africa, Tourism KwaZulu Natal (TKZN), conducts regular  annual  impact
assessments for a variety of tourism-related mega events that are hosted  by
the province. These impact assessments determine the return  on  investments
and  provide  input  to  guarantee  continued  investment  and  ensure   the
sustainability of such events.  This  paper  provided  an  overview  of  the
adopted methodologies  in  these  assessments  and  how  their  results  are
interpreted and practically applied, with particular focus  on  the  example
of the Comrades Marathon. TKZN has a dedicated tourism research  unit  where
research is done in-house with a team of part-time interviewers, trained  by
the TKZN researchers. A standardised  questionnaire  is  used  to  test  for
tourism behaviour before, during and after the  events.  Aspects  which  are
tested for include expenditure patterns and the perceptions of such  events.
Sample sizes are carefully selected to ensure results  lie  within  the  95%
confidence level and are  spread  as  randomly  as  possible  and  conducted
systematically on an hourly  basis  across  the  entire  event.  Appropriate
statistical significance tests and other key statistical  calculations  such
as taking the standard error of the mean in the  case  of  expenditure  data
are applied to  the  captured  data  to  ensure  that  it  is  appropriately
analysed. The core insights that  result  from  these  studies  provide  the
basis for recommendations which are put forward to  the  organisers  of  the
event that has been investigated. Such assessments  can  empower  organisers
to make decisions  to  improve  the  nature  of  their  events.  The  impact
assessments of each of the province’s major annual events  are  done  on  an
annual basis  to  ensure  that  the  province  has  tracking  data  for  the
measurement of the development of such events.

The Comrades Marathon is one of the oldest and largest  ultra  marathons  in
South Africa and the world. It  covers  a  distance  of  approximately  90km
began in 1921. This year, the 85th running of the marathon will see a  total
of 20 000 runners where only a mere 34 runners ran  the  first  marathon  in
1921. TKZN’s objectives  for  the  study  were  to  ultimately  improve  the
profile of the Comrade’s brand, increase the  number  of  domestic  visitors
from  outside  of  KwaZulu-Natal,  increase  the  number  of   international
visitors, increase visitor spend, and increase their  length  of  stay.  The
questionnaires  therefore  set  out  to  distinguish  between  visitors  and
locals, and to determine where the respondents stayed  while  attending  the
event, how many people were  in  the  respondent’s  immediate  group,  their
primary reason for  attendance,  how  they  travelled  to  the  event,  what
influenced their decisions to attend, whether they had  attended  previously
and  if  they  would  attend  again,  to  obtain  their  profile  and  spend
information, as well as to determine brand recognition.

A sustained level of participation is a key factor in the sustainability  of
the event. Sustained and even increasing levels  of  participation  is  also
healthy from a tourism perspective. The year  2000  saw  23961  runners  and
this gave an indication of the potential number of  domestic  visitors  that
could be attracted by the event. The domestic participant numbers  in  2005,
however, were far  below  the  2000  figure  and  marketing  campaigns  were
launched to encourage participants to attend the event and  to  stay  longer
to see other parts of the province. Central Gauteng has also emerged  as  an
important source of participants, which is  important  for  future  domestic
tourism. All of the provinces, with the exception of  the  North  West  Cape
have shown a decrease in participation in 2009 when compared  to  2005.  All
this  data  assists  in  planning  strategies  to  increase  the  number  of
participants in the race. Milestones in the  event’s  history  can  also  be
used as part of the marketing  strategy  to  attract  more  runners  to  the
event.

A need was identified to internationalise the  profile  of  the  event.  The
event was then marketed at international events such as the  New  York,  São
Paulo and Bombay marathons. The Comrades  Marathon  Association  (CMA)  also
has ambassadors in  9  countries,  namely  USA,  India,  Australia,  Canada,
France, Brazil, Japan, Germany and Scandinavia. Promotion of  the  event  in
Kenya also has to be done. The  results  of  these  campaigns  indicated  an
increase of international runners of 79% in 2008 and a further 11% in  2009.
This drive to increase exposure internationally  to  increase  international
participation has ultimately benefited both the race and tourism.

The economic impact of  the  Comrades  Marathon  is  only  one  among  other
considerations such as social, cultural,  physical,  psychological,  tourism
and commercial and political impacts.  However,  economic  impact  forms  an
important part of informing  DMO,  organiser  and  investor  decisions  with
regards to supporting such events. The average total spend  by  participants
and spectators is one aspect that could be useful in this regard  whereby  a
fluctuation in  average  spend  could  indicate  some  area  of  concern  or
possibly an opportunity for improvement. Direct  and  indirect  spend  could
also provide valuable insight, which was the case of the Comrades  Marathon.

It is clear that event organisers and DMOs can mutually  benefit  from  such
assessments  in  working  towards  more  sustainable  events.  The  Comrades
Marathon is an example of how these assessments  can  be  done  and  applied
successfully. These assessments also need to be  collaborated  in  order  to
feed into bigger, perhaps even national studies.

5.4   Unpacking the benefits of mega-events to small business

Ms Adrienne Harris looked at the role and benefits of mega events  on  small
businesses. Small businesses do not currently benefit from such events.  The
1995 Rugby World Cup, the  2002  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development
(WSSD) and the 2003 Cricket World Cup, for instance had no  real  impact  on
small businesses. Accommodation was snatched up by bigger suppliers,  little
to no tour packages were sold and foreign visitors opted  for  international
brands. Therefore, these small establishments need an  opportunity  to  play
in the same arena as their  larger  counterparts.  This  could  be  done  by
linking them to official websites of these events so as  to  increase  their
share of visitor spend.

The 2010 FIFA World Cup™ has created  much  buzz  around  opportunities  for
small business. These include promotions and  co-promotions  with  sponsors,
product licensing for merchandising and  the  provision  of  services,  etc.
However, this has not  been  the  case  in  reality.  A  tour  operator  for
instance, has to pay US$35 000 up front just to register with  MATCH,  which
is often an impossible task for small businesses.  The  Cape  Minstrels  who
run their annual festival in Cape Town  and  have  done  so  for  about  100
years, have been kicked out of their training stadium at a loss of R200  000
because they might damage the pitch.

There has been a half-hearted attempt to do something  about  the  issue  of
accommodation from small businesses. There was an  agreement  between  MATCH
and the Minister of Tourism and the  Tourism  Enterprise  Partnership  (TEP)
was also  involved  in  signing  up  small  accommodation  businesses.  Even
sponsorship for the improvement of grading has  been  implemented.  However,
many of these businesses required substantial  upgrades  and  are  now  left
with enormous loans to pay. MATCH has also already given back rooms and  the
small businesses were the first to go. Even, Zakumi,  the  mascot  is  being
produced in China. The production of the  mascot  could  have  provided  the
opportunity  to  small  enterprises  and  could  have  also  been  part   of
government poverty alleviation initiatives.

Thus, there are very limited benefits to small businesses.  There  is  still
the possibility of sub-contracting from large operators for tour guides  and
transport providers for instance. There are also opportunities for food  and
beverage outlets but not within the exclusion  zones  around  stadia.  There
will also be  limited  craft  and  curio  opportunities.  Indirect  benefits
include improved infrastructure and increased money flows into the  economy.


The question raised, why should we even  care  about  small  businesses?  In
South Africa, they account for approximately half the  formal  jobs  in  the
private sector where more than 95%  of  all  tourism  businesses  are  SMMEs
(Small Medium and Micro Enterprises). They contribute about 37% to  the  GDP
and are ideal for the upliftment of the historically disadvantaged. And  why
do small businesses not benefit? Essentially big events  are  big  business.
There is no capacity to organise  a  number  of  small  units  to  unite  to
benefit from such events. There is also concern over the  quantity,  quality
and reliability of the products and services produced by  small  businesses.
Research conducted by TEP indicates that 84% of SMMEs can  in  fact  provide
services for 2010 but approximately 50% of the potentials need help  to  get
there.

The ultimate question is ‘should small businesses benefit from  mega  events
or  should  they  rather  concentrate  on  more  suitable  events  such   as
festivals?’ And if so, who should play the coordinating role?  The  creation
of a  small  business  support  unit  to  liaise  between  local  organising
committees and small  businesses  is  suggested  here.  Such  a  unit  could
collectively harness the offerings of small  businesses  so  as  to  benefit
from such mega events, while meeting the requirements of  organisers.  There
is thus a need for focused strategy and extensive research into the  matter.
Perhaps even a unified  approach  to  bidding  where  small  businesses  are
included in the process would be beneficial to all.

6. SESSION 3B: MEGA-EVENT CONSUMER BEHAVIOUR

6.1    International  athletes   as   tourists:   Consumer   behaviours   by
participants of the 2007 and 2009 World Universiade Games

Mr Serkan Berber, Lecturer: Anadolu University  in  Turkey  noted  that  few
studies on mega events have  focused  on  the  “second  tier”  international
sport events in order to understand  participant  consumption  patterns  and
impacts. This study examines the  World  Universiade  Summer  Games  in  two
different  countries,  Belgrade,   Serbia   and   Bangkok,   Thailand.   The
Universiade is one of the world’s largest multi-sport  events.  In  2009,  8
600 athletes from 128 countries participated  in  its  25th  anniversary.  A
profile of the participants of the 2007 and  2009  games  was  generated  to
reveal and compare their consumer behaviours  over  time  and  in  the  host
cities. A total of 441 surveys were completed  by  participants  on-site  at
the 2007 games in Bangkok, and 227 in 2009 at the Belgrade games.

The 2007 and  2009  participants  were  statistically  similar  in  profile,
whereby the average age was 27.5 years in 2007  and  26.81  years  in  2009,
with approximately 60% males and 40% females. The  length  of  stay  was  12
nights in 2007 and 13 nights in 2009. The travel party included  on  average
3.75 other persons travelling in the travel party at the Bangkok games,  and
2.2 persons in the Belgrade games. Approximately, 69%  of  respondents  were
athletes, with the rest being made up of  coaches  (10%),  officials  (12%),
medical personnel (4%), and others (5%). In terms of race, the  participants
were made up of 68% Whites, followed by Asian  (12%),  Black  (11%),  Latino
(6%) and Indian (3%).

On average, participants spent €801.33 in Bangkok and  €815.60  in  Belgrade
during  the   Universiades,   primarily   for   event   tickets,   shopping,
transportation, and other  goods  and  services.  Most  lodging  costs  were
covered by the event organizstion, national or sport  federations  and  were
not a major expenditure to participants. In terms  of  perceptions,  51%  of
participants would visit Bangkok in the future, 39.8% were  unsure,  and  9%
would not visit again. Approximately 87%  of  participants  would  recommend
visiting Bangkok to their friends, 13% would not. In 2009,  less  than  half
the subjects (49.8%)  indicated  that  they  would  return  to  Belgrade  as
visitors, 5.9% would not return and 44.3% were unsure.

This study offers a glimpse at Universiade participants and  their  consumer
behaviours. Most participants had positive perceptions of Bangkok as a  host
city. It was also noted that university students are  not  high-value  sport
tourists in terms of direct spend. It is suggested that researchers  conduct
such studies of recurring events in  order  to  determine  similarities  and
differences in sport participant characteristics across time and culture.

6.2   Host challenges in preparation for the 2010 FIFA World Cup

Dr Nerine Bresler and Mr Adre  Mynhardt  from  the  School  of  Tourism  and
Hospitality, University of Johannesburg  shared  their  views  on  the  host
challenges in preparation for the tournament. Research  around  mega  events
has largely been centred on economic impacts, event benefactors, and  themes
around  economic  development,  destination  images  and  building  national
pride. The visitor experience  however  has  largely  been  neglected.  This
study set out to identify challenges that  South  Africa  faces  before  the
2010  FIFA  World  Cup™.  The  research  was  conducted  at  the  2009  FIFA
Confederations Cup™ by structured interviews with a  sample  of  spectators,
the  integration  of  a   variety   of   complementary   studies   and   the
contextualisation of international literature.

One of the biggest challenges facing South Africa is the task of  delivering
the desired experience. This involves a balance  between  the  interests  of
divergent  stakeholders.  These  interests  include  that   of   the   event
owner/promoter who provides the event as entertainment for a  profit.  South
Africa wants to ultimately  raise  its  profile  to  become  a  world  class
destination, the tourist enterprises who provide products and services at  a
profit and create the  image  for  future  visitation  and  investment,  and
lastly the visitor and/or spectator who creates the excitement at the  event
as well as the experience and  future  recommendations.  There  is  also  an
associated risk of disappointing the visitor and  incurring  costs  that  do
not contribute to growth, as well as the possibility  of  not  reducing  the
legacy of Afro-pessimism.

Interest in the event and the intention to attend are generally governed  by
three push factors, two mediating factors and  two  desired  outcomes.  Push
factors include demographics (i.e. age,  education,  income,  gender,  etc),
fan motives (aesthetics, vicarious achievement, arousal and support for  the
national team as  well  as  an  interest  in  players)  and  travel  motives
(escape, socialization, learning about the  host  country,  etc).  Mediating
factors include attraction to the  event  due  to  actual  interest  in  the
event, and the constraints such as risk (e.g. safety  and  security  issues)
and financial implications (price of  tickets  and  travel,  etc).  The  two
outcomes include the desire to  attend  (which  may  not  result  in  actual
attendance due to novelty seeking), and the feasibility of attending.

Respondents (n=205) were interviewed at the  stadiums  prior  to  the  semi-
finals. The overwhelming majority of respondents were male (85%),  and  were
on average aged between 26 and 35 years  (43.5%).  South  Africans  made  up
18.4% of the respondents. Overall, 93.9% believed that  South  Africa  could
successfully host the 2010 world cup and 90.1%  believed  the  matches  were
well organised. Perceptions were generally very  positive,  especially  with
regards to the emotional and cognitive aspects of their experience.

Negative perceptions did not indicate any new  concerns  but  did  echo  the
critical concerns that have been floating in  the  media:  crime  rate,  the
quality and efficiency of public transport, the nuisance caused  by  smoking
in the stands and the Vuvuzelas, inadequate support  for  the  event  (empty
stand and lack of volunteers), and value for money.

It is clear that there is tremendous support and belief  that  South  Africa
can in fact host this event successfully. However, it must  get  the  basics
right in order to build  a  lasting  legacy.  Benefits  need  to  be  spread
geographically and branding needs to  extend  far  beyond  just  the  event.
Enterprises should ensure that they keep their base customers  happy  so  as
to ensure long term loyalty and not to fall into the trap of  a  short  term
fix at the expense of the customer base. The ultimate winners will be  those
with revenue management skills.

6.3   The sport tourism legacy of mega-events: From Beijing  2008  to  South
Africa 2010

Mr Brendon Knott, Prof Kamilla Swart, Prof Douglas  Turco  and  Urmilla  Bob
were of the view that the  increased  attraction  to  the  hosting  of  mega
events has largely been due to their potential as valuable promotion  tools.
Sports fans and consumers are the pivotal force  behind  the  leveraging  of
such events but little research has been done on them. In South Africa,  the
government  recognises  the  sport   tourism’s   potential   to   contribute
substantially to the economy. The notion  of  legacy  is  now  no  longer  a
desired outcome but an absolutely essential priority. The key  objective  of
this study was  to  understand  the  mega  event  sport  tourist,  but  more
specifically to assess tourist perceptions of China  as  host  of  the  2008
Olympic Games, and their awareness, perceptions of and intent to  travel  to
South Africa in 2010. Primary data was  collected  at  the  Beijing  Olympic
Games with specific focus on football fans. 291 surveys were collected  over
three days.

The findings indicate that the spectators were mainly from  the  USA  (16%),
Germany (13%) and the UK  (12%).  Activities  included  traditional  tourist
activities such as visiting Tiananmen Square and the Great Wall, as well  as
general shopping. There was a relative balance in the perceptions  of  China
where 11% felt that there were many people and felt  crowded,  9%  indicated
that  there  were  strict  government  controls   visible   in   place,   8%
acknowledged that they had a strong cultural heritage and  history,  and  6%
considered it a developing nation. The perceptions on the event itself  were
generally positive where  security,  accommodation,  transport  and  service
were all seen in a good light. Although the environment  received  an  above
average  perception,  it  was  relatively  low  when   compared   to   other
perceptions. This echoed  the  climate  change  concerns  that  were  raised
leading up to the event.

In terms of awareness of South Africa, 58% of respondents  knew  that  South
Africa would be hosting the 2010 FIFA World Cup™. The  main  perceptions  of
South Africa were  balanced  between  perceptions  of  its  natural  beauty,
beaches and mountains, and more negative aspects  such  as  crime,  violence
and danger. There was a relatively high intention to travel to South  Africa
at 30%, while 29% said they were unsure.  This  opens  up  opportunities  to
turn those ‘not so sure’ responses into a clear 'yes' response.  The  length
of stay ranged from 7 to 14 days and the preferred base was Cape Town.

Overall, there is reasonable awareness of South Africa as  a  host  for  the
world cup and intention to travel to the country. Similar  nationalities  of
sport tourists could provide some insight to  key  markets.  However,  there
are negative perceptions such as crime that need to be addressed.  There  is
little  that  is  known  about  South  Africa  and  thus  2010  presents  an
opportunity for nation or city branding. Marketing activities thus  need  to
be improved to convert the ‘unsure’  tourist.  The  value  of  international
academic collaborations is also noted in the effort to coordinate and  align
research efforts.

7. SESSION 4: SETTING THE TONE FOR  THE  INTERNATIONAL  SUMMIT  ON  TOURISM,
   SPORT AND MEGA-EVENTS

The role of mega-events in city development: What have we learned?

Mr Greg Clark argued in his paper that  global  events  can  accelerate  the
development of fast growing economies. They are an investment catalyst,  and
provide the opportunity for  repositioning  a  destination.  They  can  also
present the opportunity to align  a  city  or  country’s  image,  brand  and
identity with that of the event itself. Thus, competition among world  class
cities and large emerging economies has  become  fierce.  However,  not  all
bids are properly thought out. Such events should be a means  to  accelerate
the implementation of already existing strategies  better  and  should  thus
form part of the natural development cycle. Global events  should  therefore
be ‘picked’ carefully in order to fit into an already existing strategy.

Every global event focuses on two tasks simultaneously. Firstly, it  is  the
precise purpose of the event, i.e. hosting a number  of  sporting  teams  or
athletes for a competition, and secondly it  has  a  secondary  or  parallel
purpose or task which is the benefit of the event itself that  a  host  city
or nation wants to get out of  it.  These  two  ideas  are  occasionally  in
tension. On the  one  hand,  it  may  be  so  hard  to  get  the  transport,
infrastructure, stadiums, and airports ready that  no  time,  resources  and
thinking space goes on the second task. It  is  clear  from  the  literature
that those places that have benefited more than others have  been  the  ones
that  have  managed  the  first  task  sufficiently  well  or   sufficiently
discretely and so have been able to  allocate  sufficient  attention,  time,
resources, intuition and leadership into the  second  task  as  well.  Thus,
there is a real tension about into which of these tasks resources will  flow
to.

Some places have really  understood  that  at  least  the  portions  of  the
benefits come from just bidding. There are various places that  are  bidding
with no intention of winning. Instead they are bidding well enough  to  look
good, to do some infrastructure planning, do some  land  use  assembly,  re-
branding, create media presence, etc. It has become somewhat  of  a  cheaper
way to benefit from just simply bidding for international events.

Time scale and life cycle dynamics are very important. The  time  scale  and
lifecycle at which certain benefits occur are completely different from  the
time scale and the life cycle in which the event  is  hosted.  Most  of  the
economic benefits of hosting an event of this  kind  happen  in  the  latter
part of the business cycle or even in the next business cycle. Much  of  the
infrastructure benefits, the land use or investment  benefits  happen  early
for the public sector and very often  happen  much  later  for  the  private
sector. Social benefits happen through the inter-generational  dynamics  and
not immediately.

The  role  of  cities  within  public  finance  systems  within  nations  is
particularly important. At its simplest, we  are  living  in  an  age  where
cities  find  themselves  increasingly  wanting  to  raise  their  rate   of
investment in their schools, housing,  infrastructure,  business  districts,
roads, universities, etc because they see cities as units  of  international
competition. The best way to  be  competitive  is  to  invest  more  in  the
quality  of  their  productive  platform.  At  the   same   time,   national
governments are trying to participate in all sorts of agreed  multi  lateral
fiscal restraints and there is a tension between what  cities  sees  as  the
path to success and  what  nations  are  agreeing  to  the  path  to  inter-
governmental collaboration success. This  has  given  rise  to  a  permanent
investment gap. Cities try clever ways of breaching this gap  where  hosting
mega events is one of the ways to do this because in a brief moment of  time
in the otherwise complex fiscal  calculus,  cities  become  a  priority  for
national investment. Another reason why cities want to host mega  events  is
due to the perceived failure of other policies such  as  urban  regeneration
initiatives, or regional economic development initiatives, or labour  market
interventions, etc  where  people  are  looking  for  a  different  kind  of
‘medicine’.

So how can cities maximise the positive benefits of  hosting  local  events?
The following are crucial areas of consideration:

    • Pick the right event – think about the breadth of the legacy.
    • Be bold – being imaginative.
    • Get the leadership right.
    • Bid well and with ingenuity.
    • Have a Plan B – having strategies for both winning and losing bids  so
      as to move forward either way.
    •  Accelerate existing plans and priorities.
    • Integrate efforts – well integrated in development, planning, branding
      and marketing.
    • Make the legacy and benefits  come  first  –  guiding  driver  of  all
      decisions.
    • Manage the legacy as a separate project – to avoid being distracted by
      the event.
    • Make a habit of being a host – hosting more events that  can  increase
      capacity and add to the cumulative benefits.


Global events  thus  present  an  opportunity  to  boost  city  developments
through  increased  promotional  efforts  and  the  leveraging  of  national
resources. However, the  tensions  that  provide  different  dimensions  and
complexities to the process need to be carefully considered.

8. Conclusion

The colloquium featured some of  the  most  distinguished  scholars  in  the
realm of mega events and tourism who each provided insights into a range  of
critical  dimensions  of  hosting  such  events.  The  most  recurring   and
strongest theme was that of legacy. Below are some of the  key  points  that
surfaced:

    • There was a strong focus on having the right  practitioners  with  the
      right practitioner focus. The capacity-building of present and  future
      local leaders and  planners  is  often  ignored.  Instead,  structural
      issues are often paid more attention.
    • Global events should be part of a natural development cycle as opposed
      to an unrealistic ‘dream’  to  solve  a  country  or  city’s  problems
      through hosting a mega-event.


    • Bidding with no intention to  win  has  actually  proven  to  be  more
      fruitful to many countries and also opening  up  opportunities  to  be
      ‘placed on the map’.


    • The intended legacy cannot be forgotten along the way. Despite all the
      hype around Mega-events, countries still need  to  focus  on  what  is
      going to be left behind for its residents after the event and what can
      be built on what has  been  gained  for  the  future.  (such  as  good
      infrastructure, affordable housing, schools, etc).


    • There needs to be a movement away from just the  traditional  economic
      focus on mega-events as more attention needs to  be  paid  to  a  more
      holistic view that includes environmental and  social  aspects  for  a
      potential legacy.

    • A good neighbour policy for the inclusion of the rest of the continent
      or  immediate  neighbouring  countries  is  something  that  has  been
      neglected.


    • Marginalised populations have  been  largely  ignored  in  mega  event
      research agendas and the plans for hosting such events.


    • Social networks provide another world  of  opportunity  for  countries
      even beyond mega events and need to be explored.


    • The role and power of mega event owners and promoters  has  also  been
      put into question as the developing world sets out to  host  its  firs
      FIFA World Cup™, which will provide developing  countries  like  South
      Africa to have a shot at the global arena.

    • The youth play a key role  in  the  sustainability  of  legacies  left
      behind by mega events. Even youth tourism has proved to  be  a  viable
      option for contributing to longer sport tourism strategies.


9.    Closing remarks by Deputy Minister of Sport and Recreation


The Deputy Minister said that the summit was not an end  in  itself,  but  a
milestone for South Africa and for  the  international  community.  All  the
high quality inputs  that  were  received,  the  presentations,  the  papers
submitted, and the discussions on the floor will  now  inform  a  number  of
concrete outcomes. These concrete ‘next steps’ include, amongst others,  the
following:

One: The National Department of Tourism will  compile  a  technical  project
report that collates all these source  materials  and  expert  contributions
into one volume, and by way of a summary,  lifts  out  the  key  themes  and
issues to be addressed.
Two: The valuable best practice and  knowledge  shared  will  feed  directly
into the  5-Year  Strategic  Framework  for  the  tourism  sector  that  the
Minister of Tourism will be publishing in a few weeks.

Three: These proceedings will also underpin  the  important  sports  tourism
strategy currently being finalised by the National Departments of Sport  and
Tourism, with the support of SA Tourism.

Four: The UNWTO will intensify its focus on sport, tourism  and  mega-events
as a tool for development, and would  suggest  that  they  consider  various
proposals as part of a work stream that could  include  greening  guidelines
for mega events, a knowledge repository on the management  of  mega-sporting
events, and a rethink on the ways of evaluating the costs  and  benefits  of
these events.

Five: The team of academics led by Professors Leo Jago and Daneel  van  Lill
will complete a detailed report, sponsored by Visa and commissioned  by  the
South African Government and the UNWTO that will contribute the basis  of  a
framework towards maximising the benefits of mega-events.

Delegates also had witnessed new networks  and  friendships  forged  between
industry players, academics, governments  and  international  organisations.
To South Africa – and on behalf of the government, it can  be  safely  said,
the  summit  opened  up  new  networks  between  new  friends.   The   wider
perspective  that  this  brings,  combined  with  the  new  access  to  this
knowledge network, will assist South Africa to do what was needed  do  in  a
smarter way.

In conclusion, Deputy Minister conveyed his appreciation  to  the  Secretary
General of the United Nations World  Tourism  Organisation,  for  co-hosting
that prestigious inaugural summit in  partnership  with  the  Government  of
South Africa. The impact of the event  would  be  experienced  globally  for
many years to come.
                           TUESDAY, 24 AUGUST 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Voluntary Disclosure Programme and Taxation Laws Second
         Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of Finance.
         Referred to the Standing Committee on Finance and the Select
         Committee on Finance.

2.    Introduction of Bills

     (1)    The Minister of Finance


         (a)      Taxation Laws Amendment Bill [B 28 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 77)


             Introduction in the National Assembly (proposed sec 77) and
             referral to the Standing Committee on Finance of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 24
             August 2010.
             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


         (b)      Voluntary Disclosure Programme and Taxation Laws Second
             Amendment Bill [B 29 – 2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec
             75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice of its
             introduction published in Government Gazette No 33476 of 20
             August 2010].


             Introduction in the National Assembly (proposed sec 75) and
             referral to the Standing Committee on Finance of the National
             Assembly, as well as referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism
             (JTM) for classification in terms of Joint Rule 160, on 24
             August 2010.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

     a) Submission of Policy Directives issued in terms of section 79(13)
        of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of 1977) as amended
        by section 10 (b) of the Judicial Matters Amendment Act, 2008 (Act
        No 66 of 2008).
National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Protector on an investigation into an
        allegation of a breach of the Executive Members’ Ethics Act, 1998
        and the Executive Ethics Code by General (Ret) S Nyanda, Minister
        of Communication.

