---
title: 'National Assembly - 19 August 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-08-19
---

THURSDAY, 19 AUGUST 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

         MINISTERS UNAVAILABLE AND REQUEST THAT QUESTION STAND OVER


The SPEAKER: Hon members, before we proceed with Questions, I wish to
advise the House that I’ve received correspondence from certain Ministers,
who were meant to respond to questions, indicating that they were unable to
be present today. The Ministers concerned are the Minister of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs and the Minister For the  Public Service
and Administration. The Ministers have asked for the questions to stand
over.

Needless to say, I’m very concerned about the fact that Ministers are not
available to respond to questions. To this effect, I will raise this
concern with the hon Leader of Government Business, and I’m certain that
the matter will receive his speedy attention.

I have also been informed that the Minister in the Presidency: National
Planning Commission is unable to attend today’s sitting. The Minister of
Labour will respond to questions addressed to the Minister.
[Interjections.] We are not voting on the matter, hon members. [Laughter.]

The first item on the Order Paper is questions addressed to the Deputy
President.

Ms S V KALYAN: Speaker, may I address you on the point you have just
raised?

The SPEAKER: Go ahead.

Ms S V KALYAN: Thank you. The DA echoes your concerns about the fact that
Ministers are not available to answer questions. We would like to put on
record that it’s the third time that the Minister in The Presidency:
National Planning Commission and the Minister of International Relations
and Co-operation have not presented themselves before this House to answer
questions. We have also been informed that the Deputy Minister for the
Public Service and Administration will answer questions on co-operative
governance. We would like to know why that is going to happen because that
particular portfolio has a Deputy Minister.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I’ve said I’m going to raise the matter with the
Deputy President, the Leader of Government Business, and we have expressed
our collective concern. Thank you.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

DEPUTY PRESIDENT

     Government’s standpoint on insistence of MDC on political, social,
    economic, media and electoral reforms preceding general elections in
                                  Zimbabwe

5.    Mr M B Skosana (IFP) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   (a) What is the Government's standpoint on the insistence of the
           Zimbabwean Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) that there must
           be political, social, economic, media and electoral reforms
           preceding general elections in that country and (b) on what is
           this standpoint based;


      (2)   whether he will make a statement in this regard?   NO2603E

The SPEAKER: The first item on the Order Paper is questions addressed to
the Deputy President. May I also repeat that members may press the “to
talk” button on their desks if they wish to ask a supplementary question.
The first supplementary question will go to the person who asked the
initial question, and thereafter we will have three other questions. The
first three that appear on my list are the ones that are going to get a
green light from me. The first question has been asked by the hon M B
Skosana.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Speaker, hon members, the three Zimbabwean
political parties that comprise the inclusive government are bound by the
Global Political Agreement to lead the country in a constitution-making
process which, as we speak, is under way. The draft constitution will be
subjected to a referendum leading to the elections.

Meanwhile, the parties have agreed to a set of measures which were
negotiated among the three parties. Those measures include commissions on
human rights, elections, media, land audit, anticorruption and
Constitutional Amendment No 19, which gave rise to the inclusive
government. These are instruments that are designed to level the political
playing field. The reforms that the hon member refers to are part of the
process that is already unfolding in Zimbabwe today. As South Africa we
appreciate these developments which must lead to a free and fair election
whose outcome will be credible and, hopefully, accepted by all parties
participating in those elections. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M J Skosana): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and Deputy
President for the answer. In fact, my question was, to a large degree, very
rhetorical. The group which insisted on this issue was the smaller faction
of the Movement for Democratic Change, MDC, the one led by Prof Mutambara.
I’m saying it’s rhetorical because I think the Deputy President will
remember that even among the powerful nations that have strong regional and
global influence – that would include the United States, Russia, China,
India, etc - there are those who believe in a democracy-peace proposition,
which means they insist on elections before peace. And there are those who
believe in the peace-democracy proposition, which means they believe that
there must be stability before there can be elections.

I know that South Africa is caught up within that type of paradigm.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, your one minute is up and that was not a
supplementary question; it was a supplementary statement.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr J SKOSANA): Thank you, Mr Speaker.

The SPEAKER: Hon Deputy President, you may wish to respond.
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Speaker, I think I agree with the hon member’s
line of analysis. Thank you.

The SPEAKER: On my screen I have the following: the hon Mokgalapa, followed
by the hon Ngonyama, and the last question will go to the hon C Dudley, in
that order.

Mr S MOKGALAPA: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Deputy President, in view of
government’s silence on the SADC Tribunal contravention by the Zimbabwean
government, the question is: In what ways does the government regard
Zimbabwe’s contravention of a 2008 SADC Tribunal ruling concerning the
country’s land reform programme as having undermined the progress of
political, social and economic reforms in Zimbabwe? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Mokgalapa, recently, SADC leaders met in Namibia
and they - among other things - agreed to give themselves a period of six
months in which to review and address the standoff between the government
of Zimbabwe and the regional tribunal. So we hope that, within these six
months, an amicable solution will be found to these problems. Thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Hon Speaker, recognising that perception in politics is
everything, can the Deputy President explain to this House how it is
possible for the ANC-led government to be regarded as an impartial and
honest broker when structures of the ANC are publicly pronouncing support
for Zanu-PF? I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Ngonyama. The role that
South Africa plays as an honest broker and facilitator of the dialogue in
Zimbabwe is one that is not at party-political level, but at government
level. So, the government of South Africa is regarded as neutral because it
relates to all parties in Zimbabwe. What NGOs do in their party-to-party
relations has no impact on how the South African government is regarded.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms C DUDLEY: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Deputy President, does government
agree with Zanu-PF’s assessment of the reason for economic failure and the
stumbling block to reforms in Zimbabwe as being due to the shopping
sanctions which have been externally placed on the elite? If so, how does
government see the lifting of those sanctions benefiting the people of
Zimbabwe and bringing reform? If not, what is government’s view with regard
to this matter? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Dudley. The government’s view is that
the problems of Zimbabwe cannot be solely attributed to the tastes of
Ministers in Zimbabwe. However, the “smart sanctions”, so-called, affect
free flow of capital and goods into Zimbabwe. It is really the view of the
government that the process of dialogue in Zimbabwe - which is all-
inclusive of all parties, including the MDC in its two forms - has called
for these sanctions to be lifted precisely because we think Zimbabwe is on
the right path towards recovery. We think that these sanctions retard
progress that would otherwise be achieved so that the situation in Zimbabwe
normalises or is normalised as soon as possible. That’s the view of our
government and that is why, together with SADC and the African union, we
have called upon the European Union, the United Kingdom, as well as the US
to reconsider their position regarding these “smart sanctions”. Thank you.

  Investigation into, and steps taken to help, growing number of poor white
                                   people

6.    Dr C P Mulder (FF Plus) asked the Deputy President:


      Whether the Government, in its war on poverty, has (a) launched any
      investigation into and (b) taken any steps to help the growing number
      of poor white people; if not, why not, in each case; if so, what are
      the relevant details in each case?
                                   NO2540E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon speaker, hon members, and hon Mulder, this
government is engaged in a war on poverty in our country regardless of the
race or religion of the people affected. The way the War on Poverty works
is that the poorest wards in our country have been identified using
Statistics SA’s Provincial Poverty Index. Since the unit of intervention is
the household, every household and family that lives in these targeted poor
wards across South Africa is thus eligible for all government service
interventions, irrespective of race, religion, social or political
persuasion.

So, to reiterate, government attends to the needs of all its citizens
regardless of their race. Poor white people are as entitled to government
services as any other race group of our nation. Basic services are a
constitutional right and the War on Poverty uses a needs-based approach to
service delivery co-ordination.

Government actively discourages a return to the old dispensation where skin
colour was the sole determinant of access to social services, as well as
the quality thereof. As President Jacob Zuma said when visiting the poor
white community of Bethlehem earlier this year, this government is
determined to fight and eradicate poverty in every community and every
corner of this society. Our efforts in this regard will not be driven by
considerations of race, colour or creed. It is therefore important that the
fight to eradicate poverty becomes not just a government fight. It should
be a fight in which South Africans from all walks of life collectively come
together to wage and win this war. I thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, Deputy President, for
your answer. It is exactly what I expected. However, as far as I am
concerned, it is not necessarily what we are experiencing in practice out
there, and that is what I want to take up with you.

The fact of the matter is that President Zuma visited an area around
Pretoria called Wesmoot on 30 March. The President undertook to do certain
investigations into the problems the people face there. It is now five
months after the visit, and we have had nothing and no reply back from the
Presidency. In that specific area, there are 5 000 whites living in
informal housing; and in and around Pretoria, there are now more than 70
informal settlements where whites are residing.

The Bureau of Market Research indicated that there are more than 650 000
whites, 16 years and older, that have no income whatsoever. According to
the Institute of Race Relations, there has been an increase of more than
95% in white poverty, and we have more than 430 000 poor whites at this
stage.

The President says that government does not make any distinction, but in
practice we see something different. There are certain projects where
government departments get involved, like Social Development and
Agriculture, for example, in Limpopo. But we are not aware of any projects
from government’s side in terms of what we experience in respect of white
poverty.

Arising out of the hon Deputy President’s reply, my question, basically,
was whether the government is prepared to investigate this issue because it
is becoming more and more serious. I want to ask again: Is government
prepared that we investigate this issue and see what the actual facts are?
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Mulder, as I said, we
follow Statistics SA’s Provincial Poverty Index. Just to illustrate the
point that I am making, outside Kroonstad in the Free State, there is an
old township called Marabastad. This is a very, very old township. When I
visited the area last year, the houses there were disintegrating. I am
happy to share with you that there are RDP houses that are being
constructed in the area, and homeless white families, 74 of them from
Kroonstad, are being allocated houses there and have accepted taking
ownership of those houses.

That indicates, in practical terms, that these services are not meant for
only one race group, but we follow Statistics SA’s Provincial Poverty
Index. If there are people who are poor and deserving of this intervention
in a particular area or town, that happens to them as well because the
target is the household. And in each household we try to identify change
agents.

Tomorrow and on Saturday, I will be going to Plettenberg Bay and Bitou with
the Premier of the Western Cape to do exactly the same thing. We go from
household to household to establish whether we can assist the families to
free them from this grip of poverty. I thank you.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Mhlonishwa Somlomo, namhlanje sifuna ukukhuluma
isiBhunu. [Hon Speaker, I want to speak Afrikaans today.]

Meneer die Speaker, armoede is ’n verskynsel wat nie kleur ken nie. Ek wil
met die agb adjunkpresident saamstem. Hy ken nie kleur nie. Ons is almal
arm of ryk. Ek wil ook met dr Mulder saamstem, dat daar iets aan wit
armoede gedoen moet word. Terwyl ons vandag oor wit armoede praat, kom ons
bespreek dit deeglik. Ons praat baie keer oor armoede oor die algemeen,
maar om te dink dat daar ’n 150% groei in Afrikaner armoede die afgelope
klompie jare was en dat daar omtrent 600 000 arm blankes is skokkend. Ek
wil ook sê dat daar rondom Pretoria 77 plakkerskampe is en landswyd is daar
470 blanke plakkerskampe.

As ’n mens daarna kyk, mnr die Speaker, dan het jy pyn in jou hart oor
hierdie armoede. Daarom doen ons ’n beroep op die regering om ook te kyk na
wit armoede.

Ek wil afsluit deur te sê ons bring hulde aan die vakunie Solidariteit, wat
’n spesiale afdeling, die Helpende Hand, het. Hulle reik die hand uit na
wit armoede toe, onder andere, en hulle verdien ons groot dank en
waardering vir die goeie werk wat hulle doen om armoede te bestry.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr Speaker, poverty is a phenomenon that doesn’t know colour. I want to
concur with the hon Deputy President. It doesn’t know colour. We are all
rich or poor. I also want to agree with Dr Mulder that something should be
done about white poverty. While we are talking about white poverty, let us
discuss it properly. We often talk about poverty in general, but to think
that there has been an increase of over 150% in Afrikaner poverty over the
past few years, and that there are about 600 000 poor whites, is shocking.
I also want to add that there are 77 squatter camps around Pretoria and
countrywide there are 470 white squatter camps.

Looking at it, Mr Speaker, one feels pain in one’s heart about this
poverty. That is why we are appealing to the government to take a look at
white poverty as well.

I want to conclude by saying that we pay tribute to the trade union
Solidarity, which has a special section called the Helping Hand. Their hand
has been reaching out to white poverty, among others, and they deserve our
thanks and appreciation for the good work that is being done by them in
combating poverty.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Speaker and hon Van der
Merwe. As I have stated, there is no barrier based on skin colour with
regard to these interventions, whatsoever. The fact that we follow
Statistics SA’s Provincial Poverty Index simply means that we have not been
able to go to those areas, but there is absolutely no barrier to these
communities accessing similar interventions, even now. What really needs to
happen is that these communities have got to apply for RDP houses if, for
instance, they are squatting, and so on, and those would be provided.

If they can afford rental stock, the Minister of Human Settlements will be
able to ensure that they are included on the list of those who do not quite
qualify for RDP houses and bonds from the banks. The Minister of Human
Settlements is targeting precisely that category of people in that gap
market. However, if they have absolutely no income stream, they apply for
RDP houses. As I said, in Marabastad in Kroonstad, 74 of them have done so
and are being allocated houses. Thank you.

Ms C M P KOTSI: Thank you, Speaker. Hon Deputy President, I fully agree
with you that it is not only poverty of the white people that has to be
taken into account, but that of all our people in South Africa. The key
question should be whether any steps have been taken to help the growing
number of all the people, given that the gap of South Africa’s Gini
coefficient continues to widen and is at 0.679 at present. The other issue
is that 40% of the population lives in the rural areas. Out of that, only
10% is economically active. What strategy is there in terms of closing this
gap and dealing with the 30% that is not economically active? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Kotsi. The growth path deals
precisely with the issues that you are raising, and the Minister of
Economic Development has worked out a detailed manner in which we will be
able to address this challenge of the widening gap between the affluent
section of the South African population and the poorest of the poor. The
point, however, is that wherever we find poverty, we should be able to
tackle it. At the moment, we, as it were, freeze poverty through the
various social grants and other government assistance. The idea is to
empower household members, particularly with education and skills, so that
this poverty is not transmitted from one generation to the next. So, that
is the kind of intervention we are looking at. Thank you.

Mrs H LAMOELA: Speaker, hon Deputy President, poverty affects everyone in
South Africa; it knows no boundaries. It is a disgrace that a party in the
ANC government has racialised poverty in their question to you. For the
record, the DA wants to eradicate poverty in the country. No person or
individual should suffer the indignity of poverty. Only through job
creation can we solve this problem. One way of stimulating job growth in
our country is through wage subsidies. My question then is: When will the
ANC government implement such wage subsidies? I thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon members, the most
effective way of addressing poverty in the country is really to provide
bulk economic and social infrastructure because the ... [Interjections.]
Let me finish here.

The SPEAKER: Order! hon members. You ask a question and expect answers.
Before they answer, you interject! Order!

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, Speaker, for protecting me. I
was just developing the point that, for as long as the physical
infrastructure - whether one is in a plane or on the ground - says we have
two nations in one country, that is the affluent nation and the poor
nation, so shall our fault lines ever be yawning. And that why it is
important to ensure that, first and foremost, all South Africans have
tarred streets, waterborne sewer systems, potable water, and electricity.
After that, we would be able to unleash and harness the energies of our
people to address the problem of youth unemployment, and so on.

The interventions that the Ministry of Defence and Military Veterans is
initiating to address unemployed youth would make merely a dent in the
total of 2,8 million youth up to the age of 24 that are without jobs, not
in training or at any college, and so on.

Earlier this year, the Minister of Finance announced that, as government,
we would be prepared to consider subsidising the earnings of young people
who have skills and qualifications but lack experience. This will enable
young people to gain that requisite experience and be in a position to be
employable. They also get caught between a rock and a hard place because
companies stipulate experience as a requirement, which they do not have and
cannot have unless they are given the opportunity and privilege to serve,
even at subsidised earnings.

This was met with protestations from organised labour, but that does not
mean that is the last word on this matter. As government, we are still
committed to ensuring that we address this matter and implement what the
Minister of Finance announced. We are quite committed because, if we did
not do that, this youth would forever remain on the margins. It is
important for us to get them. The economy needs them and their skills. It
is important that we take that ... [Time expired.]

   Steps to prolong unity of nation and focus particularly on needs of the
 poor, following successful hosting of 2010 Fifa World Cup Soccer tournament

7.    Dr G W Koornhof (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


      Following the successful hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup Soccer
      tournament, what steps will the Government take to prolong the unity
      of the nation, with particular focus on the needs of poor people?
                                   NO2610E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Speaker and hon members, as we heard in the debate in
this Chamber yesterday, the South African government was inspired by the
enthusiasm displayed by the people of this country, from all races and
walks of life, in the build-up to and throughout the course of the 2010
Fifa World Cup.

To capitalise on the positive mood that prevailed in the run-up and
throughout the event, the South African government is in liaison with the
International Marketing Council to conceptualise a programme aimed at
building on the enthusiasm of South Africans which was expressed in their
cohesion as a nation, united under a common flag and anthem. This programme
will seek to develop and entrench a national brand of ubuntu, unity through
our diversity, innovation and creativity, and of possibilities. A campaign
has already been developed and will be launched within the next few weeks.

In addition, government supports other initiatives by the private sector,
which are currently under way, that encourage South Africans to build on
this spirit even after the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup. Some private
businesses continue to infuse the flying of the national flag in their
campaigns, and we encourage others to do likewise.

We have seen the flying of the flag in the last few days, especially in the
build-up to and during the friendly match between our national football
team, Bafana Bafana, and their Ghanaian counterparts, the Black Stars, on
11 August 2010. Thank you.

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Thank you, Deputy President, for the reply and the steps
that you’ve outlined. Apart from gaining the admiration of the world in
staging this very successful event, the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup has
demonstrated that there is a need and, indeed, a willingness to reach out
to one another and work together. As a matter of fact, the 2010 Fifa Soccer
World Cup reiterated the motto on our coat of arms: Diverse People Unite.

My question to the Deputy President is: Shouldn’t we consider capturing and
institutionalising this growth in unity that we have demonstrated by, for
instance, establishing a task team in the Presidency within the National
Planning Commission? Such a task group can, for instance, identify areas
such as sport, education, housing, peace and security, and even tourism in
different spheres of government to include all role-players and,
especially, to focus on the needs of the poor people because this is where
our challenge lies. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Koornhof, the idea of establishing a special task
team in the National Planning Commission has not been entertained by
Cabinet, and it is an idea, perhaps, that you’ve planted now. I would just
like to say that the lessons of the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup will not be
lost to government because, in preparing for the 2010 Fifa Soccer World
Cup, we were able to work within very tight timeframes and to have
interspherical co-ordination from national down to host city level, which
is local government.

We believe that need we to identify major projects that are catalytic. For
example, if we were to say that our next “Fifa World Cup” is to provide
poor communities in rural areas and in the townships with bulk economic and
social infrastructure so that, as I said, none of our people should be
without access to potable water, proper sanitation and an environment that
is liveable. If we were to do that and tackle it in the same spirit by
harnessing the available talent in the country from engineers, and so on, I
think we would enhance our chances of cementing the unity of our nation.

The fact is that the Bulls were able to take the semi-final and final of
the Super 14 rugby tournament to Orlando Stadium and, whilst there, then
had the privilege of interacting with Sowetans. In Pretoria, a pint of beer
costs R25. In Soweto, two quarts of beer cost R30. So, they were very
happy, and I think that we can have integration. [Laughter.] We can really
have national unity. Our people can live cheek by jowl, and we will be a
truly happy nation, if the infrastructure is there. One of the things that
cause people to migrate away from the depressed areas is absence of
infrastructure. Thank you.

Mr T D LEE: Mr Deputy President, for a short while during the 2010 Fifa
Soccer World Cup, South Africans were a very happy family, and South Africa
was a very happy place, even for the poor. Why was that, Mr Deputy
President? It was because we delivered on time for Fifa. We did everything
to please Fifa. We were determined to meet their deadlines. Now, Mr Deputy
President, my question to you is: When will the government start showing
the same determination to expedite the delivery of services to the poor on
time again? When and why don’t we stick to timeframes when it comes to the
poor? The poor people of this country are becoming restive again. Thank
you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Lee, I couldn’t agree with you more that this is
what we should do. This is a very important lesson that we need to draw
from the experience of hosting the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup. There are
all of these concurrent competencies, and so on. We need to cut across that
administrative and bureaucratic need to account and ensure that we process
matters within the shortest possible time and also look at the quality of
the projects and what is being delivered.

This weekend I spent time in a place called Namibia in Mangaung, Free
State. It is called Namibia, but it is in Mangaung. We’re a wonderful
country. [Laughter.] A place that used to be an informal settlement is now
formalised. There are RDP houses, and the people there are happy. They said
to me that their experience of the new sewer system that they have is that
they get rain from the ground and not from the heavens because the sewer
system blocks. It does so because the pipes used are narrow.

The contract was given and the civil engineering company laid out the sewer
system, the pipes, and so on, but cut costs by utilising narrow pipes. It
is very clear that they are already blocking today. In the next 10 years
when the population density increases, it would be a disaster.

So, the province has to pull all of that out and replace it with pipes of a
better quality. That is a lesson that, for every major project, we must
have a team that monitors from day one that those who have won the contract
deliver in accordance with specifications. That is what we need to do. Of
course, as Premier Zille indicated here yesterday, the time taken to
process simple applications is just too inordinate for us to be efficient.
We need to address those bottlenecks. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Speaker, arising from the Deputy President’s reply, would the
Deputy President agree that there is a duty upon all leaders and
politicians to continue with nation-building, particularly by avoiding
making inflammatory and ill-considered statements which do irreparable harm
to the cause of nation-building in the country? Deputy President, was it
not noteworthy that during the successful 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup, the
normally strident voices of certain politicians and leaders were more
constrained and constructive, including the silence of a prominent youth
league president? Should we not all learn from that process as we
contribute? It is not what we say, but how we say it. Thank you, Deputy
President.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Swart, I agree with you that it is our duty and
responsibility, all of us, to contribute towards nation-building, but, of
course, we are who we are. Life would be very dull if we were all the same.
In a manner of speaking, there are people who speak with a bit more
exuberance. So, we must also learn how to live with such people here. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr P D DEXTER: Deputy President, we all agree that the 2010 Fifa Soccer
World Cup was a success at many levels, and it taught us many important
lessons as a country. One of the most important of these was that we, as a
country, performed beyond everybody’s expectations when we had very tight
and specific deadlines and targets to meet. Are we now setting deadlines
for key performance areas in respect of achieving national unity and
driving this from the highest office in the land? If so, what are some of
the key areas that have been identified?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Dexter, yes there are outcomes that the President
has agreed to with his Ministers, and contracts have been signed to that
end. But the process of nation-building is an ongoing process; it’s not
something that would simply admit to strict timeframes. When the Bulls go
to Soweto, for instance, that’s a major contribution. It conveys, in a very
practical way, a more positive message than what you and I can manage in a
rally.

Therefore we have to take the contributions of all sections of society
towards unity of South Africans as an important matter. Those of us who
have public platforms as public representatives and as leaders must utilise
these public platforms to convey this message of unity of our people all
the time. Even as we differ or as we expose one another’s weaknesses, we
must not forget to slide in the message that our people need to be united
all the time. I think that is a task that we must all carry. Thank you.

     Particulars regarding steps taken to establish a code of ethics for
                            business and politics

8.    Rev K R J Meshoe (ACDP) asked the Deputy President:
      Whether, in light of his speech at the Regenesys graduation ceremony
      on 4 August 2010, he has taken any steps to establish a code of ethics
      for both business and politics; if not, why not; if so, (a) who are
      the drafters of the code and (b)(i) how will the code be enforced and
      (ii) by whom will it be enforced?
                       NO2536E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Speaker. Hon Rev Meshoe, at
the Regenesys graduation ceremony to which you refer, I was addressing
young management and leadership graduates. I encouraged them, as the
leaders of tomorrow, to always engage in good governance practice, whether
they are located in the private or public sectors.

I further conveyed that for any society to thrive, especially for the
benefit of the poor, it has to have in place moderating mechanisms, plus
checks and balances, because the system by its nature is imperfect. As the
member should be aware, there are a number of initiatives and instruments,
like the King Code, that promote ethical dealings by the business sector.
Unless gaps are identified in these measures, among others, there is no
need for further codes.

As for codes of ethics for politics, as the hon member is aware, there is
the Executive Members’ Ethics Act, which was passed by this House; the Code
of Conduct for Members of Parliament, which is implemented by the Joint
Ethics Committee of Parliament; as well as codes for Members of Provincial
Legislatures and municipal councils. Unless otherwise determined by
Parliament, there is no need for new codes.

However, hon member, let me reiterate that it is not so much the content of
the existing codes - whether they be in the business or political spheres —
but rather the adherence to and enforcement of these codes that is
important. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Speaker, I give Rev Meshoe’s apologies. He couldn’t be
here due to unforeseen circumstances. Thank you for your gracious response,
hon Deputy President. I will pass the information on to the hon Rev Kenneth
Meshoe.

The ACDP appreciates all efforts promoting ethical behaviour in government
and society in general. Having had the opportunity to read your speech now,
I have been inspired and encouraged. The following words of Dr Martin
Luther King, which you began and ended your speech with, were particularly
inspirational:

   Cowardice asks the question: Is it safe? Expediency asks the question:
   Is it politic?. ... But conscience asks the question: Is it right? And
   there comes a time when one must take a position that is neither safe,
   nor politic, nor popular, but because conscience tells one it is right.
Thank you.

Mr M SWART: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon Deputy President, in your speech at
the Regenesys graduation ceremony you said:

   Each organisation and institution has an ethical culture which separates
   what is just and good from the bad and unjust.

And you continued to say –

   We see a direct link in the practice of ethical leadership and
   transparent and representative governance.

We, in the DA, agree with the sentiments you expressed, but we would like
to know from you, Mr Deputy President: How do you reconcile these
statements about ethics, transparency and governance with the fact that the
ANC continues to do business with government through its company,
Chancellor House?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Swart, with regard to the ANC and Chancellor
House story, Chancellor House does not do business with government.
Chancellor House bought a stake in a company called Hitachi Power Africa.
It is Hitachi Power Africa that won a contract to supply boilers to Eskom.
That is the closest, closest, closest link between Chancellor House and any
government institution. It is the closest. Besides that, there is none.
Chancellor House does not chase after government contracts at all. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Deputy President, you have referred
to various pieces of legislation that would in effect promote an ethical
code of conduct for both business and politics. However, in the recent
past, we have had incidents of either senior Cabinet Ministers or directors-
general or senior government officials either resigning from government or
leaving government and, within a short space of time, joining companies
which do business with government.

Would the hon Deputy President, in looking at the code of ethics, promote a
cooling-off period where hon Cabinet Ministers or senior government
officials do not involve themselves in business with companies for a period
of 12 months or so, or any period that may be determined? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Singh. Yes, indeed, there
should be a cooling-off period because it would not be correct for any
senior politician or manager to prepare ground and then move outside to
collect what they would have prepared whilst in government. I think a
cooling-off period is very important, and that ought to be followed.

However, of course, you will also take into account the fact that,
normally, people are employed as senior managers in government departments
either in accordance with their skills or in accordance with what they
would have qualified for. When they then leave the Public Service, it is
natural that they would also operate in the same space precisely because of
their strong points, and so on. So, we also have to accept that such things
will happen. However, a cooling-off period is definitely a necessity; I
agree with you. Thank you.

Ms J D KILIAN: Speaker, the Deputy President has indicated that he believes
that what Chancellor House is doing is okay because it has a specific
interest in Hitachi, and is not directly doing business with government.
Yet, the hon Deputy President must be aware that there are some other
contracts — very controversial contracts — that have been awarded, and in
respect of which the Public Protector has actually found that there are
transgressions in the one instance, more so on the pronouncements made by
the hon Minister of Communications.

In the other case, it was actually a saviour for the particular senior ANC
politician who is the owner of SGL Engineering that municipal records could
not really prove to the Public Protector what business he engaged in with
local authorities. Can I just ask him whether he will assure us in this
House today that government will close all those avenues within the codes
of ethics, and implement very firm cooling-off periods so that we can avert
the current insider trading that is taking place between senior officials
and government? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Kilian is now raising issues about business
activities of members of the ANC, rather than Chancellor House. I want us
to be clear about that. These are now individual members of the ANC who are
in business, or who have interests in business entities. That is a very
grey area for the simple reason that South Africans have a right to partake
in the economy of the country without exception.

At certain times, the relatives, or individuals, or friends, or
acquaintances of people who hold political office are reduced to automatons
that have no lives, skills, and experience of their own. They are regarded
as people who can only benefit from the fact that they are blood relatives
or friends to political office bearers. This is a very difficult area. I
would like us to look at it in a just manner which also takes into account
that individuals grow differently. Even if people are born of the same
mother, they may pursue completely different paths as they develop. Then
later, by virtue of having someone in the family or within your circle of
friends who is a political office bearer, you are debarred from all other
activities.

I think it is a bit of a challenge. I do know that perhaps what should be
helpful in such instances is that — and I don’t think this would be a
difficulty, although it’s a prejudice, but it may be helpful — where such
individuals who are relatives of prominent office bearers succeed in life,
in one way or the other, there should be a body - perhaps the Public
Protector or somebody like that - that will be allowed to check whether or
not something untoward has happened. If something untoward has happened,
then we take steps to correct it. If there has been undue facilitation, it
must not be allowed.

However, when people succeed on merit, of their own volition and on their
own initiative, and if they are cleared by a body such as the Public
Protector, then there should be no insinuations and innuendos. Even though,
on the one hand, we want to fight against corruption - which is a serious
problem – on the other hand, if everything is called corruption, then that
is a problem.

For example, I have seen my name attached to somebody who was a member of
the trade union when I was the general secretary. People raised concerns
that this person and the Deputy President were in the same union at some
point. Bear in mind that the person in question has been in business for
many years, and so on. I am just saying that there are those kinds of
things that do not help us to zero in on the nub of the problem.

What we should be dealing with is how we shall ensure that there is no
undue manipulation and influence of processes, so that the law or tender
processes apply, and people have equal access to these. I think that is the
issue that we must look into. Thank you. [Applause.]

                                 GOVERNANCE
                                  Cluster 3

MINISTERS:

         Progress made in finalising anti-corruption strategic plan

95.   The Leader of the Opposition (DA) asked the Minister in the
      Presidency - Performance Monitoring and Evaluation as well as
      Administration in the Presidency:
      Whether, with reference to his reply to question 1248 on 13 May 2010,
      any progress has been made since May 2010 in finalising the anti-
      corruption strategic plan; if not, why not; if so, why has it not been
      completed in view of the fight against crime and corruption being one
      of the Government's twelve priority outcomes?
                                   NO2532E

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND
EVALUATION, AS WELL AS ADMINISTRATION IN THE PRESIDENCY:
Hon Speaker, the anti-corruption interministerial committee has been
established by Cabinet. Its main focus of work includes the following: to
ensure a co-ordinated approach to fight corruption; to promote policy
coherence and alignment on cross-cutting anticorruption programmes of
government; to develop or enhance technical measures to curb corruption in
both the public and private sector; to review procurement processes to
prevent corrupt practices; to advise on weaknesses in the criminal justice
system and how these would be addressed so as to ensure efficient
prosecution; to ensure political co-ordination of anticorruption efforts in
the international arena; to identify areas which may need to be
prioritised; and to review current measures to improve on effectiveness and
co-ordination.

The Cabinet didn’t think it was necessary for us to have a strategic plan,
but rather indicated that what we need is action which is going to bring
results as speedily as possible. Therefore, no strategic plan is being
developed.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Minister, in the light of the fact that you
say government is not going to have a strategic plan and that they want to
be results-driven with regard to eradicating corruption; the recent
embarrassing exposés that implicated the governing party, its affiliates
and high-profile individuals in the abuse of political office for financial
gain; and this week’s comments by the ANC spokesperson, Mr Jackson Mthembu,
that “the ANC’s democratic government has made it fashionable to fight
corruption”; my question is as follows: Is the governing party prepared to
support the recently tabled Private Member’s Bill that seeks to ban
political parties from tendering and contracting with government? If not,
why not?

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION, AS
WELL AS ADMINISTRATION IN THE PRESIDENCY: Obviously, I can’t answer for the
political party. Political parties have their own spokespersons or Chief
Whips in Parliament to deal with these matters. [Applause.] The Bill, which
I suppose is a Private Member’s Bill, will undergo appropriate processes,
and parties will discuss what will happen to it. I can’t comment on behalf
of political parties sitting here in Parliament. They have Chief Whips and
leaders of political parties who can do that well. Thank you.

Mr N SINGH: Hon Minister, I would like to know if your office is going to
investigate the number of cases that are outstanding for disciplinary and
corruption practices by departmental officials because in the committee I
serve we are told, on a regular basis, that there are cases which are not
finalised in good time. Some of the departments are not aggressive in
pursuing either disciplinary or criminal proceedings against officials who
are allegedly corrupt. I want to know if your Ministry would take this
forward.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION, AS
WELL AS ADMINISTRATION IN THE PRESIDENCY: If there are processes which are
not moving with speed, they will be dealt with through another process, not
this one. I have indicated the tasks of this committee.

However, we do interact with state agencies which deal with various cases.
It is not our job to investigate. We ensure that those who are tasked with
doing the job do it speedily and according to law. Thank you.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Minister, if you say that there is no
need for a strategic plan to combat corruption, and that you are going to
be result-oriented, how then do you determine what those results are? How
do you embark on achieving the results that you want to achieve in
eradicating corruption if there is no plan?

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION, AS
WELL AS ADMINISTRATION IN THE PRESIDENCY: The hon member would remember
that the issue of corruption falls within various areas of work of various
institutions - the Police, the Public Service Commission, the Public
Protector and everybody else. It doesn’t help us to develop more and more
documents. What we need is an effective mechanism and the unlocking of
bottlenecks which make it impossible for agencies to perform their work.
That is what we are going to do, and that is how we are going to judge
progress with regard to that work. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms J C MOLOI-MOROPA: Chairperson, in the light of a number of strategies
and ways of co-ordinating and combating corruption, can the Minister
clarify to us if there is a time when government will take an approach of
co-ordinating all activities, efforts, policies and strategies put in place
to ensure that we deal with this problem of corruption that is facing us?

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION, AS
WELL AS ADMINISTRATION IN THE PRESIDENCY: In my response to the principal
question, I indicated that one of the tasks we are busy with is to review
the current measures to improve on their effectiveness and co-ordination.
Therefore, definitely, that is part of the work which we are doing to
ensure that there is better co-ordination of anticorruption efforts by all
agencies responsible for various aspects of the corruption sphere.

       Particulars regarding appointment of advisors in the Presidency

87.   Mr N Singh (IFP) asked the Minister in the Presidency - Performance
      Monitoring and Evaluation as well as Administration in the Presidency:


      (a) How many advisors have been appointed in the Presidency, (b) what
      are the relevant details of (i) their salaries and (ii) their
      contracts and (c) what role does each fulfil?
                                                   NO2521E

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION, AS
WELL AS ADMINISTRATION IN THE PRESIDENCY: Chairperson, the answer to the
first part of the question is 12. To the second part the answer is as
follows: eight advisors are to the President; one to the Deputy President;
two to performance, monitoring and evaluation; and one to the National
Planning Commission.

With regard to details of the expenditure and salaries, salaries are
determined according regulations and they total to about R11 552 530 per
annum. Their contracts are for the term of office of the principals, unless
they are predetermined for earlier exit. Three of the advisors are seconded
from various government institutions and departments. Four deal with
special advisors work which is related to the offices they serve. One is
for international relations. One is a legal advisor, one a political
advisor, one an economic advisor, one a special envoy, one an advisor on
communication, one on governance and one on security.

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, it is difficult to absorb the answer, especially
as we don’t have it in written form. However, what I would like the hon
Minister to answer is: Is he aware whether these advisors have performance
agreements that they signed with the principal officers, and is it
necessary, with the extended Cabinet we have, that there be eight advisors
to the President? Thank you.

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION, AS
WELL AS ADMINISTRATION IN THE PRESIDENCY: Hon Singh, with regard to your
earlier comment, I can’t help it; it is the nature of the question. If the
question is asked in such a manner that you need that many details, then
there is nothing I can do except to provide those details. If you don’t
follow, you cannot blame me for that.

As to whether it is necessary for the President to have so many advisors, I
don’t know of any President in the world who does not have advisors on the
various fields. You cannot specialise in everything. You need to have the
best advice with regard to the various works the President has to perform.
We think that the advisors are adequate. Sometimes there are areas on which
the President may often need advice, which, as you can see, are not
necessarily covered.

With regard to the question whether they have performance agreements, my
reply is: Not as far as I know. Advisors work in a special way, but there
are no performance agreements – at least in my case. I don’t know about
others; I have not been able to check that. Thank you.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Minister, my figures indicate that
R7 million would be spent on paying advisors to the President in the 2010-
11 financial year. However, I have it on very good authority from you that
it is R11 million. Seeing that the President’s supplementary advice comes
with a price tag of R11 million, which is R8 million more than we paid in
the previous year, and the President’s transgression of the executive
ethics code is handled, in part, by his own private attorney, Mr Michael
Hulley, at the cost of the state, instead of one of the legal advisors
currently employed by the state to supply supplementary legal advice to the
President, why did the Presidency deem it necessary to get additional legal
support when he has all the existing advice, a cost of at R11 million to
the state?

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - PERFORMANCE MONITORING AND EVALUATION, AS
WELL AS ADMINISTRATION IN THE PRESIDENCY: I thought the question was to the
Presidency and not the President. That is why my figures will differ from
yours. You might be referring to advice to the President while I
encompassed everybody who works in the Presidency. I think that is the
difference.

With regard to the question of why do we need further legal advice whereas
we have legal advisors; you would know that, normally, you source out a
particular legal advice if the services you have are not adequate. I think
you know that one cannot always have adequate legal advice.
[Interjections.] For example, when you seek legal opinion, you don’t
necessarily depend on what you have, but you have to seek legal opinion
from elsewhere as well. Therefore, I don’t see anything strange in seeking
additional legal advice with regard to matters you are dealing with, even
if you have the services. [Interjections.]

 Plans to enforce departmental compliance with legislation on employment of
                          persons with disabilities

78.   Mrs J M Maluleke (ANC) asked the Minister of Women, Children and
      People with Disabilities:


      Whether she has any plans to compel departments to comply with
      legislation regarding the employment of persons with disabilities; if
      not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        NO2512E

The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon
Chairperson and hon members, the Employment Equity Act of 1998 outlaws
discrimination of any kind in the workplace, and promotes equal
opportunities for all workers in the workplace. In 1995, the South African
government adopted the White Paper on the Transformation of the Public
Service that outlined government’s commitment to achieve a minimum of 2%
representation of persons with disabilities in the Public Service by 2005.

However, as at December 2005, persons with disabilities constituted a mere
0,16% of Public Service personnel, which was well below the set target
according to the Nedlac. For the period of 2008 to 2009, there were 2 410
employees with disabilities in the Public Service workplace out of a total
number of more than 1,2 million, which translates to only 0,2%.

For the period of 2009 to 2010, there were only 2 838 employees with
disabilities in the Public Service workplace, out of a total number of more
than 1,91 million, which translates to only 0,24% representation of persons
with disabilities. These statistics are available from the Public Service
Commission report of 2008 and 2009.

In order to compel departments to comply with legislation regarding the
employment of persons with disabilities, the Ministry for Women, Children
and Persons with Disabilities is conducting oversight of the implementation
of the employment of persons with disabilities. The department commits to
take appropriate measures in reviewing current legislation; for example,
the Integrated National Disability Strategy and the draft national
disability policy in order to strengthen compliance mechanisms regarding
their employment.
Monitoring mechanisms of the implementation of employment equity are mainly
by way of periodic reports. The department is currently working together
with the Department of Public Service and Administration on the
implementation of the job access strategy regarding recruitment, retention
and reasonable accommodation, and general employment in the Public Service.

Article 4 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities of 2006, obliges governments to domesticate all issues
affecting persons with disabilities in the convention, of which employment
features are a major priority. It therefore gives a compelling reason for
all departments to implement the disability employment targets which the
Department of Women, Children and Persons with Disabilities may reveal with
a view to increasing in the next financial year.

We have also started engaging with the Ministry for Performance Monitoring
and Evaluation as a way of developing proper targets that will be enforced
for each department and all levels of government. [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, I’ve got no members
for supplementary questions. No, hon members, you must press the button.

Mrs P C DUNCAN: I did press the button.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): No, but there is nothing on the
screen, except now - except now it shows up! Then I see hon member Duncan.

Mrs P C DUNCAN: Thank you, Chairperson. Minister, your Ministry is brand-
new. However, in the more than one year of existence you had a golden
opportunity to ensure that you adhere to legislation, which compels you to
employ 2% of persons with disabilities. How do you justify the fact that
you have failed to meet the 2% target?

The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon
Chairperson, I would wish your house, hon member, to be built in one day.
There is always a process in establishing a department. You need to
establish the foundation and ensure that structures and systems are put in
place. For your information, hon member, we intend to have a summit on
disability at the end of the year, which will look into a number of
questions affecting disabilities and related problems.

Therefore my response is that we are on course with our programmes, and
even in terms of developing legislation with regard to disability - we are
working on that one. So, there is no failure on our part, we are on course
and we are committed to ensuring that we achieve the objectives that this
department was established for. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, I thank the hon Minister for her response. We, in
this House, are glad that at last there is a Ministry that will focus on
women, children and people with disabilities. But by your own admission,
Madam Minister, I think the situation is far from satisfactory because 0,2%
and 0,24% doesn’t give us a whiff of a pass, or even an average
performance.

We trust that, in looking at this matter seriously, your department give
priority to it, and will also look at the question of facilities. In this
House we have been raising the issue of the lack of facilities; not only
for officials, but for people with disabilities who go to government
departments and buildings, Home Affairs, and so on. This is another area, I
think, which your department has got to look into. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Thank you, hon
member, for the statement. I don’t believe it’s a question but a statement
that supports the programme of government in ensuring that we achieve the
targets that we have set ourselves.

However, I want to emphasise that it is not the responsibility of
government alone; it is the responsibility of all of us as South Africans
to ensure that people with disabilities access the workplace and are also
part of the mainstream economy. So, all of us have got that kind of
responsibility to ensure that we achieve those programmes. Thank you very
much.

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, I agree with the last opinion of the hon
Minister that we should all do it, but government departments should set
the trend. My question to the hon Minister is as follows: During this year,
has her department established what the problems are that are causing this
not to happen? Is the post not available? Do they not advertise it? Are the
people not applying? Have you established what the real problem is and come
up with some solutions?

The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon
Chairperson, I am not sure whether the question is about the department or
about the fact that we are here discussing the importance of ensuring that
people with disabilities access the labour market. I thought that was the
issue we were addressing.

However, I wish to say to the hon member that the department, new as it is,
is on course in terms of its programmes, priorities, and strategic plan.
And, hopefully, we will be having a full complement of staff members by the
end of this year. The process is unfolding and ongoing, and, in due course,
people will know the outcome of those processes. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, can I appeal to
members not to press the button knowing very well that there is no
supplementary question that one is going to ask.

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, may I take that last follow-up question? My
question relates to ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): I have not yet answered whether
you may pose a follow-up question or not. But you may now proceed!
[Laughter.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Hon Minister, my question
relates to your department’s capacity to monitor the employment of persons
with disabilities by other government departments. That is what I want to
know. Is the problem due to the fact that the posts are not advertised by
government departments? Is it due to the fact that people with disabilities
do not apply? Have you, as the department, established what the problems
are, and what are you going to do about them?

The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon
Chairperson, I indicated earlier on that, there is a process that is
unfolding to ensure that measurable targets are put in place. We are
working with the Ministry or Department of Performance Monitoring and
Evaluation to develop such measures.

We are also in the process of putting mechanisms in place to ensure that
there is compliance. We all know that we have not done well as a country.
There are a number of reasons for that. Hon members know that we have not
achieved our ... [Interjections.]

Now, the important thing to do is to ensure that all the departments comply
with the set of targets and the mechanisms that are going to be put in
place soon enough. These will be announced to the country to ensure that
there is compliance around the 2% target that has been set for our country
to reach. Thank you.

        Meetings and work timeframes of National Planning Commission

86.   Mr N Singh (IFP) asked the Minister in the Presidency: National
      Planning Commission:


      (1)   How many meetings of the National Planning Commission have been
           held;


      (2)   whether any timeframes for the work of the NPC have been
           implemented; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant
           details?                                                 NO2520E

The MINISTER OF LABOUR (On behalf of the Minister in the Presidency-
National Planning Commission): Chairperson, to date, the National Planning
Commission held three meetings on a monthly basis. The first meeting was a
two-day orientation session in May 2010, which was addressed by the
President, who spelled out the commission’s mandate. The mandate that was
given to the commission was that its vision and development plan should be
finalised within 18 months after its appointment. Taking this deadline into
account, the commission is in the process of finalising short-term
deadlines to embark on the processes of consultation and discussions with
various stakeholders in order to meet its mandate.

Furthermore, the commission is mandated to produce reports on issues
relating to long-term development on an ongoing basis. Thank you,
Chairperson.

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson, I know I can’t ask the hon Minister of Labour this
question. But, in any event, I will ask the question and maybe he can give
us a response through the Minister in the Presidency: National Planning
Commission. I would just like to know how often Parliament will be briefed
on the working of the National Planning Commission. We did have an ad hoc
committee that set up the commission. But I think as Parliament we have the
right to be briefed at regular intervals about what the commission is doing
without us having to ask questions in the House. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Minister, you may respond to
the question or refer it to the Minister.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR (On behalf of the Minister in the Presidency-
National Planning Commission): I can respond to the question. My
understanding of Parliament is that, as Parliament requires briefings, they
will be as regular as Parliament wants them.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Minister, you say that these report-backs
will be as regular as Parliament would like to have them. Now, with regard
to all other departments, Parliament interacts with them at various times
of the year in various circles. The only department that does not have that
interaction is the Presidency, where the National Planning Commission is
situated. Would you not think it would be a good idea to have a portfolio
committee that oversees the working of the Presidency and the two
commissions that find themselves in that Presidency, especially seeing that
they have a budget of R780 million in the Presidency to conduct the
business that they are expected to conduct? Then there could be regular
interaction with the National Planning Commission.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR (On behalf of the Minister in the Presidency-
National Planning Commission): Chairperson, according to my little
experience in Parliament since 1994, if there is any need for a portfolio
committee, the Rules of Parliament can decide that.

  Progress made, and timeframe regarding implementation of National Spatial
                              Development Plan

84.   Dr G W Koornhof (ANC) asked the Minister in the Presidency: National
      Planning Commission:


      (a) What progress has been made to implement a national spatial
      development plan, with specific reference to (i) coordinating
      government action to meet social, economic and environmental
      objectives, (ii) striking a balance between urban and rural
      development and (iii) identifying areas with demonstrated economic
      potential most favourable for overcoming poverty and (b) in what
      timeframe will action plans regarding the abovementioned aspects be
      implemented to ensure achieving South Africa Vision 2025?
                                   NO2518E

The MINISTER OF LABOUR (On behalf of the Minister in the Presidency-
National Planning Commission): Chairperson, the National Planning
Commission recently hosted a seminar on spatial planning. The seminar
brought together academics, NGO representatives, development planning
practitioners in the public and private sectors and representatives of the
three spheres of government involved in planning.

Issues that emerged from that interaction include: one, getting around the
rural-urban dichotomy and finding ways that recognise the spatial
interdependences and linkages; two, getting the basics right by improving
the turnaround times for decisions on development applications and dealing
with duplicate processes; three, addressing the legislative impasse; four,
changing incentives that shape the use and management of land; five,
resolving ambiguities around roles and responsibilities of various actors;
six, agreeing on a spatial vision for the country, and finally, putting in
place spatial norms to guide the policies and strategies of all spatial
actors.

Prior to the seminar, the Minister had discussions with his Cabinet
colleagues, in particular Minister Nkwinti of Rural Development and Land
Reform, Minister Sexwale of Human Settlements, Minister Sonjica of Water
and Environmental Affairs and Minister Shiceka of Co-operative Governance
and Traditional Affairs. They all shared the view that we need to act
urgently to solve spatial planning issues. Thank you, Chairperson.

Dr G W KOORNHOF: Chairperson, I will not ask a follow-up question to the
Minister, but I will just agree with the answer that the Minister has
supplied to this House and welcome the seminar that took place.

I think it is important that we have a holistic approach to this situation.
There is an urgent need to finalise a national urbanisation strategy,
together with a comprehensive rural development strategy. We cannot plan
unless we know where our people are going to live and work in future. Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR (On behalf of the Minister in the Presidency-
National Planning Commission): Chairperson, I agree with the hon member on
the need to strike a balance between urban and rural development. The
emerging thinking - not only in this country, but globally - suggests that
the urban-versus-rural approach is not a very useful one. Overplaying the
differences tends to lead to inappropriate policies.

We all know how difficult this matter is; urban and rural areas are linked
in a very complex way, but they provide inputs for activities taking place
in the respective sectors. They provide labour, employment opportunities,
as well as markets for goods and services produced in either of these
sectors.

Therefore, the hon member is quite correct; we need not draw a big
distinction between the two. We must link them up, otherwise the situation
will be such that people will think that there are greener pastures in the
cities and there is nothing in the rural areas. We need to make sure that
we improve the life there so that our people also enjoy living in those
rural areas. [Applause.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chairperson, I was trying to get the
service button off and then all the buttons went on.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): You then have to apologise to me.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Am I to apologise?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Yes!

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: I apologise. I was trying to get the service
button off.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Okay, thank you. Take your seat.

Ms A STEYN: Thank you, House Chairperson. Hon Minister, I just want to find
out whether you took the traditional leadership into consideration in this
National Planning Commission and what the discussions around the
traditional leadership were. The reason I’m asking this question is that
most of the problems that we experience are in the rural areas under the
traditional leadership. What were your discussions with traditional
leaders? Thank you.

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI (EMELE UMPHATHISWA KUBONGAMELI: IKOMISHONI
YOCWANGCISO YESIZWE): NdinguDlamini, uJama kaSjadu, uZulu. Ngoko ke
asingekhe sizilahlele ngaphandle iinkokeli zethu zemveli kuba kaloku uninzi
lwazo luphaya emaphandleni. Asikwazi ukuthi xa sixoxa ngonxibelelwano
phakathi kwamaphandle kunye needolophu sikhuphele ngaphandle iinkokeli
zethu zemveli ezinjengooShenge. Soze siyenze loo nto. Kuyanyanzelekile
ukuba uthetha-thethwano lwenzeke phakathi kweeNkosi, kwaye siyazi ukuba
iingxaki ezithi zidale impixano ngamanye amaxesha ziyintaphane
njengeentwala kubaThembu. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR (On behalf of the Minister in the Presidency-
National Planning Commission): I am Dlamini, Jama kaSjadu, Zulu. Therefore
we cannot sideline our traditional leaders because most of them are in the
rural areas. When we debate about communication between rural and urban
areas, we cannot exclude our traditional leaders such as Shenge.  We will
never do that. It must be enforced that there must be negotiations amongst
Chiefs, and we are aware that sometimes problems that create conflict are
immeasurable. [Applause.]]

    Progress made in protecting children from harmful media content, and
            position regarding setting up of a reporting hotline

85.   Mrs C Dudley (ACDP) asked the Minister of Women, Children and People
      with Disabilities:


      (1)   What progress has been made (a) to remove pornography from media
           advertising and broadcast content, (b) to block gaps in the
           broadcasters’ code and (c) to curtail violent, graphic and
           gruesome images in broadcast content with a view to protecting
           children from harmful media content;
      (2)   whether she intends setting up a reporting hotline to aid in
           implementing protective measures; if not, what is the position
           in this regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                             NO2519E

The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon
Chairperson, the Deputy Minister of Communications serves on the SABC board
that ensures that pornography is not used in the media, advertising and
broadcasting content in general.

The SABC board does the classification of films, videos, etc, for suitable
viewership of all film material that is used by the SABC. The SABC board
also encourages the public to inform it of any material broadcast by the
SABC which it does not approve of. Any violent, graphic and gruesome images
in broadcast content are censored by the SABC board before films can be
published for children. Otherwise, members of the public are normally made
aware of the age classification of the viewing material in order that
parents can choose what they prefer to watch and what their children may
watch.

The establishment of a reporting hotline is in the long-term plans of the
Department of Women Children and People with Disabilities. However, we are
happy that the presidential hotline is also assisting in ensuring that we
are able to deal with a number of cases that are reported through that
hotline. These are cases regarding women, children and people with
disabilities who are in need of urgent government services and are referred
to the department through nominated officials who work directly with the
hotline. The official would then distribute such queries to relevant
branches within the department as well as other departments.

The Film and Publication Board has also established the Internet hotline,
which affords members of the public the opportunity to report online about
any child pornography or sexual abuse images that are accidentally
discovered on the Internet. In this regard, I want to use this opportunity
to congratulate the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs on the contribution he
has made in the fight against pornography for our children.

I also wish to state that there was an indication that another channel,
which would have been accessible to children, would be opened on TV for
viewers. All of us, especially government leading at the forefront, opposed
that move which was to be introduced by M-Net. Therefore there are
interventions which are being made in cognisance of the fact that we have
to protect our children from pornography and ensure that they grow up in an
environment that is conducive to their development and growth. Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chairperson, we know that various organisations and
departments are rallying to support a move to draft a law that will be
aimed at ensuring that Internet service providers filter all content on the
web so that people across the country, particularly children, cannot access
pornography on their cellphones or computers. The Department of Education,
the Department of Communications, Childline South Africa, the cyber crime
unit and the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa are all
among the stakeholders. What role will your department play in this regard
and how do you see your Ministry actually working within the situation to
bring about this law? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon
Chairperson, I would like to thank the hon member for the question. I think
the interventions that we need to make include raising awareness within our
communities around this particular issue so that we all play a role in
ensuring that children are protected from pornography. Government will
continue doing what it has to do in terms of whatever legislative or policy
framework interventions that would need to be looked at in that regard.

At the moment, in addition to what has been done by the SABC board and
other stakeholders, we need to ensure that we create an environment that is
conducive for our children. So, it is an effort that we all need to make to
ensure that children are protected from easy access to pornographic
material. Even with the cellphones which are so easily accessible to
children, parents need to ensure that they too play a role to monitor and
ensure that children do not go beyond what is expected of them in their
usage of cellphones, and so on. Thank you, Chair.

Mrs H H MALGAS: Thank you Chairperson. Minister, we would like to know, as
the ANC, how you see the involvement of the community. You just said it
broadly, but, specifically, how do you see it with regard to legislations,
policies, including the moral regeneration programme of government
pertaining to society as a whole in speedily minimising the further spread
of pornographic material, whether it is in print or electronic media? Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon
Chairperson, as I have indicated earlier, this is a collective
responsibility of all South Africans and, therefore, the role of the
community is very critical in this regard. I think that the Moral
Regeneration Movement, led by the Deputy President will assist us in moving
forward in this regard to ensure that there is participation of all.
Communities will also be able to raise their issues and voices with regard
to these matters and play a part in ensuring that there is awareness. They
will also be able to educate their children on the dangers of accessing
pornographic material. So, it is a responsibility that we all have to
share, including communities. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mnu M MNQASELA: Sihlalo, xa uMphathiswa ethetha ngalo mcimbi womnathazwe
ndinethemba lokuba uyayazi into yokuba phaya kum elalini eQolombana kuTsolo
azikho iikhompyutha. Loo nto ke ithetha ukuba abantu abakwindawo
ezisemaphandleni abasayi kukhawuleza bayixele ingxaki enje ngale. Kanti ke,
imicimbi yamanyala nemiboniso bhanya-bhanya evela koomabonakude nakwiselula
yinto echaphazela wonke umntu kwaye ekufuneka siyiqwalasele.

Ndifuna ukuqonda ke ukuba siyibeka esweni njani into yokuba lo mnathazwe
uyabakhusela abantwana kwaye zidandalaziswa kakuhle zonke ezi zinto. Kwaye
siza kubona njani ukuba abantwana bakhuseleka ngokwenene kwizinto ezifana
nezi. Enkosi kakhulu.

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASETYHINI, ABANTWANA KUNYE NABANTU ABAKHUBAZEKILEYO:
Sihlalo, ndiyabulela kakhulu kwilungu elihlonophekileyo. Kukho inombolo
yomnxeba engahlawulelwayo ekhoyo eyenzelwe wonke umntu, kuquka nabantu
abahlala emaphandleni ezindaweni ekuthiwa kusemakhaya. Kufuneka
bayisebenzise loo nombolo yomnxeba ingahlawulelwayo ukuze bakwazi
ukuncedakala nabo xa befuna ukuveza iingxaki ezifana nezi. Ukwaleka apho,
kuza kufuneka ukuba sibe nephulo lokwazisa eliza kuthetha ngezi zinto.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr M MNQASELA: Chairperson, when the Minister speaks about this Internet
issue, I hope she knows that in my village, Qolombana in Tsolo, there are
no computers. That means people in the rural areas will not immediately
report such a problem. However, pornography and film material screened on
television and cellular phones is something that affects everybody and we
need to pay special attention to it.

I would like to know how we should monitor the safety of Internet use in
respect of our children and ensure that there is transparency as far as
this is concerned. In addition, how are we going to ensure that children
are safe from undesirable material such as this?

The MINISTER OF WOMEN, CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Chairperson,
I would like to thank the hon member. There is a toll free number for
everybody, including people who reside in the rural areas. They must use
that toll free number in order for them to get help when they want to
report problems and incidents such as these. In addition, we must have a
campaign to raise awareness which will address these issues ...]

... and we are also working with the Deputy Minister of Home Affairs to
ensure that we run such a campaign around these particular matters, like
access to pornography. Such a campaign will also take us to provinces.
Thank you, hon Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Madam Deputy Speaker, as one who had the privilege
of drafting the original Films and Publications Act in 1996, I am a little
scared and terrified of the blurring of some lines which are quite
fundamental. For example, the Minister says that the SABC censors
programmes and that government tells them not to run some. In terms of the
law, that is illegal because the censorship is based on the fact that
certain material is not desirable to government or to others. I think that
the issue of pornography is a difficult one. It also tests the divide
between freedom and authority.

Now, the question to the Minister is: On what authority does the government
go beyond the legislative parameter and not interfere in communication
between consenting adults, above and beyond protecting children from those
communications? Where is that line set and how is it enforced if it is not
the one which is in the Act and is left to the authority and prerogatives
of the Film and Publication Board?

The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon
Chairperson, I think that was more of a comment than a question, unless I
am mistaken.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): If the Minister wants to comment,
she can do so. But there was a question that was raised by the hon member.
Hon Ambrosini, can you repeat your question, only the question?

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Minister, the job is for the Film and Publication
Board. How government takes the job beyond that is a matter of policy, not
of illegality. How does a moral judgement come into the picture?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you; initially you asked
only one question.

The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon
Chairperson, there are a lot of pieces of legislation currently in the
country that help us to deal with all these questions around pornography
and the protection of children. Therefore, even the Film and Publication
Board does have a role in terms of the classification of films, videos, and
so on, as we have indicated earlier. There is a commitment from government,
as we have seen in the past, to ensure that we protect our children and use
the current legislation in place to protect children and prevent easy
access to pornography. Thank you.

  Position regarding achievement of Millennium Development Goals concerning
                  gender equality and empowerment of women

94.   Mrs D Robinson (DA) asked the Minister of Women, Children and People
      with Disabilities:


      Whether the Government will achieve the Millennium Development Goals
      with regard to (a) gender equality and (b) the empowerment of women;
      if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                             NO2531E


The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon
Chairperson, with regard to Millennium Development Goal 3 on gender
equality and women empowerment, South Africa has met the indicators on
equity enrolment ratio between girls and boys at the 20% level of
schooling, that is the number of girls that are enrolled is more than that
of boys.

With regard to the indicator on women in political positions, South Africa
is on track towards reaching parity by the year 2015. Presently, South
Africa stands at 44% in terms of women who are in the national Parliament.

However, in terms of indicators on employment of women in other sectors,
including the private sector, and so on, there is a concern. South Africa
is far from reaching parity in decision-making structures of companies in
the private sector.

There is growth in the employment of women, but this figure still remains
lower than that of men. We are in no position to state categorically that
Millennium Development Goal 3 can be achieved, but we are getting there.

Women can only be empowered if the present indicators are attained because,
in its current standing, this goal lacks other critical elements such as
addressing violence against women and children. Thank you.

Mrs P C DUNCAN: Minister, although the strides made by South Africa
regarding the education of women and girls can be acknowledged - as you
also said today - their disabled counterparts, however, lag behind
significantly. What engagements have you had with the Ministers of Basic
and Higher Education to increase school attendance of girls and young women
with disabilities? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Chairperson,
firstly, there is an engagement that is going on currently in terms of
ensuring that the targets, as I have indicated earlier, are met. Secondly,
there is a commitment by government to ensure that our children access
education.

I also want to go back to other creative measures that we are discussing,
including the 1Goal campaign that was launched during the Fifa World Cup
last month, to ensure that children with disabilities are able to access
the opportunities in education and, in fact, go to school like other
children.

So, in terms of basic education, there is a programme that outlines how
children with disabilities need to be assisted to ensure that they too
access educational opportunities. Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Minister, something that is seriously working against
these goals at this present moment are the strikes and protest that are
disrupting services and impacting on women, children, the disabled, the
aged, etc. For example, yesterday and today, in Witbank where my
constituency’s offices are, protesters stormed the building and took over
the offices of the South African Social Security Agency, Sassa, and all
other offices. People were intimidated by protesters who were carrying
sticks, threatening and removing the women who were working there. They
removed and destroyed the files, and completely trashed the offices.

There are going to be a lot of people expecting grants to be paid, and
there will be no information to be able to work with. This is going to be
seriously disruptive.

The police responded extremely weakly and are still not responding with any
enthusiasm to the situation. What would your department be able to do in
terms of exerting pressure in this situation now to ensure that people who
choose to go to work and the surrounding offices where people are not meant
to be at work are actually protected? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon
Chairperson, the summit of disability that I referred to earlier on in my
earlier presentation seeks to address all such questions that arise from
concerns about what we need to do in terms of ensuring that we implement
the UNCRPD, including children.

With regard to that, hon Chairperson, we want to ensure that South Africa
develops a plan of action which will take forward the UNCRPD and also
promote the rights of all children, including those with disabilities.

So, there is a programme in place, which we are working on. Hopefully, on 2
and 3 December, we will be having such a summit which will also help us to
deliberate on measures that we need to put in place to reach the target
that we set for ourselves for people with disabilities in the labour market
as well. Thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Hon Minister, my observation is that this is a very
important subject. However, every time we listen to responses on the
matter, we hear broad responses, not scientific and empirical evidence as
to how many people and what percentages we have in each and every sector.
Are we really making a very strong impact? Are the various government
departments called upon to come up with evidence of transformation
regarding the gender equality?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, I think your question
is a new question. Nevertheless, I will allow the Minister to respond if
she wants to do so.

The MINISTER OF WOMEN CHILDREN AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES: Hon
Chairperson, it is an important question. I want to state that there is
evidence. There is evidence on the participation of women in the public
sector and in terms of the private sector. The information that we don’t
have as yet is how far civil society goes to ensure that they too come to
the party in terms of womens participation.

In terms of the programme that we have, I hope that, soon after having gone
through the necessary processes, Parliament later this year will discuss
the question of the Gender Equality Bill, which we believe will take us
forward in the struggle for women’s empowerment and gender equality in our
society.

We need to engage with these matters and appreciate the progress that the
country has made since 1994. The evidence is there, but we need to move
beyond what we have achieved and achieve even more, especially in the
private sector, as well as in civil society. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon Minister. Hon
members, that concludes the time for questions. The replies that have been
received will be printed in Hansard.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of ACDP:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes the publishing of the book Gukurahundi, an account of the
        widespread atrocities that took place between 1980 and 1988 in
        Matebeleland, Zimbabwe, where an estimated 20 000 people died under
        the terror of the Zimbabwean dictator, Robert Mugabe, and his army;


   (2)      acknowledges the pain and suffering of a people whose cries were
        not and are not being heard, for mass killings still continue to
        take place along with forced labour, beating, torture and sexual
        abuse, at the Mashonaland Marange diamond fields, allegedly again on
        President Mugabe’s orders;


   (3)      congratulates the author for relating the terror inflicted on
        the people of Matebeleland from 1980 to 1988; and


   (4)      further congratulates Elinor Sisulu for courageously writing the
        foreword.

Thank you.

Mr P S SIZANI: Hon Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of ANC:

   That the House debates rural development plans to help with the
   implementation of large-scale programmes to establish new small farm
   holders and improve the productivity of existing small-scale farmers and
   subsistence farmers and their integration into the formal value chain
   that links them with markets.

Thank you.

Ms F I CHOHAN: Hon Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the plans of the Department of Basic Education to
   increase the pass rate of the matric cohort in 2010.

Ms J L FUBBS: Hon Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the development of trading opportunities in
   informal settlements broadly.

Thank you.

Ms D CARTER: Hon Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the unacceptable attack on matriculants of
   Scottburgh High School by labour union members picketing outside the G J
   Crookes Hospital in Scottburgh, KwaZulu-Natal.

Thank you.

Mr T W NXESI: Hon Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates mainstreaming African jurisprudence for social
   cohesion, peace and harmony in society.

Mr N SINGH: Hon Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the House debates the extent of homeless street people in South
   Africa and tries to find solutions to alleviate their problems.

          MUDSLIDE HITS ZHOUQU, NORTHWEST OF CHINA’S GANSU PROVINCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I hereby move
without notice:

   That the House –

       1) notes the devastating mudslide which hit Zhouqu, northwest of
          China's Gansu province, last week following torrential rain
          overnight, burying various houses and crushing buildings;


   (2)      further notes that over 1 248 people have died and more than
          600 people are reported missing; and


   (3)      conveys its deepest sympathy and condolences to the government
          and people of China over the loss of life and devastation caused
          by the severe mudslide.


Agreed to.
                    TORRENTIAL MONSOON RAIN HITS PAKISTAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House –


   (1)      notes that it has been three weeks since torrential monsoon
         rain in Pakistan triggered catastrophic floods in the Islamabad
         region, claiming the lives of at least 1 400 people and
         obliterating villages, infrastructure and farmlands within the
         region;


    (2)     further notes that these floods have displaced 20 million people
         and are the worst natural disaster to hit Pakistan in the history
         of the county and that Pakistan urgently requires financial and
         medical aid to assist it to rebuild its economy and assist the 6
         million people who are at risk of contracting deadly water-borne
         diseases such as typhoid and cholera;

    (3)     acknowledges that although the United Nations and World Bank
         have pledged to give international aid to Pakistan, the nation is
         facing an economic and health disaster of unprecedented
         proportions and has not yet received 50% of the aid which has been
         pledged to it by nations throughout the world;


    (4)     conveys its deepest condolences and sympathies to the government
          and people of Pakistan for the death and devastation that these
          floods have caused; and

    (5)     urges all world leaders to immediately provide international aid
          to Pakistan.

Agreed to.

 APPOINTMENT OF ADVOCATE PANSY TLAKULA AS VICE CHANCELLOR OF VAAL UNIVERSITY
                                OF TECHNOLOGY

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move   without
notice:

    That the House –


    (1)     welcomes the appointment of Advocate Pansy Tlakula as the first
          female Vice Chancellor of the Vaal University of Technology;


    (2)     recognises that Advocate Tlakula is no stranger to academia and
          once taught law at the North West University, then known as the
          University of Bophuthatswana, and as the then Chairperson of the
          Council of the University of the North West, led the team that
          negotiated the merger of the then North West and Potchefstroom
          Universities that formed the North-West University; and


    (3)     congratulates Advocate Tlakula on her appointment and wishes
          her well in her new position.


Agreed to.

DEVELOPMENT OF A TEA BAG-TYPE FILTER BY PROFESSOR EUGENE CLOETE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs H N NDUDE: House Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the House –


   (1)      notes that Professor Eugene Cloete at Stellenbosch University
         has developed a tea bag-type filter that can cheaply and
         effectively remove contaminants, microbes and bacteria from dirty
         water to make it suitable for drinking and cooking;
   (2)      recognises that this newly invented filter, which can clean a
         litre of the dirtiest water to about the same quality as bottled
         water, will signify a great breakthrough in the country’s struggle
         to bring clean water to every household; and


   (3)      requests the Department of Water Affairs to consider exploring
         the validity of the findings and the viability of its wide-scale
         use if the results do indeed measure up to the claims.


Agreed to.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 16:16.
                                 __________


                          WEDNESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM, in terms of Joint Rule 160(6), classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Magistrates’ Courts Amendment Bill [B 23 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Land Bank for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Consolidated
        Financial Statements of the Land and Agricultural Development Bank
        of South Africa (Land Bank) for 2009-2010  [RP 95-2010].

2.    The Minister of Public Enterprises


     a) Report and Financial Statements  of  the  Broadband  Infraco  (Pty)
        Limited for 2009-2010, including  the  Report  of  the  Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements  and  Performance  Information
        for 2009-2010 [RP 170-2010].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

 1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform
    on the Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B 13 – 2010] (National Assembly
    – sec 75), dated 17 August 2010:

        The Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform,
        having considered the subject of the Deeds Registries Amendment
        Bill [B 13 – 2010] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and
        classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) as a section 75
        Bill, reports that it has agreed to the Bill [B13 - 2010] without
        amendments.

 2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform
    on the Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 14 – 2010] (National Assembly
    – sec 75), dated 17 August 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform, having
      considered the subject of the Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B14 –
      2010] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by
      the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) as a section 75 Bill, reports that
      it has agreed to the Bill [B 14 - 2010] without amendments.

                          THURSDAY, 19 AUGUST 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159
    (1)    Local Government: Municipal Electoral Amendment Bill, 2010,
         submitted by the Minister of Home Affairs.


    (2)    Refugees Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of Home
         Affairs.
    (3)    Immigration Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of
         Home Affairs.


        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs and the Select
        Committee on Social Services.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


    (a)     Strategic Plan for the Fourth Parliament 2009-2014.

      Available on Parliament’s website: www.parliament.gov.za

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Labour on the oversight visit to
    Labour Centres in the Provinces from 17 – 21 May 2010
1. Background
In the 2010 State of the Nation  Address  (SONA),  the  President  announced
that  the  current  government  administration  should  understand  and   be
responsive to people’s needs. In so doing, it  should  work  faster,  harder
and smarter. In response to the President’s call, the Department  of  Labour
(DoL),  in  its  2010  Strategic  Plan  introduced  the   service   delivery
improvement  programme  highlighting  specific  areas  of  improvement   and
introducing various service delivery systems  which  are  meant  to  address
challenges with the hope of increasing the rate and quality of services  and
labour market information.
As a result, the Portfolio Committee  on  Labour  undertook  to  conduct  an
oversight visit to four Provinces, namely: North West,  Mpumalanga,  Limpopo
and Gauteng, with the intention of overseeing service provision through  the
Department of Labour’s labour centres and tusong centres.

   1. Objectives

The Portfolio Committee on Labour took a decision to undertake an  oversight
visit to the above-mentioned four Provinces to assess the work  of  the  DoL
against priorities  as  set  in  the  strategic  plan  of  2010  -2015.  The
strategic plan includes:
    • Assessing if the Department has  been  able  to  reposition  the  Head
      Office, the provincial offices and labour  centers  for  improved  and
      effective service delivery
    • Evaluating if the Department has empowered its access points staff  in
      delivering the entire suite of  the  DoL’s  services  and  information
      inclusive  of  employment  services,  social   security   and   labour
      protection service
    • Evaluate if mechanisms have been put in place  by  the  Department  in
      order to improve access to services and information and in addition to
      access if the Department has integrated service delivery centres close
      to the people and put in place multiple  access  channels  across  the
      country
    • Assess if both the Employment Services  System  and  the  Inspectorate
      Enforcement Case Management System  has  been  enhanced  in  order  to
      respond to clients’ needs and expectations for access to services  and
      information
    • Assessing if measures have been put in place to  encourage  continuous
      learning and improvement, and innovation by those serving at the point
      of contact with the client

   2. Delegation
The  delegation  of  the  committee  composed  of  Ms  L  E   Yengeni,   ANC
(Chairperson and Leader of the delegation), Ms A M Rantsolase, ANC, Ms  A  N
Mnisi, ANC, Mr E  Nyekemba,  ANC,  Ms  L  S  Makhubela-Mashele,  ANC,  Ms  D
Tsotetsi, ANC, Ms F Khumalo, ANC, Mr I Ollis, DA, Mr A Louw,  DA  and  Mr  V
Ndlovu,  IFP.  Ms  A  Kakaza,  Acting  Committee  Secretary,  Ms  S  Mkhize,
Committee Researcher and Ms N Myovu, Committee Assistant.

   1. Findings

2.1 Rustenburg Labour Centre

The Committee visited this office which deals mostly  with  UIF  claims  and
the following challenges were observed.
    • Upon arrival members of the committee were greeted by long ques mostly
      UIF applicants
    • Clients did not receive any assistance from the official
    • People were being sent from pillar to post
    • No assistance was given to those clients  who  cannot  read  or  write
      instead they were sent back
    • Number of UIF beneficiaries complained of not receiving their benefits
      for over two months
    • The building or offices in the building were not accessible
However the Management and officials of the centre were of the opinion  that
the problems identified emanate from the following challenges that  make  it
difficult for them to do their job efficiently and effectively:
    • Not enough office space, due to small office  space  clients  have  to
      stand in long ques waiting for services and according to the officials
      of the center alternative accommodation was identified seven years ago
      but nothing has been done.
    • The labour centre offices are  not  accessible  to  old  and  disabled
      people as it is allocated on the first floor of the building
    • Operational design is centralised and as s result much minor decisions
      such as the buying of stationery have to be approved by the Provincial
      Office
    • Human Resource was also identified as a challenge. There is a shortage
      of staff especially on the front desk
    • Computer system was also identified as one of the challenges

After meeting with the management of the centre the committee noted that:

    • The Rustenburg Labour Centre faces numerous structural challenges  due
      to the policy design guiding operational procedures. Such policies  do
      not take cognisance of the expanded services that labour centres  have
      to deliver due to the decentralisation  of  functions  from  the  Head
      Office and provincial offices. Whilst Labour  Centre  responsibilities
      have been expanded, the roles of managers have not  been  reviewed  to
      empower them with necessary authority to implement their new delegated
      functions.


    • When registering for the Unemployment  Insurance  benefits,  claimants
      have to automatically register with  the  Employment  Services  System
      (ESSA)  as  work-seekers.  Whereas  the  intention  was   to   improve
      coordination and efficiency of services provision, the system has  led
      to slow registration process leading to long queues.

2.2   Britz Labour Centre

These were challenges observed by the members of the committee upon  arrival
in the centre:
    • The issue of long ques was also a challenge in the centre
    • Shortage of human resource including computer was also identified
    • Most of claims were about companies who do not pay the workers
    • Some clients were complaining that they have been coming back  to  the
      centre for the 15th  time for the same application
    • General shortage of vehicles, as inspectors and staff members have  to
      alternate using the three available cars amongst eleven inspectors and
      two remaining cars for the rest of the staff
    • Due to the increasing demand for service provided by the labour centre
      which resulted to  increase  in  the  number  of  clients  the  office
      accommodation became a challenge
    • The labour centre does not have any security
    • The officials were not wearing their name tags in order for the public
      to identify them easily
    • Notice boards were  written  in  English,  no  interpretation  in  the
      language that the majority of the clients understand
    • The ESSA system experiences systemic challenges and is still not fully
      utilised by the employers who should register vacancies and access the
      data base when recruiting prospective employees.


Management of the centre in the meeting with the members  of  the  Committee
also raised the issue of office  space,  shortage  of  staff,  the  computer
system which was very slow and lack of enforcement from the companies  which
resulted in the delays on the processing and payments of claims.

The committee noted that;
    • The frontline staff members were not properly monitored to ensure that
      they provide client-friendly services. People spend numerous hours  in
      queues without being attended to, only to be  turned  back  for  minor
      queries that could have been spotted if there had been floor  managers
      attending to the people.
    • The UIF processing system, i.e.  the  labour  centres  processing  the
      manual data and the provincial  offices  processing  the  computerised
      data and the payment process, delay service  provision  as  data  gets
      lost therefore people are sent from pillar to post
    • The toilet facilities were not well maintained and out of  order.  The
      manager should fast  track  the  process  of  maintaining  the  toilet
      facilities
    • Whilst there was visible signage that displays information on  various
      services provided by the centre, it did not cater for  the  indigenous
      language users.

2.3   KwaMhlushwa Labour Centre

The labour centre mainly services the remote rural  area,  ideally  applying
the principle of taking the services closer to  the  people.  The  following
were committee observations on arrival:
    • The office is situated next to the shebeen which is not  conducive  at
      all for both the clients and officials
    • Resources like computers  and switch board facilities were in  a  very
      bad situation
    • Office space problem was identified as clients had to que outside  the
      building
    • Notifications were not  written  in  a  language  that  clients  would
      understand
    • Officials were not identifiable, not wearing their name tags
    • Clients were complaining about their  forms  being  misplaced  by  the
      officials
    • No pre-screening in the ques, resulting in clients queing not  knowing
      whether all the documents provided are correct
    • Staff shortage, as a result there are constant backlog in  claims  not
      captured
    • The general environmental hygiene does  not  promote  healthy  working
      conditions, for example there is no permanent cleaner in  the  centre,
      no fire extinguish in the building, there is one toilet shared between
      staff and clients and there are instances where there  is  no  running
      water
    • Telephones were old and the switchboard  was  outdated  and  therefore
      regularly out of order
However the Management of the centre when  meeting  with  committee  members
identified the following challenges that were hampering the  centre  not  to
deliver effectively:
    • That the previous Director-General knew about the  situation  in  this
      centre but up to date nothing has been done
    • The centre had also a problem of shortage of staff, which resulted  in
      cancellation of the mobile labour centre
    • The office was supposed to capture applications and make payments, but
      due to shortage of staff it only captures and send the application  to
      the Provincial Office for payment
    • Office space is a problem which results in clients queing outside  the
      building
    • There were constant IT challenges which take long time  to  be  fixed.
      This  affects  the  Employment  Services   System   (ESSA)   programme
      performance as it relies on computer  data  capturing.  There  is  one
      Siemens person based in Witbank  assigned  to  repairs  and  programme
      computers, in addition IT  contactors  are  reluctant  to  drive  long
      distances to rural areas such as KwaMhlushwa office
    • The DoL introduced sophisticated programme such as ESSA whereas the IT
      software does not match the required tasks
    • Law Enforcement Inspectors do not have equipments such as  laptops  in
      order for them to do their job as most of the time  they  are  working
      outside the office
    • There was a shortage of vehicles for inspectors

However, the committee noted the following:
The general state of the office is unpleasant due to unhygienic and  muddled
conditions that workers and clients are exposed to daily.
The committee acknowledged the  urgency  for  the  Department  to  sort  the
conditions of the offices, however felt that the manager and the  staff  had
not taken any initiative to improve the conditions in the offices,  such  as
littering on the floor,  files  clumsily  placed  on  the  floor,  including
confidential client information.

2.4   Nelspruit Provincial Office
On arrival, the Committee recorded the following complains after  interacted
with clients in the Nelspruit Provincial Office:
    • No preference given to pregnant women or old people
    • The clients were complaining that the service was too slow, they have
      to wait in the que for a long time

In the meeting with Management of the centre the following  challenges  were
identified in dealing with their day-to-day functioning.
    • Long queues as a result of insufficient accommodation.
    • As a result of the lack of facilities in the  part-time  offices,  the
      staff has to travel to the office to perform data capturing
    • Due to the inherent systemic bureaucracy within the DoL, the  regional
      offices are caught in the  red  tape  processes,  causing  unnecessary
      delays to services.

2.5   Polokwane Labour Centre

The following were the challenges reported by the officials of the centre:
    • Demand for services has increased as a result of the  decentralisation
      process. Although the  demand  has  increased,  the  number  of  staff
      members has not increased.
    • Inspectors continue to find it difficult to access farms due  to  non-
      cooperation from farm owners.
    • Increase in non-compliance to minimum wage payments due to the growing
      number of people who are unemployed and living in poverty.
    • Shortage of inspection vehicles. As a  result,  the  DoL  through  the
      2010/11 budget will hire vehicles for the inspectorate service.
    • Increasing non-compliance to general basic working conditions from the
      immigrant employers. In response, the DoL and the Department  of  Home
      Affairs will conduct joint inspections in the  province  in  order  to
      assess and enforce compliance

2.6   Pretoria Labour Centre

According to the  labour  centre  manager,  the  following  challenges  were
identified:
    • There’s general  non-compliance  by  employers  with  regards  to  the
      filling of the UIF declaration forms (UI-19).
    • Prevalence of  labour  broking  activities  within  the  cleaning  and
      security sector, which undermines adherence  to  basic  conditions  of
      employment for workers.
    • Increasing number  of  retrenched  job-seekers  as  a  result  of  the
      economic recession.
    • Employers are not forthcoming in registering for the ESSA services.
    • Employers take  advantage  of  statutory  limitations,  therefore  not
      comply with legislative requirements.
    • Inspectors find it difficult to access private premises  in  order  to
      enforce compliance within the domestic sector.
    • Rural residents travel to the city labour centre, avoiding their local
      labour centres due to the perception that urban-based centres  process
      claims quicker. As a result of this influx, the  centre  has  constant
      long queues.

However, these were the concerns raised by the committee members on site:

    • Members received complaints from  clients  of  unanswered  switchboard
      calls. In response, it was answered that there is technical fault with
      the switchboard line which has been referred to the management support
      unit
    • All written communication, including posters  or  notices  around  the
      office, was in English. Therefore not acknowledging the illiterate non-
      English speakers
    • The Members were briefed of the impending  disciplinary  case  of  one
      staff member.  According to the labour centre manager, the  provincial
      office is handling the matter which has already commenced  in  January
      2010. Concerns about the disciplinary hearing delays were also  raised
      by Members, as the  hearing  was  initiated  in  June  2009,  but  not
      completed in almost a year.

2.7   Compensation Fund’s Offices (CF)
These were concerns  raised  by  the  members  of  the  portfolio  committee
regarding CF services:

    • Whereas the majority of people interviewed by the Members praised  the
      manner in which the CF services  the  public,  there  were  criticisms
      about continuous long queues.
    • Others complained about being sent  from  pillar  to  post,  with  the
      labour centres not disseminating accurate information  such  as  which
      forms people should bring when applying for CF benefits
    • Others complained about the lengthy periods they had to wait for their
      benefits. One such example is the man who alleged to have been waiting
      for over 5 years for his benefits from the Fund.

The CFO of the Fund reiterated that some of the challenges  are  exacerbated
by the high turnover amongst the  casual  staff.  This  affects  the  skills
retention for labour centres.

2.7 The Commission for Conciliation Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA)

The Johannesburg CCMA office is the biggest and  seemingly  the  busiest  in
the country. It  is  also  the  biggest  resolution  centre  in  the  world.
According to the Senior Convenor Commissioner,  Bheki  Khumalo,  the  office
receives more or less 3 000 cases per month. As a result the workload  piles
up and become too  much  to  handle.  Currently,  there  are  100  part-time
commissioners,  30  full-time  commissioners  and  close  to  50   part-time
interpreters.

    • Due to the  large  number  of  staff  being  part-time,  it  is  quite
      difficult to establish and instil a strict organisational  culture  of
      discipline and certain values, such as the Batho Pele  (People  First)
      values. However, the  Members  also  appreciated  the  hard  work  and
      dedication of certain staff members who resumed work well before  time
      and were hospitable to both the members and the general members of the
      public, for example the receptionist.

    • Numerous cases are postponed due to non-availability of employers  and
      due to commissioners who view this as  a  money-making  scheme,  since
      commissioners are paid per session they hold.

    • Challenges of employers who do not honour the  settlement  agreements.
      As a result, the vulnerable workers struggle to enforce the agreements
      as such actions require more funds to pay the Sheriff  of  the  Court.
      Individual workers, who do not fall under  the  trade  union,  end  up
      paying close to R2 000 for the enforcement.

    • The Johannesburg CCMA office has been said to be the worst  performing
      centre. As a result, the management has  embarked  on  the  turnaround
      strategy which includes designing permanent organisational  structures
      to support administrative  functions  regardless  who  the  individual
      manager is.

    • In order to fast-track the case management process, each  Commissioner
      will have a number of specifically dedicated cases to manage. This  is
      a move away from the past practice where cases did not have  dedicated
      commissioners, resulting in the lengthy case management processes.

    • There are instances whereby  commissioners  deliberately  delay  cases
      where they have conflict of interest. There is currently such  a  case
      with one commissioner going through the disciplinary process.

However, members of the committee were concerned about Labour Courts being
taken over by the Department of Justice. The concern was what is going to
happen to issues of labour enforcement laws which have been channel through
labour courts.

   2. Conclusion

Members of the Committee having interacted with the people from the
different labour centres recognised that service delivery is still lacking
in some of the centres and what the National Department says is different
from what the Members saw during the visit.

Whilst some labour centers have improved  service  delivery  system,  others
continue to struggle due to non-empowerment of staff members to  deliver  on
the entire suite  of  the  Department  of  Labour’s  services.  Due  to  not
understanding these services, the  ill-informed  staff  members  give  wrong
information to clients. As a result, people  continuously  travel  back  and
forth the labour centres.


Due to the weaknesses in the IT system,  some  labour  centers  struggle  to
fully implement the Employment Services System, especially those located  in
the rural areas.


The optimal conceptual framework of the Employment Services System  requires
a full structural support, such as fully furnished  spacious  offices  where
people can fill forms without  compromising  their  privacy.  However,  this
systemic support for the ESSA has  not  yet  been  achieved  in  the  labour
centers.

The Department’s  decentralisation  process  has  overstretched  the  labour
centre functions, but failed to empower the labour centre managers in  order
to enable them to make swift administrative  decisions.  As  a  result,  the
labour centers cannot address minor challenges due to red-tape
Without underestimating the challenges identified in the urban based  labour
centers, the resource support appears to be biased towards them  as  opposed
to the rural labour centers. As  a  result,  the  majority  of  rural  based
people travel to the urban areas in search  of  better  services,  therefore
leading to long queues and deterioration of services provided  as  a  result
of overburdened infrastructure


There is general non-compliance with regard to  the  Unemployment  Insurance
Act, as commercial employers do not declare relevant  information  in  order
for employees to collect  their  benefits.  As  a  result,  claimants  spent
lengthy periods without receiving their benefits.

   3. Recommendations

The Department of Labour should address the situation in KwaMhlushwa Labour
Centre as the Office was a disaster.
There should be more personnel employed in the Labour centres, in order to
curb long ques which are of great concern to Government.

The Department should look at the Siemens contract as it had come up
clearly in most centres that there was a problem with IT services.

The Department should consider having more mobile centres especially in
rural areas in order to bring the service closer to the people.

In instances where office accommodation is a challenge, the Minister of
Labour should approach the Minister of Public Works to address and fast
–track the issue of proper offices and facilities in the labour centres.
The Department should address those challenges that can be resolved  in  the
short term by the labour centres,  such  as  the  assignment  of  the  floor
manager to guide and assist people,  given  that  the  majority  of  service
users are illiterate, old and  disabled.  In  addition,  the  floor  manager
would have to ensure that the vulnerable groups including the old,  disabled
people and pregnant women are prioritised using the “express queues”.

The floor manager should  be  multi-lingual  in  order  to  accommodate  all
people who use the labour centre services.
The Department should respond to all the recommendations in this report  and
report back to the Committee within 30 days after adoption of the report  by
the House.

Report to be considered.


