---
title: 'National Assembly - 26 May 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-05-26
---

                           WEDNESDAY, 26 MAY 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mrs S V KALYAN: Speaker, on the next sitting day of the House I shall move:


   That the House debates the human rights violations in Africa, in
   particular the recent violation against a Malawian gay couple, and comes
   up with solutions in curbing these kinds of violations.

[Applause.]

Mr M WATERS: Speaker, on the next sitting day of the House I shall move:
   That the House debates the regulation of prices in the private health
   sector, as well as the effects this will have on quality of service, and
   comes up with other alternatives.

Mr M M SWATHE: Speaker, on the next sitting day of the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the R580 million payment backlog of the Department
   of Rural Development and Land Reform for land purchased, and comes up
   with possible solutions to this problem.

Mr S J F MARAIS: Speaker, on the next sitting day of the House I shall
move:

   That the House debates the recently signed bilateral trade agreement
   between South Africa and Zimbabwe that does not offer adequate protection
   to South African investors in Zimbabwe, and comes up with possible
   solutions. I thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:

   That the House debates the centenary of the Union of South Africa.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Speaker, by die volgende sitting van die Huis sal ek
voorstel:
   Dat die Huis–

      1) debatteer oor die gevolge van die Transnet-staking in terme van –

          a) die skade wat in- en uitvoerders gely het na en van Suid-
             Afrika;


          b) die finansiële skade wat Transnet gely het deur die
             beskadiging van sy eiendom tydens die staking;


          c) die skade wat die staat ly in terme van belastingverliese; en


          d) die algehele verlies aan goedere en dienste as gevolg van die
             Transnet-staking.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Speaker, at the next sitting of the House I shall move:


    That the House —


            1) debates the effects of the Transnet strike in respect of —
             a) the losses suffered by importers and exporters to and from
                South Africa;
             b) the financial losses suffered by Transnet as a result of
                damage to its property during the strike;

                    c) the losses suffered by the state in respect of loss
                       of tax revenue; and

             d) the overall loss of goods and services due to the Transnet
                strike.]

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

               (The late Abathembu King Zwelenkosi Matanzima)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes with deep sadness the death, over the weekend, of His Majesty
        Nkosi Zwelenkosi Lwandile Matanzima;


     2) further notes that the deceased was one of the  younger  generation
        of traditional leaders who worked tirelessly to improve  the  lives
        of his people and rural communities in general;


     3) recognises that Nkosi Matanzima leaves behind a  great  legacy:  as
        the great-grandson of Ngangelizwe, his  death  marks  the  turn  of
        events in the history of traditional leadership in the Eastern Cape
        and the entire country;


     4)  further  recognises  Nkosi   Matanzima’s   contribution   to   the
        transformation of institutions  of  traditional  leadership,  which
        sought to offer women and nontraditional leaders an opportunity  to
        take part in the development of their communities, and also honours
        him for his unwavering commitment to the Tembus; and
     5) conveys  its  heartfelt  condolences  to  the  Bakhozi  of  Western
        Tembuland and the people of the Tembus on the untimely death of His
        Majesty Nkosi Zwelenkosi Lwandile Matanzima and assures  them  that
        thoughts and prayers of its  members  are  with  them  during  this
        difficult time.

Agreed to.

       CONGRATULATIONS TO SA POLICE SERVICE ON DILIGENCE AND HARD WORK
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr V B NDLOVU: Speaker, I wish to move without notice:
   That the House –

      1) notes that on 13  May  2010  the  police  arrested  nine  suspected
         robbers after a high-speed car chase and shoot-out on the N2;

      2) further notes that the police received a  tip-off  about  an  armed
         robbery that would take place at a  Durbanville  farm  and  due  to
         their hard work and commitment,  apprehended  the  suspects  before
         they could execute their plan;

      3) applauds the South African Police Service for  their  diligent  and
         thorough investigations  which  led  to  the  apprehension  of  the
         suspects; and
      4) encourages South Africans to assist the  South  African  Police  by
         reporting all types of crime.

Agreed to.

      RECOGNITION OF EXCELLELENT WORK DONE BY BENJAMIN DUBE FOUNDATION

                             (Draft Resolution)
Mrs C DUDLEY: Speaker, I move without notice:


   That the House –

     1) notes that a community-based early childhood development  programme
        called “The Wonderful     World of Kids” has been developed by  the
        Benjamin Dube Foundation with the aim of establishing “care points”
        and “reschool” centres in squatter camps and  sites  of  low-income
        housing projects throughout South Africa;


     2) further notes that the “care points”  are  meant  to  provide  free
        preschool education, nutritious food, medical services and  a  safe
        environment for children to play and develop;


      3) recognises that there is an urgent need in our communities to  care
         for young children who are orphaned due to HIV/Aids, those who  are
         poverty-stricken because of chronic unemployment and others in need
         of care because of the disintegration of family structures for many
         reasons;


      4) further recognises that such a project had been a great success  in
         Swaziland under the organisation “Children’s Cup” and that in order
         to build and operate  such  centres,  considerable  sponsorship  is
         required and is currently being sought; and

      5) commends the Benjamin Dube Foundation for identifying the need  and
         “stepping up to the plate” in providing this valuable service which
         will assist thousands of growing children and  benefit  communities
         for many years to come, and  we pray that Almighty God  will  grant
         them favour, provision and protection.

Agreed to.

             LAUNCH OF SECOND ANNUAL MANDELA DAY ON 12 MAY 2010

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes with great happiness the launch of the second annual  Mandela
        Day on Wednesday, 12 May 2010,  marking  the  67-day  countdown  to
        Mandela Day, which is celebrated on Madiba’s 92nd birthday;


     2) further notes that 18 July  was  adopted  by  the  United  Nations’
        General Assembly as Nelson Mandela Day when people across the world
        spend 67 minutes in honour of Madiba’s service to humanity and that
        three events have  been  organised  in  three  different  locations
        around the country to urge people to dedicate 67 minutes  of  their
        time to doing something good for humanity;


     3) believes that this campaign  should  grow  in  stature  and  should
        excite millions of people      around the world to make every day a
        Mandela Day; and


     4) encourages all South Africans to  build  on  the  success  of  last
        year’s Mandela Day activities and to make this coming one  an  even
        greater success.

Agreed to.

             PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY DONATION FOR CLINIC IN DELFT

                             (Draft Resolution)
Ms H N MAKHUBA: On behalf of the Chief Whip of the IFP, I move without
notice:

   That the House –


      1) notes that the Delft community is set to receive a state-of-the-art
         antiretroviral and tuberculosis clinic, thanks to a substantial
         R1,5 million donation by a South African pharmaceutical company;

      2) further notes that this new clinic is expected to significantly
         improve the lives of those who live in this fast-growing area;

      3) further notes that the Delft Community Health Centre serves a
         population of more than 520 000 people, the monthly attendance at
         the clinic averages 30 000, with a growth of 500 new patients per
         month, and about 2 000 patients receive antiretroviral treatment
         there monthly, 900 of whom also have TB; and

      4) expresses its sincere gratitude to the company that made this
         donation and encourages more private companies to follow its
         example.

Agreed to.
                       LAUNCH OF CHILD PROTECTION WEEK

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes that President Jacob Zuma on Friday launched Child Protection
         Week, which will focus on the protection of children during the
         2010 Fifa World Cup;


      2) further notes that Child Protection Week, which runs from 24 to 30
         May 2010, was introduced by the government with an aim to raise
         awareness, educate and mobilise communities to put children first;


      3) believes that Child Protection Week will act as a reminder to
         parents and caregivers of their responsibility to protect children
         and notes that special attention has been drawn to the possible
         dangers, such as child trafficking, during the World Cup, as child
         trafficking  has unfortunately become part of huge international
         sporting events; and

      4) urges communities to use the launch as an important reminder to
         protect the country’s children and to ensure their safety during
         the World Cup and beyond and further urges members of the House to
         do their part to assist the police in keeping the children safe:
         Together we can do more!

Agreed to.

                    CONGRATULATIONS TO BULLS AND STORMERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I stand as a very proud Shark supporter to move
this motion without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes with pride the outstanding performances of the Bulls and  the
         Stormers rugby teams in  the  semifinals  of  the  Super  14  Rugby
         Competition on Saturday, 22 May 2010, which resulted in both  teams
         winning their respective matches, thus ensuring that for the  first
         time since 2007, the Super 14 Final will be contested by two  South
         African teams, which will be  played  at  the  Orlando  Stadium  in
         Soweto;

      2) acknowledges the exceptional performances of both sides  throughout
         the tournament which has led to a historic final in which the Bulls
         will defend their title against the Stormers, which last  contested
         a Super Rugby final 11 years ago;

      3) further acknowledges that the Bulls’ success last Saturday  may  be
         attributed to the enthusiastic support of the rugby fans who packed
         the Orlando Stadium in Soweto to witness the first  historic  rugby
         match to be played at this stadium and who, through  their  support
         for their team, created the vibrant and  dynamic  atmosphere  which
         helped to spur the Bulls to victory;

      4) congratulates both rugby teams on  their  respective  victories  on
         Saturday and the South African fans for making the Bulls’ victory a
         truly auspicious occasion at the Orlando Stadium; and

      5) wishes both teams everything of the best for the final on  Saturday
         and enjoins all South Africans to support their respective sides in
         order to make the final a proudly South African event.


The SPEAKER: That underscores the importance of the right venue. If there
are no objections, I put the motion.

Agreed to.

                   INTERNATIONAL AIDS CANDLELIGHT MEMORIAL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr  Speaker,  I  hereby  move  without
notice:

   That the House –
      1) notes that the International Aids Candlelight Memorial, a programme
         of the Global Health Council, is one  of  the  oldest  and  largest
         grassroots mobilisation campaigns for  HIV/Aids  awareness  in  the
         world and that it started in  1983  and  takes  place  every  third
         Sunday in May;

     2) further notes that the International Aids Candlelight  Memorial  is
        led by a coalition of more than 1 200  community  organisations  in
        115 countries, hosting local memorials that  honour  the  lost  and
        raise social consciousness about the disease;

     3) believes that the Candlelight, is much more than  just  a  memorial
        and  provides  opportunities  for  leadership  development,  policy
        advocacy, partnerships and improvement  of  community  mobilisation
        skills;

     4) further believes that everyone should expand his or  her  knowledge
        and understanding of the epidemic in order  to  protect  themselves
        and the communities they live in and  that  HIV  testing  campaigns
        serve to educate the people and promote the rights to human dignity
        and privacy of those living with HIV; and

     5) encourages everyone to test and know their status without  fear  of
        victimisation or being pressured to disclose their status publicly.

Agreed to.

     ACHIEVEMENTS OF SOUTH AFRICAN PARAPLEGIC ATHLETES ERNST VAN DYK AND
                    KRIGE SCHABORT IN THE BOSTON MARATHON

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes that two South African paraplegic athletes Ernst van Dyk  and
         Krige Schabort competed in the “Men’s Push Rim Wheelchair” Division
         of the Boston Marathon held on 19 April 2010 and made their country
         proud by securing first and second place respectively;


      2) further notes that this  year  marked  the  35th  “Men’s  Push  Rim
         Wheelchair” Boston Marathon, which Ernst van Dyk has won nine times
         and for which he holds the  course  record,  making  him  the  most
         successful competitor in the history of this gruelling 42 kilometre
         race between rural Hopkinton and Boston USA;


      3) recognises the exceptional nature of the respective performances by
         these two dedicated athletes who finished  the  race  within  three
         seconds of each other; and

      4) congratulates these outstanding ambassadors for South African sport
         for their achievements and for making South Africa and  its  people
         proud.

Agreed to.


                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE


                      (The late Dr F Van Zyl Slabbert)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORTIY PARTY: Mr  Speaker,  I  hereby  move  without
notice:

   That the House –

   (1)      notes with deep sadness the death of former politician, academic
         and businessman Dr Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert on Friday, 14 May
         2010, at the age of 70;


   (2)      further notes that Dr Slabbert was born on 2 March 1940, spent
         his formative years in Polokwane, then known as Pietersburg,
         completed a BA Honours at the University of Stellenbosch in 1962
         and was awarded a doctorate in 1967, that he also studied for 18
         months at the Dutch Reformed Church’s Theological Seminary at
         Stellenbosch before deciding on sociology as his proper calling;


   (3)      recalls that Dr Slabbert traveled to Lusaka in 1985 for talks
         with the external wing of the African National Congress and with
         the Inkatha Freedom Party's, then known as Inkatha ye Nkululeko ye
         Sizwe Prince Mangosuthu Buthelezi, launched the National Convention
         Movement in an unsuccessful attempt to put pressure on the South
         African government to negotiate with all political groups;


   (4)      recognises Dr Slabbert’s contribution towards shaping the South
         African political landscape; and


   (5)      conveys its heartfelt condolences to the Slabbert family, his
         relatives and friends.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, hon Members of Parliament,
it is with great sadness that the ANC learnt of the death of the former
Member of Parliament, respected academic, intellectual and prolific
political commentator, Prof Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert.

He will be remembered for the role he played in the historic meeting
between Afrikaner South Africans and the ANC representatives in exile,
which spurred the advancement towards a democratic South Africa. The
meeting further helped to open channels of communication between the ANC
and the white community which had for a long time been bombarded with the
apartheid regime’s anti-ANC propaganda.

The ANC president, O R Tambo, commented on that meeting and remarked that -


   An organisation that is opposed to the apartheid system, we regard as on
   our side.


That means Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert was, from that point, on our side.

For a long time, Prof Van Zyl Slabbert served as one of the few outstanding
voices of reason amidst an ocean of ruthlessness, repression and
subjugation.

He was amongst the few white South Africans who resisted apartheid when it
was not fashionable or personally rewarding to do so. Like Helen Suzman, he
sought to use his role within the parliamentary opposition, the Progressive
Federal Party, as a platform to reject and fight apartheid.

He later resigned from Parliament in protest against the apartheid regime’s
inability to address the country’s problems. He did so not only to send an
unequivocal message to the regime about the wrongness of its oppressive
policies, but also to avail himself of an opportunity to join
extraparliamentary forces of change to accelerate the process towards the
demise of the apartheid demon.

He argued at the time that staying on in that institution would merely
serve to lend it legitimacy. Recognising the historic importance of this
decisive break with the apartheid system by an Afrikaner, the leadership of
the ANC made bold to salute him as a new voortrekker.

Van Zyl Slabbert will be missed for his intellectual and constructive
analysis of the political challenges of the day, which enriched our
political discourse and contributed to strengthening our constitutional
democracy. This is the quality present-day academics, opposition
politicians and commentators should emulate.

It is a pleasure for me to say that I had the honour to work with Van Zyl
Slabbert when we negotiated the new dispensation of local government. We co-
chaired the negotiating forum. I can confidently say that he brilliantly
contributed to the new metro system of government that we have today. We
know that this system owes a great deal to the work that he has done.

He not only facilitated the discussion but contributed to the formulation
of the new system of government, especially at local government level.

As the ANC, we want to say that he must rest in peace. He has played his
part in this democracy. We hope that all of us will emulate his good work.
I thank you.

Mr D A KGANARE: Speaker, I stand here on behalf of Cope to honour and
remember a brave son of the soil ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Please, let the speaker be heard. This is
an important motion. Continue, hon member.
Mr D A KGANARE: ... a patriot and towering giant. I’ve been made to
understand that he tackled hard on the rugby field, but harder in the
political arena. The demise of Dr Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert leaves us all
with a deep sense of loss.

On behalf of Cope, I extend my sincerest condolences to his bereaved
family. They must take comfort in the knowledge that we all grieve with
them, and that in his death we have a rare opportunity to celebrate his
life and achievements. He has departed this life, leaving behind a legacy
that will live on.
Growing up in Pietersburg, Van Zyl Slabbert manifested leadership qualities
from the beginning. He moved from classical studies at Wits to attaining
his MA degree in Sociology and then his doctorate at Stellenbosch
University.

Throughout his commendable life, Van Zyl Slabbert was a man of discernment
and rare talent. In 1972, he became Head of the Sociology Department at
Wits University. Even though his interest in politics started when he was
young, Van Zyl Slabbert officially became seriously active in politics when
he joined the Progressive Federal Party, PFP. In 1974 Slabbert accepted the
nomination to stand for Rondebosch in the general elections. He triumphed
over the National Party, NP, representative by 1 600 votes. He continued to
hold a seat for the PFP in the 1977-81 elections.

Van Zyl Slabbert stood up against the oppressive regime and chose to relate
to the suffering of the people. He did not see colour, because he was
looking for justice. He was not driven by fear, but aspired to seek hope.
He chose the hard and lonely path of a man of vision.

In 1979, he became the leader of the PFP and of the parliamentary
opposition – a position he held until 1986. Slabbert soon felt that his
fight within Parliament was leading nowhere, considering the iron hand with
which the NP ruled. He, therefore, resigned from his position as a
parliamentarian in 1986 to try his hand at negotiations. A year later, he
started negotiations with ANC members in exile.

This resulted in the Dakar conference between the liberation movement and a
group of mainly Afrikaner politicians, academics and businessmen. The
conference was organised by the Institute for Democracy in South Africa,
Idasa, which he co-formed with Alex Boraine in July 1986.

He served Idasa as Director of Policy and Planning. In his book, The Other
Side of History, he articulates the event with clarity with the sole
objective to counter an attempt to rewrite history, not as a record of what
transpired, but for political expediency. He later began a career in
commerce by lecturing at the Wits Business School and engaged in political
consultancy.

He had many achievements. In 1964 he received an Abe Bailey Travel Bursary
to the United Kingdom. In 1976 he was given an American cultural exchange
award. He went to international conferences and delivered papers in the USA
and Western Europe.

He was truly an enlightened representative of South Africa during the dark
years of apartheid rule. He not only went against his fellow Afrikaners in
pursuit of peace and justice in South Africa, but fought for this cause
abroad. In 1977 he was a research fellow at the Bergtraesser Institute for
Social Research in Freiburg, West Germany.

Slabbert jointly wrote a book with Prof D Welsh called South Africa’s
Options: Strategies for Sharing Power, which was published in 1979. He
published papers and articles which appeared in several publications. He
received honorary doctorates from Simon Fraser University in Canada and the
Universities of KwaZulu-Natal and the Free State. He was a visiting scholar
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in November 1982. He was also
a businessman and a co-founder of Khula, a black investment trust, in 1990.

His contributions did not stop there. In 2002 President Thabo Mbeki
appointed him to ... [Time expired.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Speaker Xhamela, hon Ministers present, and hon
members of the Assembly, on 14 May, South Africa lost one of the best minds
ever to have graced our national discourse. The passing of Dr Frederik Van
Zyl Slabbert was met with a flood of tributes from politicians, academics
and journalists, all singing the praises of a man who deserved every good
word that was spoken about his life.

Today, we, in this House, honour the memory of a former colleague in the
hope that what we say may capture the magnitude of our loss. I had the
privilege of enjoying a long and sincere friendship with Dr Van Zyl
Slabbert.

We first met in the 70s when he was a young lecturer at Stellenbosh
University. At the time there was a group of businessmen and intellectuals
who met to discuss current affairs since they were concerned about the
situation in the country. Dr Van Zyl Slabbert was part of the study group
called “Synthesis”, to which I was also invited to participate.

My first impression was of a man of remarkable intellect, yet authentic
humility. This humility spoke of a depth of character that I grew to
respect and admire. More than anything, I was drawn to Dr Van Zyl Slabbert
because of his integrity.

I was chatting with my son Ntuthukoyezwe - Zuzie to his friends - during
the weekend. He said something about integrity which stuck in my mind. He
said that if one has integrity, anything else doesn’t matter; and if one
hasn’t got integrity, again, anything else doesn’t matter.

When Dr Van Zyl Slabbert was elected leader of the PFP, I invited him to
address Inkatha’s conferences in Ulundi. Together, with members of our two
organisations, we participated in many protest meetings in Durban and
Johannesburg. We shared a vision for the liberation of South Africa, for
which I nearly became ridiculed and vilified. Dr Van Zyl Slabbert and I
both believed that the liberation of our country should be pursued through
negotiations and not through the barrel of a gun.

In 1985 we formed the National Convention Movement which emphasised the
need for government to negotiate with all political parties. The depth of
our friendship became a cause for concern for the NP government at the
time, which attempted to drive a wedge between the two of us. The
government at that time released a transcript of a private conversation
that Dr Van Zyl Slabbert had had with the then Prime Minister, Mr PW Botha,
in which Dr Slabbert was quoted as saying about me that:

   He thinks that he is the only bull in the kraal ...

But to the government’s dismay, this did not affect our good relations or
our genuine friendship.

I respected Dr Van Zyl Slabbert’s incisive criticism, as well as his
directness. He was a man who could always be trusted to speak his mind with
sincerity and not tickle the ears with falsehood. This trait cost him the
friendship of other leaders, but earned him my respect. He was a great
asset to our country, which today is poorer for his passing. I was not
surprised when, asked about his time as Chairman of the Van Zyl Slabbert
Commission, he remarked that:

   It was a disgusting and eminently forgettable experience.

As Minister of Home Affairs, I appointed Dr Van Zyl Slabbert to chair the
commission which was established to redraft the Electoral Act. The Van Zyl
Slabbert Commission brought together some of the best domestic and
international minds - genuine democrats drawn from across the broader
spectrum - because I understood that the Electoral Act is the contract
between the politicians and the people, and thus cannot be written by the
politicians alone.

The Van Zyl Slabbert Commission recognised that the present electoral
system lacks accountability and proposed a system akin to the local
government model, which combines constituencies and proportional
representation. It was a well-considered recommendation based on
comprehensive research, and Cabinet rejected it.

However, Cabinet committed itself to implementing the recommendations at a
later stage. I regret that Dr Van Zyl Slabbert never lived to see that day,
but I hope that his good intentions will not be forgotten.

On behalf of the IFP, I offer my sincere condolences to the family of Dr
Van Zyl Slabbert and to the many who mourn his passing. He has left a
tremendous legacy, and for that we thank him. We hope that he will forever
rest in peace. To you, Van, I say “requiescat in pace” [rest in peace].
Thank you. [Applause.]
Mrs P DE LILLE: Speaker, Dr Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert was a true patriot
and a son of the soil, who had a passionate love for his country and
closely followed the trials of the new democratic order that he helped to
foster.

He will always be remembered as the progressive voice for change during the
dying days of apartheid – someone who possessed the foresight and courage
to seize the moment in bringing together members of the old regime and
exile liberation movements at the historic Dakar meeting.

This meeting is widely recognised as being instrumental in fostering the
conditions for our negotiated transition to occur. All South Africans owe
him a depth of gratitude for the principled stance he took in all the
various positions he occupied throughout his life.

On a more personal level, Van was my old friend who was always willing to
share his political advice and experiences with me. He loved to debate with
me about his pet topic Afrikaner versus Afrikaan. Eventually he wrote a
good book about it.

He was a walking encyclopaedia. I often relied on him for quality advice.
More than all of this, he was very firm on principle and really stood by
what he believed in. His voice and presence will certainly be missed by all
of us in the new, democratic South Africa.
The ID would also like to offer its sincerest condolences to Van Zyl
Slabbert’s family and friends during this difficult period. Our thoughts
and prayers are with you. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mnr N M KGANYAGO: Speaker, agb lede, ons vergader vandag hier om hulde te
bring aan ’n groot Suid-Afrikaner. Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert was ’n man van
woorde en ’n man van aksie met ’n rare mengsel van beginsel en visie. Hy
was ook ’n man van vrede. In hierdie opsigte was hy ’n pionier wat vir
ander blankes en Afrikaners gewys het dat daar wel hoop is om ’n morele en
vreedsame einde aan apartheid te bring.

Waar ander slegs veroordeling gesien het, het Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert ’n
visie vir ’n beter toekoms gehad. In 1980 sou andere dit sekerlik as ’n
fantasie beskou het dat ek vandag hier, in hierdie Huis, sou staan en hulde
bring aan hom in sy eie taal. Ek het egter geen twyfel dat hy net sou
geglimlag en gevra het: Hoekom nie?

Die effek van sy bydrae tot ons nuwe grondwetlike bestel het ook verby 1994
gestrek. In sy hoedanigheid as die voorsitter van die kommissie wat die
kiesstelsel vir hervorming ondersoek het, het hy weer eens ’n waardevolle
bydrae gemaak.

Net soos vantevore, is sy visie en wysheid ongelukkig nie met ope arms deur
die regering van die dag ontvang nie. Daar kan geen groter huldeblyk aan
hom wees as vir hierdie regering om nou daardie kommissie se werk te erken
en te implementeer nie.

Laat my toe om aan Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert se familie en vriende ons
opregte medelye mee te deel. Mag u in hierdie tyd troos vind in die opregte
dankbaarheid van die hele nasie. U is in ons gedagtes en gebede. Mag hy in
vrede rus. Ek dank u. [Applous]. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr N M KGANYAGO: Speaker, hon members, we gather here today to pay tribute
to a great South African. Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert was a man of words and
a man of action, with an unusual blend of principle and vision. Likewise he
was a man of peace. In these respects he was a pioneer who showed other
whites and Afrikaners that hope did indeed exist to bring an end to
apartheid in a moral and peaceful manner.

Where others only saw condemnation, Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert had a vision
for a better future. In 1980, others would surely have regarded it as a
fantasy that I would be standing here today, in this House, paying tribute
to him in his mother tongue. However, I have no doubt that he would have
just smiled and asked: Why not?

The result of his contribution towards our new constitutional dispensation
also went beyond 1994. In his capacity as chairperson of the commission
that examined reforming the electoral system he once more made a valuable
contribution.

Just as before, his vision and wisdom were unfortunately not welcomed by
the government of the day. There would be no greater homage paid to him
than for this government to acknowledge and implement that commission’s
work right now.

Allow me to convey our sincere condolences to Fredrik Van Zyl Slabbert’s
family and friends. May you find comfort during this time in the sincere
gratitude of the entire nation. You are in our thoughts and prayers. May he
rest in peace. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Dr C P MULDER: Speaker, ek wil begin deur aan my agb kollega, mnr Kganyago,
baie geluk en dankie te sê vir die treffende wyse waarop hy so pas hulde
gebring het aan Dr Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert. Die wyse waarop hy dit gedoen
het, stel vir ons almal ’n voorbeeld van hoe ons mekaar se tale en kultuur
behoort te respekteer en te herken. Baie dankie daarvoor.

Die VF Plus spreek graag sy simpatie uit teenoor die familie en
naasbestaandes van Dr Fredrik Van Zyl Slabbert met sy onlangse afsterwe. Dr
Slabbert het oor ’n lang tyd ’n belangrike rol in die Suid-Afrikaanse
politiek gespeel. Ek het by verskillende openbare en private geleenthede
met hom te doen gekry en was deurlopend beïndruk met die eerlikheid waarin
hy alle sake benader het.

Of jy met hom saamgestem of verskil het, het hy almal op dieselfde hoflike
manier hanteer en integriteit en styl aan die politiek gebring wat vandag
dikwels kortkom. Die agb Buthelezi het reeds verwys na die belangrikheid
van integriteit in die politiek en ek deel dit met hom.

Vir my is die grootste tragedie van die lewe van Dr Van Zyl Slabbert dat hy
nie die geleentheid gehad het om ’n groter rol te kon speel en miskien meer
aktief betrokke te kon wees in dít waarin hy sy ideaal gestel en waarvoor
hy hom beywer het nie, naamlik ’n demokratiese alternatief wat na 1994 tot
stand gekom het.

Sy politieke insigte en kommentaar sal sekerlik in Suid-Afrika gemis word.
Hy het ’n groot bydrae gemaak en ons dra graag ons simpatie aan sy
geliefdes oor. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER: Speaker, I would like to begin by congratulating and
thanking my hon colleague, Mr Kganyago, for the striking manner in which he
has just paid tribute to Dr Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert. The way in which he
has done this sets an example to all of us of how we have to respect and
acknowledge each other’s languages and cultures. Thank you very much for
that.
The FF Plus would like to convey its condolences to the family and next of
kin of Dr Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert on his death, recently. Dr Slabbert
played a pivotal role in South African politics over a long period of time.
We’ve met at numerous public and private events and I was always impressed
with the honest way in which he approached matters.

Whether you agreed or disagreed with him, he always handled everyone in a
courteous way that infused politics with the integrity and style that is so
often lacking nowadays. The hon Buthelezi has already referred to the
importance of integrity in politics and I share that sentiment with him.

To me the biggest tragedy of the life of Dr Van Zyl Slabbert is the fact
that he did not get an opportunity to play a bigger role and perhaps be
more actively involved in that in which his ideals were vested and that
which he was striving towards, namely a democratic alternative which was
established in 1994.

His political insights and commentary will surely be missed in South
Africa. He made a huge contribution and we would like to convey our
condolences to his loved ones. Thank you very much.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, the ACDP is saddened by the death of Dr Frederik
Van Zyl Slabbert, one of the architects of South Africa’s transition from
apartheid and a noted writer on its politics and sociology.

Dr Slabbert was a former leader of the then official opposition, the PFP,
in the House of Assembly, a political analyst, successful businessman and
one of our country’s most respected visionary political leaders. We will
remember him for his courage to stand up against apartheid, contrary to his
upbringing and culture as an Afrikaner and at the cost of being labelled a
traitor by his fellow Afrikaners.

In 1986, he surprised many when he and fellow MP, Alex Boraine, resigned as
Members of Parliament, in protest against the politics of exclusion and
repression that was promoted and perpetrated by the apartheid National
Party government.

The Institute for Democracy in South Africa, Idasa, board chairman, Njabulo
Ndebele, said and I quote:

   Slabbert went against the grain, broke ranks, but established new
   alliances and friendships that transcended the old divisions. He was a
   remarkable South African who had a sharp and sensitive intelligence and a
   tremendous sense of humour.

One of the many initiatives Dr Slabbert will be remembered for was the
conference Idasa held in Dakar, Senegal, in July 1987, which brought
together about 60 influential white South Africans and members of the
exiled ANC to initiate a dialogue that led to negotiations. This resulted
in a political settlement, and the multiparty democracy we enjoy today.

To his wife and children, loved ones and colleagues, the ACDP offers their
sincere condolences. South Africa has lost a great man of principle who
left a great legacy. I thank you.

Mrs I C DITSHETELO: Speaker, the UCDP would like to offer its heartfelt
condolences to the family and friends of Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert. To have
been an opposition party leader during the apartheid years, speaks a lot of
the legacy he is leaving behind. We shall remember him for the role he
played in prenegotiations between the ANC and the National Party.

May his soul rest in peace. I thank you.

Dr W G JAMES: Speaker, Acting President Jeff Radebe, it is my great honour
to close this debate today by saying that there rose in South African
public life a few champions of liberty and justice with a consistency of
conviction, integrity and purpose. Our first democratically elected
President, Nelson Mandela, is one of them. Dr Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert,
whose life we honour today, is another. Van Zyl wrote:

   I was 50 years old when I met Madiba face to face for the first time. I
   was completely disarmed by him and felt immediately that I would like to
   do anything to help him achieve his vision for South Africa.

Van Zyl kept his promise to the end. He was an Afrikaner who walked a
different road. He treasured the assets of his background, but found
Afrikaner nationalism to be suffocating. He recoiled also from African
nationalism. He found the narrow rights-based approach to be inherently
conservative. Van Zyl was my kind of man: a thinking liberal with strong
social democratic leanings.

For those who knew Van Zyl, he had a warm directness in approach, a
charming civility, an irrepressible republicanism and an impatience with
status and ceremonial pretension. He was an instinctual democrat, someone
who wore justice on his sleeve and clutched it to his heart.

He became one of the most celebrated debaters in Parliament, which he
joined in 1974 as a Progressive Party member. He left under great
controversy as Leader of the Opposition and later formed the Institute for
a Democratic Alternative in South Africa, Idasa, in 1986. He said then that
P W Botha’s Tricameral Parliament was a dangerous exercise in futility, for
it aggravated the divisions in our land.

In the history of Parliament, Van Zyl joined the ranks of a few excellent
MPs who learned the art of debate, including in our history the brilliant
liberal, Jan Hendrik Hofmeyr, and the equally brilliant communist, Sam
Kahn. Van Zyl’s infinite appreciation for the beauty of words, his
carefully timed witticisms, his unrelenting search for the truth, and the
politically productive sarcasm that he used, invoked to great effect,
became his art.

At Idasa, he was a visionary who saw the necessity of creating a climate
for dialogue and negotiations – he did not start negotiations – starting
with the meeting in Dakar in 1987 and followed by numerous other
gatherings, bringing together individuals from across the divide. Writers
he brought together; soldiers he brought together; women he brought
together; and constitutionalists he brought together, as well as analysts.
After he left, Idasa continued having meetings in order to build consensus
for our constitutional process.

It was Van Zyl Slabbert who steered the financier George Soros to invest
his considerable wealth in the creation of a more open society here and
later expanded the enterprise to all of the countries of the Southern
African Development Community, SADC. He inspired the creation of the Vrye
Weekblad in the world of journalism and the Institute for Security Studies
in the world of policy studies. He founded the Goreè Institute in Senegal,
building a continental network that animated the quest for peace and
justice in Africa.

Van Zyl gave a great deal to public service: as chairman, as the ANC’s
Chief Whip noted, of the Johannesburg Metropolitan Council, crafting a
future for that city; as one of the leaders for the local government
elections of 1995 and 1996; and, as the hon Buthelezi pointed out, with his
electoral task team on which I had the privilege to serve.

That task team recommended that half of the MPs in this House ought to be
chosen by constituencies directly and the other half by proportional
representation. Greater accountability and the proportionality required by
our Constitution were the mantra. Van Zyl’s team completed the design, as
well as the demarcation, and the lawyers wrote the draft Bill in
preparation for this.

I urge this House and the Minister of Home Affairs, the hon Nkosazana
Dlamini-Zuma, to appoint a task team to examine these proposals again.
There is a great deal of interest among many members on both sides of this
House in reforming our electoral process so as to empower voters.

About his role in life, I think of Van Zyl in the words of the Irish Nobel
Laureate Seamus Heaney, when he wrote:

   Human beings suffer
   They torture one another.
   They get hurt and get hard.
   No poem or play or song
   Can fully right a wrong
   Inflicted and endured.


   History says, don’t hope
   On this side of the grave,
   But then, once in a lifetime
   The longed-for tidal wave
   Of justice can rise up
   And hope and history rhyme.

In death, I think of our loss in the bleak melancholic poem of Eugène
Marais, which must be read in Afrikaans:

   O koud is die windjie en skraal.
   En blink in die dof-lig en kaal,
   so wyd as die Heer se genade,
   lê die velde in sterlig en skade.
   En hoog in die rande,
   versprei in die brande,
   is die grassaad aan roere
   soos winkende hande.


   O treurig die wysie
   op die ooswind se maat,
   soos die lied van ’n meisie
   in haar liefde verlaat.
   In elk grashalm se vou
   blink ’n druppel van dou,
   en vinnig verbleik dit
   tot ryp in die kou.

The DA wishes to express our deepest sympathy to his wife, Jane, his son,
Riko, his daughter, Tania, and the many grandchildren who are part of the
Slabbert family. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Motion agreed to.

The SPEAKER: The condolences of the House will be conveyed to the Slabbert
family.

   ESTABLISHMENT OF AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE ON SOUTH AFRICA’S READINESS FOR
                             2010 FIFA WORLD CUP

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY  PARTY:  Speaker,  I  move  the  draft
resolution as it appears in the Order Paper in the name of  the  Chief  Whip
of the Majority Party:

   That the House –

      1) notes that the 2010 Fifa World Cup tournament is set to commence on
         11 June 2010 and that, since 5 April 2010, a group of members of
         the two Houses has been conducting oversight activities to assess
         the country’s overall readiness to host the World Cup tournament;


   (2)      further notes that the group of members consisted of 11 members
         from the Portfolio Committee on Transport, five members from each
         of the Portfolio Committees on Energy, Tourism, Police, Sport and
         Recreation, Public Enterprises, Home Affairs and Health, and five
         members from committees of the National Council of Provinces;


   (3)      establishes, subject to the concurrence of the National Council
         of Provinces, an Ad Hoc Joint Committee on South Africa’s Readiness
         for the 2010 Fifa World Cup, the committee to –


         (a)      consist of those members that are mentioned in paragraph
               (2) above;


         (b)      conduct co-ordinated oversight activities to assess the
               country’s overall readiness to host the World Cup tournament
               and identify any outstanding challenges;


         (c)      exercise those powers in Joint Rule 138 that may assist it
               in carrying out its task; and


        d) report by no later than 1 June 2010; and


   (4)      ratifies the work done by this group of members since 5 April
         2010.

Agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

(Consideration of Report of Standing Committee on Appropriations)

There was no debate.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                           (First Reading debate)

Mr E M SOGONI: Speaker, hon members, ladies and gentlemen, let me thank you
for the opportunity afforded me to address this august House on this
important Bill, the Appropriation Bill, B3 of 2010.

Recognising that this is the climax of a long, democratic process in which
a lot of debate has taken place and Budget Votes have been subjected to
thorough scrutiny, it is important to reflect on why this is being done. In
doing so, there is a need to have an appreciation of the constitutional and
legal requirements, as well as the economic and political context that
informs it.

From a constitutional perspective, this fulfils the requirements of section
213(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa and section 26
of the Public Finance Management Act. These sections provide that money may
be withdrawn from the National Revenue Fund only in terms of an
appropriation by an Act of Parliament, and that Parliament must appropriate
money for each financial year for the requirements of the state.

Through this process, the provisions of section 10 of the Money Bills
Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act have been fulfilled, as no
committee has proposed any amendments thus far. Notwithstanding this,
Parliament needs to act with speed to ensure full implementation of the
Act, including establishing a parliamentary budget office.

The economic context is both positive and negative. On the positive side,
according to a National Treasury assessment earlier this year, there was an
expected economic growth, though moderate, but rising gradually; better
inflation outcomes within the target range; an increase in global demand
for goods and trade volumes; sectoral growth outcomes and employment
stabilising; expectation of a moderating current account deficit this year
as compared to 2008; a lower than originally forecasted budget deficit due
to a target overshoot in the revenue collection; and sustained
infrastructure investment over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF.


Should this positive focus materialise and continue as envisaged, it
provides a degree of comfort in the adoption of the Appropriation Bill
before us.
On the negative side, the country is still faced with massive challenges of
high unemployment estimated at around 24%. As a result of poverty and
inequality our Gini coefficient is said to be the highest in the world.

Some of the risks to the economy, as identified by National Treasury, are
wage pressures; high oil prices; challenges associated with the
implementation of mass infrastructure investment; expected moderate
investment due to unused capacity; sluggish net job creation; a sizeable
budget deficit remaining as a result of a slow global economic recovery;
and rising debt service costs which would eat into our fiscal resources.

When debating this Bill, it is incumbent upon us, as we exercise our
oversight role, to monitor the potential impact of these risks on the
Budget. Of particular importance will be the need to keep a close watch on
issues relating to wasteful expenditure and inefficient management of
finances by departments.

From a political point of view, this is about enabling the state to meet
the needs of the people as expressed in the Constitution and through the
2009 elections, which the ANC won by an overwhelming majority. The
political context in which this appropriation debate is taking place is
that of implementing an ANC agenda, as was mandated by the majority of
South Africans.

What informs the budget-making process and the appropriation debate though,
takes into account the views of all Members of Parliament and public
representatives with regard to fulfilling their constitutional role of
oversight and holding the executive to account.

In the past few weeks, following the state of the nation address and the
Budget Speech by the Minister of Finance, all Ministers have presented
their departmental strategic plans and Budget Votes. These have been
debated and subjected to scrutiny in order to assess whether the money
being asked for by Parliament will indeed meet the requirements of the
state in the 2010-11 financial year.

Complementary to this was a thorough process by Parliament calling
departments to come and account for how they used the funds appropriated
for the past financial year. This is important, not only for
accountability, but also to assess the extent to which the state has the
capacity to effectively, efficiently and economically spend the money for
the purpose it was appropriated.

That assessment gives Parliament a sense of how the funds being sought for
appropriation this financial year are likely to be used, and that it will
be accounted for in terms of section 32 of the Public Finance Management
Act. We always need to be mindful of the fact that these are public funds,
and as public representatives we are acting in the best interest of the
public.
In playing our oversight role – that of ensuring that the executive is
accountable – we must, in the same vein, commend the signing of performance
agreements between the President and Cabinet Ministers. This is indeed
innovative and historical in the South African context, as it has not been
done before. The signing of performance agreements will help strengthen the
whole value chain of monitoring, evaluation and accountability in the
implementation of our laws, especially in relation to spending public
funds.

It has to be understood that the ANC, as an elected governing party, gives
a mandate to government to implement its electoral mandate. This mandate is
well reflected in the following government priorities: improving the
quality of education; enhancing the health system; making communities
safer; fostering rural development; creating jobs; and investing in local
government and human settlements.

The Appropriation Bill is about how we implement these things within the
framework of government programmes, and whether it can be done within the
constraints of available financial resources. It is about whether the
executive arm of government will use the funds appropriated for their
purpose, cost-effectively and accountably.

In assessing these things, this paper will focus on three critical priority
areas as articulated in our manifesto, namely job creation, infrastructure
and human settlements. They are all embedded in the manifesto’s plans of
more jobs, decent work and sustainable livelihoods, and building cohesive
and sustainable communities.

Today, the country is faced with the challenge of high unemployment. In
2009, unemployment was estimated at over 24,3% of the working-age
population in the country. According to National Treasury estimates, only
44% of the working-age population had a job compared with an international
rate of about 60%.

The key factor behind this is the structure of the economy that the country
has inherited, commonly identified as two economies in one country - the
first economy and second economy. These do not only define class divisions,
but also racial and gender divisions in our society.

The first economy is characterised by a high degree of economic
formalisation based on modern technology; capital intensive sectors which
require highly skilled labour; unionisation and a formal labour relations
system that allows for bargaining between employers and labour.

The majority of the people are trapped within the second economy, which is
survivalist in nature, and is characterised by an informal and unskilled
work force and poverty wages.

The first economy is also undergoing changes that are contributing to the
rising unemployment rates. The combination of factors that have contributed
to the worsening of high levels of unemployment  are retrenchments as a
result of the recession; the introduction of highly developed and
sophisticated technology which requires fewer but highly skilled workers;
and the move away from a traditional labour-intensive economy towards a
service-oriented economy. Companies have embraced these forms of production
to maximise their profits.

The danger is that the majority of those who are unemployed are the youth
and people with low skills not required by the economy. High unemployment
rates and relatively low wage employment are contributory factors to
inequality, low levels of human development, social polarisation, poverty
and high levels of crime.

In the short and medium term, unemployment and low wages lead to an
increase in the demand for social security by the majority of the people
and a low tax base which, in turn, adversely affect economic growth in the
long term.

It is for these reasons that the ANC government has prioritised job
creation and decent work as one of the most important programmes for this
financial year and in the medium-term budget plans. The importance of this
has been correctly articulated in the 2010 Budget Review document that
states:
   To build a more inclusive society, South Africa needs a marked expansion
   in employment. This is not only an economic objective; putting more
   people to work will contribute to human development, income
   redistribution and social cohesion. Broadening economic participation
   assists in curbing dependence, countering crime and reducing poverty,
   illness, alienation, mental stress and social exclusion.

Funds that are being requested in the Appropriation Bill have to be used to
address these critical challenges that the country is faced with today.

Initiatives contained in this Bill to address this challenge must be
supported. These initiatives include, amongst other things, programmes such
as the Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP; skills development;
improvements in public employment services; and the implementation of
various strategies that are likely to promote job creation and are embedded
in most departmental budgets such as those of the Department of Labour,
Trade and Industry, etc.

Since the majority of poor people reside in the rural areas, the
implementation of a comprehensive rural development strategy would have to
be given the highest priority in our funding plans. Some of the identified
interventions prioritised for funding in promoting job creation include
programmes that will advance industries and services with the potential for
job creation; increasing the pace and upping the content of the Expanded
Public Works Programme; increasing investment in further education and
training; implementing new measures to promote youth employment; and
putting in place programmes and strategies that will encourage the
development of co-operatives, small and medium enterprises and the spirit
of entrepreneurship in general.

The implementation of some of these priority programmes identified in the
Industrial Policy Action Plan 2, Ipap 2, embedded in the Department of
Trade and Industry’s funding plans, will assist in speeding up job-creation
measures. When looked at holistically, the budget being sought through the
Appropriation Bill is necessary for this work.

As part of its strategies to reduce the high rate of unemployment and
create more jobs and decent work, the ANC government has identified
infrastructure development as one of the key priority programmes for
funding. In the Minister of Finance’s Budget Speech in February, an
announcement was made that, over the next three years, the public sector
aims to spend R846 billion on infrastructure programmes.

It is expected that a large part of this spending would be in this year’s
budget requirement needs. Some of the additional funding on infrastructure
as identified in the Budget Review are the R2,5 billion to increase labour
intensity in public works and the R1,8 billion for the clothing and textile
industries.
The implementation of these programmes will have a huge impact on the
taking off of the country’s new economic growth path and increase the
potential to reduce the current rates of unemployment and poverty.

The ANC government is committed to building cohesive and sustainable
communities to advance the Freedom Charter’s call that there shall be
houses and security for all.

This is also enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic as a human right
in the Bill of Rights. The ANC manifesto stipulated that, through
programmes for housing, social security, as well as sports and recreation,
the aim is to build a better life for all.

The ANC government has put a priority on increasing access to security and
decent housing for all. It is also committed to strengthening local
government as a crucial sphere of government where the majority of the
population has frequent and direct contact with government. It is
recognised that local government is critical for service delivery in the
country.

In their Budget Vote, the Department of Human Settlements prioritised the
acceleration of the delivery of houses, access to basic services and more
efficient land utilisation as their core programmes needing funding.

The Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs has
prioritised building an accountable and efficient local government. Their
focus on funding plans is to meet community needs; provision of clean,
responsive and accountable administration; improving performance and
professionalism; and support for municipalities, given the importance of
local government in service delivery and the fact that a lot of problems
relating to the capacity of municipalities to deliver services have been
identified in the past.

In conclusion, this Bill had to be assessed against the priorities of the
ANC government and its funding priorities. The budget requirements, as
stated in various government departmental Votes proposed for appropriation
in this Bill, are important and urgent. The release of these funds will
advance the implementation of the plans for change.

As the ANC, we need to ensure that this Budget is used effectively and
efficiently to achieve the mandate to pursue transformation, which has been
given to us by the people. In adopting this Bill, we are going to intensify
our oversight role in Parliament. We must vigorously ensure consistent
monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the programmes funded
through the appropriation.
As legislators, we must ensure that all the laws that we have put in place,
such as the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act and
others, are indeed enablers of a developmental state to achieve the goals
of speedy service delivery and development.

For these reasons, the ANC supports the passing of the Appropriation Bill.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M SWART: Mr Speaker, a budget deficit of about 7,3% was expected at the
end of the 2009-10 financial year. Sars, however, managed to do their trick
once more, and a lower budget deficit of 6,8% was in fact achieved. They
deserve our congratulations.

In addition, we managed a higher growth rate than expected, inflation was
reduced, and a sensible monetary policy was followed by the Reserve Bank.
Although these factors give rise to optimism, outside international factors
such as the declining value of the euro, due mainly to financial problems
in Greece, could quite easily lead to a second round of recession
worldwide.

We should therefore make sure that we are ready for such an eventuality by
being absolutely prudent in our spending patterns. This applies even more
so in the case of government departments and institutions.

When looking at the spending patterns of departments for the entire 2009-10
financial year, it is disconcerting to note that many departments fail to
spend the budget amounts allocated to them, and that they continue to spend
as much as possible in the fourth quarter of the financial year so as not
to have a reduced allocation made to them in the next financial year.
Equally disconcerting is the continued misappropriation of funds by way of
corruption as well as the recurring trend of incurring wasteful and
unnecessary expenditure. No wonder the DA’s wasteful expenditure monitor
exceeds the R1 billion mark already.

Of concern also is the number of jobs lost in the economy and the inability
of the Department of Public Works to spend all available Expanded Public
Works Programme, EPWP, funds for job creation in respect of their EPWP
incentive schemes. Some R30 million of this incentive programme remained
unspent at year-end.

Only 68 municipalities out of a total of 283 received monies from this
fund. It is clear therefore that the oversight role of Parliament,
particularly by its portfolio and standing committees, will become of
utmost importance in the 2010-11 financial year to ensure that money is
spent prudently and wisely.

One of the instruments Parliament and its committees will be able to use to
good effect to ensure proper oversight is the Money Bills Amendment
Procedure and Related Matters Act, the content of which we have recently
explained to hon members in a number of training sessions.

This Act, signed into law by the hon President during April last year,
provides the right to Parliament - for the first time - to amend the
budgets of departments through the various portfolio committees as well as
through the Standing Committees, on Finance and Appropriations, provided,
however, that such amendments fall within the approved fiscal framework.

The Act provides an opportunity for Parliament to control the unnecessary
roll-over of funds, and expenditure outside the declared priorities of
government; to curb unnecessary and wasteful expenditure and over- and
underspending on budgets; as well as to ensure adherence to the Public
Finance Management Act for funding roll-overs.

The Act also provides for the establishment of a budget office to give
assistance to portfolio committees, but in particular to the Standing
Committees on Finance and Appropriations to fulfil their mandate as
prescribed by the Act. A director is to be appointed in terms of the Act to
head the budget office.

The Act has been law for more than a year now, but a director has not been
appointed yet. This is despite the fact that the advertisement for filling
the position was approved by a joint sitting of the finance and
appropriations committees in February this year.

Despite the fact that the appointment is crucial for proper assistance to
committees to provide effective oversight, the ANC instead formed what they
call “a political task team” to deal with the matter. This so-called
“political task team”, consisting of ANC members only, came up with the
idea of seconding current parliamentary staff to the budget office before
the director of the budget office is appointed.

When asked what the function of these seconded personnel would be and who
would supervise them in the interim, the Secretary to Parliament advised
that they were to arrange office space, buy furniture and computers, etc,
so that the new director would not be bothered with such trivial matters
when he assumed office.

Needless to say, there was no organogram for the budget office, and the Act
clearly prescribes that the director shall be part of compiling such an
organogram. The seconded personnel would therefore have embarked on the
procurement of offices, furniture and computers without knowing the number
of personnel involved and therefore the quantities required.

Fortunately the joint sitting of the finance and appropriations committees
did not agree with this hair-raising scheme. The result, however, is that
nothing has happened since and the advertisement to fill the position has
still not been inserted a year after having been signed into law by the
President.

One wonders whether the proposed secondment of parliamentary personnel was
an attempt to create vacancies to which superfluous ANC caucus employees
could be deployed, or whether the proposed independence of the budget
office provides a threat to centralised political control or maybe even
endanger the position of certain parliamentary staff members.

At the time when committees and Parliament consider the Medium-Term Budget
Policy Statements, MTBPS, the advice and recommendations of the budget
office will be of immense value, and it is a pity that priority attention
is not given to the establishment of the said office.

It is at the MTBPS that a major portion of the rollover of funds takes
place. It would unfortunately also appear that certain departments are not
yet aware of the existence and prescripts of the Money Bills Amendment
Procedure and Related Matters Act.

I make the latter statement based on the fact that the Director-General of
Labour wants to increase his budget by a huge R1 billion without reference
to anybody and without quite knowing what the purpose of the additional
funding would be. When one hears this, the need for parliamentary oversight
becomes clearer.

The example quoted is made more serious by the fact that the director-
general in question is also the president of the Black Management Forum of
South Africa and should therefore be more knowledgeable about management
and South African laws than the rest of us.

Although he is supposed to be an apolitical public servant, we regrettably
might be forced to pardon him as he is probably so busy with expressing his
own political opinions in his capacity as the president of the forum that
he has limited time to attend to the poor showing of the Department of
Labour!

I thank you and wish Bafana Bafana all the best. [Applause.]

Mr G P D MACKENZIE: Hon Speaker, hon members, the Financial and Fiscal
Commission’s submission has interrogated government’s policy priorities for
2010. It has also examined growth trends and the utilisation of national
revenue funding. It concurs with government on its main priorities and thus
gives support for the Appropriation Bill.

It is, however, distressing that 16 years after the advent of democracy,
South Africa has the unenviable record of being the most unequal society in
the world. The gap between the rich and the poor as shown by the Gini
coefficient is forever widening.

It is not surprising therefore that unions’ strikes stem in part from the
disparity of earnings between the upper echelon and ordinary workers. The
class divide is going to lead to a class conflict. One does not have to be
a prophet to recognise this. The question is whether we have the will to
alter the situation on time.

The government’s key public spending priorities for the year are education
and skills development, health care, job creation, infrastructure, rural
development, justice, crime prevention and policing.

There has been little change since 2008. Skills development has been
appended to education. We fully agree that skills development is a very
important component of education. Job creation has been prefixed to
infrastructure development. We also agree that considerable emphasis should
be placed on job creation.

However, basic household services have been removed from the government's
previous priority list. Rural development has taken its place. This is
surprising as the issue of household services remains as contentious as
ever.
In Cope we agree that rural development has to come onto the priority
listing, but not at the expense of household services. This is
fundamentally wrong. Even at this stage, it would be appropriate for
government to list six extraordinary priorities instead of the basic, usual
five. We urge government to do so and to return basic household services to
the list as the sixth item.

I now come to debt serve costs as this is the fastest growing item on the
budget line. The Financial and Fiscal Commission has warned about the
government's use of debt to fund current expenditure, such as remuneration
of public servants.

Like the commission, we too are concerned about the increase in debt
service costs relative to other budget items, as well as the rapid increase
of the public sector wage bill. Government must drastically restrict long-
term borrowing because what has happened in Greece should serve as a timely
warning to us in South Africa. Debt has a tendency to become unmanageable
very quickly, especially as circumstances can alter very quickly.

At a time when economic conditions in the world are as
uncertain as they are today, it is very important to curb debt
rather than to roll it over as government is intending to do. I believe
that red lights should start to flicker. As the custodians of the national
purse, this august House should start to become very concerned.

The national government's net loan debt will have risen from R526 billion
last year to R1,3 trillion in two years time. Consolidated government debt
service costs will therefore rise from 2,4% of the gross domestic product,
GDP, or R57,599 billion this year to 3,2% of the GDP, or R104 billion in
2012-13. At that stage, the government debt service costs will be a
staggering R104 022 billion.
The National Assembly must think very seriously about the impact of this
spiralling debt service costs as it must do everything in its power to
bring the debt down. As I see it, South Africa is never going to be able to
enjoy a debt-free status again. While the national government's net loan
debt is growing, so is expenditure.

Only International Relations, Public Enterprises, Arts and Culture, Sport
and Recreation and Communications reflected a slight decrease in their
budgets. All of the other departments have increased their budgets. This
means that the hard pressed South African citizens must prepare for
substantial tax increases.

Likewise, whichever party that comes into government in 2014, will have a
note from Minister Gordhan left on the table saying, “Sorry, but there is
no money left in the Treasury. Good luck!” Remember that this is what
happened just a few weeks ago, when the labour government left office in
the United Kingdom.

It is an economic truism that large-scale debt, driven by current
consumption, will compromise economic growth and destabilise the domestic
financial system. It would have been different if debt was being used to
finance capital assets. Unfortunately, this is not so and that is why the
country is going to face fiscal uncertainty.

There is another matter of some importance on which we would like to get
clarity from the Minister. This year the national estimates of expenditure
have not reflected government’s expenditure on consultants. Does this mean
that as of this year, consultants will no longer be appointed?

That would be a very progressive development considering how government
employees leave by one door and return straightaway as consultants through
the next door. Even though this is not allowed in the code, the practice is
now well established.

It would therefore be of great relief to know that expenditure on
consultants is not reflected in the estimates of national expenditure
because departments may no longer employ consultants.

Cope would also like to hear from the Minister about procurement processes
as these have been thoroughly corrupted by the ANC-led government. Although
tax compliance certificates are required by law, departments are dispensing
with them at will without any consequences.

The Minister can look at how the Department of Correctional Services has
generally subverted the law in this regard. Tender adjudication processes
have been bent crooked and accreditation processes are twisted. For how
long must the taxpayer patiently countenance such criminal behaviour inside
government?

I now come to the question of funding for the public transport sector. A
coherent fiscal strategy is lacking. Can we ask the Minister when this
deficiency is likely to be remedied?

Finally, I come to the question of the poor in South Africa. Three factors
that are making the present global economic crisis more severe for our poor
are escalating food prices, rising electricity tariffs, fuel costs and
joblessness.

Constitutionally, the poor are not passive victims of poverty and mere
recipients of state grants and services. They have to be actively assisted
to a better life through education, jobs and services.

We are seriously concerned about the fiscal position in which this country
finds itself. We insist that debt has to come down as the cost of servicing
that debt will impact negatively on taxpayers in particular. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI: Speaker, the distribution of funding from the
National Revenue Fund to the state departments is both critical and central
to the economic and social development of our country. It is therefore
imperative that this distribution is properly planned and implemented
strictly according to plan, as we are dealing with finite fiscal resources
and cannot afford the luxury of second-guessing ourselves.
Central to the point of effective distribution is the concept of value for
money. Many of our state departments still receive qualified audit reports
from the Auditor–General’s office indicating poor management of funding,
which results in ineffective service delivery. It seems as if a culture of
general unaccountability regarding fiscal funding is being allowed to
develop in certain departments and this is most worrisome to the IFP.

Tender fraud and mismanagement must be identified within the departments
and those responsible must be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.
It seems as if very few staff members in state departments are ever taken
to task over fraudulent mismanagement of fiscal resources.

Lack of a necessary skills base in some departments is also a major
contributing factor to poor service delivery, and this must be addressed as
a matter of urgency. In addition, a culture of discipline, responsibility
and accountability must be inculcated within the departments and staff
members found in breach of their duties must be disciplined.

Transfers to state-owned entities should be strictly monitored as there
does not seem to be much supervision over these funds. They seem to be
dissipated with the greatest of ease with little or no accountability
attached thereto, an example being the Commission for Gender Equality.
State-owned entities must take a long, hard look at their salary
structures. The fat needs to be trimmed off CEO and senior management
salaries so that there is more equitable distribution of funds for the
average worker. This will result in fewer strikes, a more content
workforce, effective service delivery and fewer service delivery
demonstrations by the public.

Whilst the IFP respects the rights of workers to partake in legitimate
strike action, we question the appropriateness of the timing 15 days before
the World Cup.

The Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act provides us
with a golden opportunity which will allow the voices of our citizens to be
heard through their respective public representatives in terms of the
allocation of resources. Service delivery must be first and foremost on the
agenda.

In the past we have been hampered by issues of over- and underspending,
which resulted ultimately in the needs of the people on the ground not
being met. This Act will empower us as Members of Parliament to correct
these imbalances.

Finally, we would like to task the Ministers and senior management of the
various departments with taking full ownership and with being accountable
to the people of this country for the funds that they receive from the
fiscus.

They should ensure that those funds go where they are supposed to go and do
what they are supposed to do. The IFP will support this Bill. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Speaker, this year’s Appropriation Bill was formulated at
an extremely difficult economic time in our country’s history. The whole
world is experiencing a massive economic upheaval, with millions of people
having lost their livelihoods across the globe.

The recent crisis in the Eurozone has also shown that the tentative global
recovery of the past year has mainly been propped up by unsustainable
deficit spending. We therefore need to be alive to the fact that our own
recovery, as shown by the growth figures yesterday, is constantly subjected
to threats outside of our control. The factors that are within our control,
however, are the allocation and spending of our budgetary resources.

In this regard, the ID believes that you have done a good job, Minister, of
ensuring that different priorities are being met during this difficult
period. The ID welcomes the fact that you have chosen not to decrease
social welfare expenditure during this time, and that finally the extension
of the child support grant to all children under the age of 18 years has
been implemented. This is something that the ID has called for for a number
of years.

The ID also welcomes the announcement that you will be considering the
introduction of a wage subsidy for youth, but we would have liked to have
seen this implemented this year rather than next year.

The ID would also liked to have seen more money being set aside for the
gradual implementation of the much-debated national health insurance scheme
as the gross inequalities in our health sector need to be urgently
addressed. In addition, the ID is concerned that not enough money has been
set aside for the building up of specific green industries. We cannot keep
debating this issue without actually putting forward the funds and policies
to build up this potentially huge growth sector.

The ID does, however, welcome the fact that this year’s Budget has started
to close the financial taps on those nonperforming state-owned enterprises,
particularly those that have become a major drain on the fiscus. A major
challenge that still needs to be confronted, though, is how we are going to
continue to fund the huge infrastructural needs of our country,
particularly in the areas of energy, water and sanitation.

For too long we have lived in a false economy where we have not invested
enough in maintaining and upgrading the essential services of our country,
and the effects of this are starting to be seen throughout our society.

Allocating the money, however, is only one side of the equation. The ID
hopes that you will also live up to your promise of ensuring that we get
value for money from every cent of government expenditure. This includes
ensuring that no money is lost through corrupt practices, nor is siphoned
off into the coffers of the ruling party under the guise of investment
front companies like Chancellor House. With this proviso in place, the ID
supports the Appropriation Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Deputy Speaker, hon members, Ministers present in the
House, the Bill before us represents the backbone of government’s expressed
policy for the coming year. Between what we approved here today and what is
actually delivered in services, there is a vast gulf.

The failure to turn today’s Budget into tomorrow’s service delivery is in
essence the cause of a spate of violent community protests. As I have
indicated earlier in the budget cycle, conditional grants do not resolve
the problem of the failure to spend budgets appropriately. At the heart of
the matter is a severe lack of skills coupled with an institutional culture
that celebrates ineptitude and turns a blind eye to cronyism and tender
fraud.

National government will simply have to improve its ability to monitor the
spending of provincial and local governments. It also means that national
government will have to radically improve its own track record when it
comes to responsible spending and meeting delivery targets. We need
leadership from the front.

The continued torrent of poor management and widespread critical vacancies
must be addressed immediately. It is these basic things which undermine the
beautiful intentions of the budget process. It is also these things that
create the conditions for corruption to flourish.

We are especially concerned about the numerous state-owned enterprises and
entities which draw heavily upon the national revenue for support, yet also
have a terrible track record. The SABC, to name an example, continues to
benefit from taxpayer relief while it stumbles from one management crisis
to another.

Regrettably, this is true of many state-owned enterprises and agencies.
Eskom is a particularly troubling case. It is a drain on the fiscus. It has
undermined our economy with its failure to maintain and invest in
infrastructure. It is worsening inflation with its escalating rates.

These are illustrations of a particular culture that has seeped into every
facet of governance. If we do not face up to this culture and replace it
with one that celebrates competence and dedication, all policy and
budgeting will be for nought. The UDM supports the Bill. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Nkul D W MAVUNDA: Xandla xa Xipikara na Yindlu ya wena leyo hlonipheka,
ndza mi losa eka ndzhenga wa namuntlha. Ndzi lava ku burisana na n’wina
swintsongo mayelana na matirhelo ya mikavelo ya mali hi tindzawulo ta
mfumo. Komiti leyi yi xiyaxiya, ku landzelerisa na ku vona loko mali leyi
kunguhateriweke tindzawulo yi tirhisiwa hilaha yi pimanyetiweke hakona.
(Translation of Xitsonga paragraph follows.)

[Mr D W MAVUNDA: Deputy Speaker and your august House, I salute you this
afternoon. I want to discuss with you a little bit concerning the spending
of allocated money by government departments. The committee oversees and
monitors whether the money which is set aside for the departments is spent
as budgeted.]

It should also be emphasised that this Standing Committee on Appropriations
was established in terms of section 43 of the Money Bills Amendment
Procedure and Related Matters Act, Act 9 of 2009, with the powers and
functions conferred to it by subsection 4 of the Act and the Constitution.
The Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act set out,
amongst other things, the legislative framework for the amendments to the
Appropriation Bill. In terms of this Act, the committee has to consider and
report on spending issues, actual expenditure published by the National
Treasury and amendments to the Division of Revenue Bill, the Appropriation
Bill and the Adjustments Appropriation Bill, among other things.

It is, therefore, noted with great concern that the government in general
reported an overall underexpenditure of R5,8 billion or 1,3% of the entire
national Budget for the 2009-10 financial year. The general observation
indicates that the bulk of this underspending emanates from the current
payment and capital expenditure. However, the 2010-11 Budget has increased
by R2,6 billion, or 0,6%, from the 2009-10 to the 2010-2011 financial year.


Be that as it may, if government wants to realise the strategic priorities
arising from the 2009 state of the nation address of the hon President, the
Appropriation Bill committee recognises that it will have to be effective
in its oversight and other functions, and it will have to monitor the
achievement of government goals for economic development and service
delivery.

Taking into consideration the Appropriation Bill issues raised during the
public hearings and section 32 reports - the in-year monitoring instruments
for government spending - it has been established that many departments do
not fully comply with the range of prescribed legislation, rules, and
procedures — amongst other things, the Public Finance Management Act and
the Public Service Act.

Picking up but just a few departments, like the Department of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs, which is regarded as the central and
integral instrument of government, it has, in as far as service delivery is
concerned, been allocated approximately R43,9 billion in the 2010-11 Budget
compared to the R36,5 billion for the previous financial year.

The department spent R36 billion, which is R513 million less than the
allocated amount in the 2009-10 financial year. The department reported
underspending in all economic classifications during 2009-10 with capital
expenditure reflecting the major underspending. The high levels of
underspending are of concern since capital spending and transfer payments
form part of government instruments which are meant to create jobs and
enhance service delivery.

Having said that, the committee has also learnt with great concern that it
has lost about R8,7 million in the 2009-10 financial year, according to the
Public Service Commission, PSC, due to suspension of personnel with pay on
misconduct and misappropriation of public funds.

This means that with so many departments, there is a lack of compliance
with the Public Service Act which prescribes, amongst other things, that a
case of any misconduct, including suspension, must be concluded within 60
days. However, there are departments that have in some other cases taken up
to approximately 250 days to finalise formal disciplinary processes.

We, therefore, in this committee urge all the departments to comply with
the Public Service Act in all respects in order not to misuse public funds
unnecessarily. However, this committee, the members of the ANC in
particular, has learnt with great interest of the passion, commitment and
concern of the Minister of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
with regard to all that has happened at local government level,
particularly in various municipalities.

The ANC is waiting with great anticipation for the turnaround strategy
model that will strengthen and ensure that government funds are utilised
appropriately, effectively and efficiently by highly skilled, suitably and
highly qualified personnel who will be placed in the right posts and be
equal to the task.

We hope that the turnaround strategy, as alluded to by the Minister
himself, will design programmes with proper planning and control of state
funds, with monitoring and evaluation being the order of the day. The
committee is also impressed by the fact that the Ministry is aware of the
challenges faced by both municipalities and provinces, and has come up with
a clear programme called “Operation Clean Audit 2009-14” - which also
clearly outlines those challenges and its problems - and has also come up
with a plan to deal with those challenges that are hampering service
delivery.

We appreciate the establishment of the new Department of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs with Dr Masenjani Sibanda as the
director. It is noted with appreciation that from the moment of colonial
occupation and the apartheid regime, traditional leaders have been at the
forefront of the struggle against the dispossession of their land,
subjugation, oppression and discrimination by those forces.

It was not by mistake that traditional leaders were central to the creation
of the ANC in the year 1912, which culminated in prominent and progressive
leaders like Chief Albert Luthuli being elected as the president of this
revolutionary movement.

As we speak, in the democratic South Africa together with the leaders in
government, we do realise that our enemies are no longer colonialism and
apartheid. They are unemployment, crime and poverty that the majority of
people in this country have been subjected to since the introduction of the
so-called Land Act of 1913, which drove black people to the dry areas
called reserves, later named homelands; as well as the Bantu Administration
Act of 1938 which stripped away the powers and authority of our kings and
chiefs and subjected them to the control of white supremacy then called the
Governor-General.

It is our view that the new department will — in consultation with
traditional leaders and structures like the Congress of Traditional Leaders
of South Africa, Contralesa, and the House of Traditional Leaders — draw up
programmes leading to proper land allocation and administration, and local
economic development leading to service delivery.

The second example is the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform.
This committee has learnt, again, that we are still experiencing the legacy
of the Land Act of 1913, which is still prevalent in landownership in our
country; in the rural areas in particular, where farmworkers are still
trapped by the injustice of this legislation. It is noted with great
concern, because land is an asset for any societal development, and it is
central to rural development.

The 2010-11 Appropriation Bill proposes a budget allocation of R6,8 billion
to the department, which is an increase of R365,2 million as compared to
the 2009-10 Budget. The department was allocated R6,4 billion in the 2009-
10 Budget. According to section 32 published by the National Treasury, the
department has spent R5,9 billion of this budget, which reflects an
underspending of R536,4 million at the end of the fourth quarter.

However, the Standing Committee on Appropriations does not encourage these
practices that are being practised by other departments, like virements,
shifting of funds within the budget and rollovers. As a committee, we do
not encourage such practices.

However, as the ANC, we have learnt with great disappointment that most of
the land reform legislation has not benefited the majority of our people,
and continues to keep them on the sidelines of economic participation. For
example, the agreed principle of willing-buyer, willing-seller has no
bearing at all. Instead, it sucks up all the money allocated to restitution
and land redistribution programmes.

We have also noted with concern that at the end of the 2008-09 financial
year, government had delivered approximately 2,9 million ha of white-owned
agricultural land to land reform beneficiaries. This is just about 6% of
the 8,2 million ha that government has planned to transfer by 2014.

Even though the initial planned transfer of 1,5 million ha of land was
reduced by approximately 40,54%, the department only managed to transfer
443 600 ha due to the escalating land price that eroded all the buying
power of the budget allocated to this department.

The attitude of most white farmers in this country, who inflate their
prices more than the market value when selling farms to government, remains
a serious challenge; hence, as the ANC, we fully support the Minister of
Rural Development and Land Reform when calling for progressive legislative
instruments that will ensure that there are proper plans and programmes
leading towards rural development, and which will make it viable for the
department to buy farms at reasonable market value prices.

We also call on ... [Time expired.]

Adv A D ALBERTS: Minister Gordhan se department verdien om geluk gewens te
word met hul prestasies. Die feit dat die Suid-Afrikaanse Inkomstediens sy
invorderingsdoelwitte oorskry het, wys dat die departement wel hard werk.
Dit dui natuurlik ook daarop dat die Suid-Afrikaanse belastingbetaler wil
hê dat die land moet werk, gegewe hul bydraes.

Daarom is die omgekeerde ook waar, en dit is dat die regering ’n besondere
verantwoordelikheid het teenoor die belastingbetaler. Dit vind
vergestalting in die aanwending van die belastingfondse op ’n sinvolle en
effektiewe wyse. Dit behels enersyds die neem van die korrekte
beleidsbesluite en andersyds die effektiewe toepassing van dié besluite,
met inbegrepe van die uitwissing van korrupsie.

Die regering het, wat die VF Plus betref, wel in die regte rigting begin
beweeg rakende ekonomiese beleid, maar ons moet u maan dat die broodnodige
ekonomiese groei en werkskepping wat ons land wel nodig het nie gaan gebeur
deur die grootskaalse intervensie van die regering alleen nie. Die
belastinggeld moet grootliks aangewend word om ’n omgewing te skep wat die
entrepreneurswese sal dien as synde die grootste werkskepper.

Ons glo daarin dat Afrikaners en ander minderhede die regering kan bystaan
indien die regering gewillig sal wees om die strukturele hindernisse van
regstellende aksie en swart ekonomiese bemagtiging te begin hersien en
derhalwe die speelveld waarlik gelyk te maak.

Daarby wil ons ook die Minister en sy departement versoek om aandag te gee
aan die volgende sake van kommer: die publiek sou graag eerstens wil weet
of die Inkomstediens steeds voortgaan met hulle ondersoek teen Julius
Malema. Ons verstaan sy belasting is ’n private aangeleentheid, maar indien
die ondersoek sou bevind dat daar onreëlmatighede bestaan, veral in die lig
daarvan dat sy maatskappye gebruik maak van staatsgeld en
substandaarddienste lewer in daardie verband, het die publiek ook ’n reg om
te weet wat die uitslag van daardie ondersoek is. (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraphs follows.)

[Adv A D ALBERTS: Minister Gordhan’s department deserves to be
congratulated on their achievements. The fact that the SA Revenue Service
has exceeded its revenue collection goal indicates that the department is
working really hard. This also clearly indicates that the South African
taxpayer would like the country to be functioning, given their
contributions.

Hence the reverse is also true, and that is that the government has a
particular responsibility towards the taxpayer. This is personified by the
meaningful and effective utilisation of tax revenue. This involves, on the
one hand, taking correct policy decisions and, on the other hand, the
effective implementation of these decisions, especially with regard to the
eradication of corruption.

The government, according to the FF Plus, is moving in the right direction
with regard to its economic policy, but we have to caution that the much-
needed economic growth and job creation are not only going to come about
through massive government intervention. Taxes should mainly be utilised
for creating an environment that would serve the entrepreneurial sector,
since it is responsible for creating most jobs.

We believe that Afrikaners and other minorities would support government if
it would be willing to review structural obstacles such as affirmative
action and black economic empowerment to consequently level the playing
field.

We would also like to request from the Minister and his department to give
attention to the following matters of concern: firstly, the public would
like to know whether the SA Revenue Service would be continuing its
investigation into Julius Malema. We know that his tax situation is a
private matter, but if the investigation concerns irregularities,
especially in the light of the fact that his company is using public funds
and delivering substandard services in this regard, the public also has a
right to know about the outcome of that investigation.]

Secondly, and most importantly, it is becoming very evident that the South
African taxpayer is being overburdened by the demands of the state on his
or her income. The middle class is struggling, yet the government
increasingly levies more taxes or charges upon the everyday working person
to the degree that this economy can be constricted into a backwards slide.

At all levels of government, new taxes are born without it necessarily
being called taxes. An example is the new road-use tax in Gauteng. Existing
tax rates are being increased beyond affordability, with many people now
facing the prospect of losing their properties due to local government
charges.

This is clearly nonsensical. Therefore, we appeal to the Minister to take
stock of all the taxes bearing down upon taxpayers and to rework the system
into a more equitable form that will allow for entrepreneurial growth in
South Africa, otherwise we are fast approaching a communist tax system and
fascist economy.

The Minister has always shown prudence in the face of adversity, and we
trust he will do so again. Thank you very much.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is hon Mkhulusi’s maiden speech. You are welcome.
[Applause.]

Ms N N P MKHULUSI: Deputy Speaker, hon Minister of Finance, hon members and
guests, the Appropriation Bill in its allocation makes education one of the
key priorities of the ANC government. Basic education that is free,
compulsory and universal is the overarching vision that forms the ANC’s
education policy, and it is people’s education for people’s power.

In following this vision, the ANC has always advanced towards ensuring that
education is becoming free, compulsory, universal and equal for all
children. The 2010 Appropriation Bill should therefore enhance the
implementation of the ANC’s decisions towards the realisation of the
overarching vision. The Bill will go a long way in promoting and supporting
mathematics, science and information technology through bursaries to be
offered to teachers in these areas.

The appropriations to education, human resources and management expenditure
increased at an average annual rate of 134,8%, from R38,85 million in 2006-
07 to R498,6 million in 2009-10. This growth is due mainly to additional
funds allocated for the supply of newly trained teachers from 2007-08.

Prioritisation of these decisions by the ANC is critical, as there are very
few teachers of these subjects in the country. Untargeted training of
educators will not be able to deal with the challenge of scarce skills
shortages in general and shortages of teachers in mathematics, science and
information technology in particular.

Coupled to this is the recruitment of scarce skills such as mathematics and
science from foreign countries, whilst a review of current recruitment and
retention strategies and its effectiveness has been made. Clarity about the
intention to implement a decision to recruit scarce skills from foreign
countries is lacking. The ANC decided that government should recruit the
skills South Africa does not have from foreign countries in order to raise
the internal skills capacity through an increased number of well-performing
learners who will end up not only with a university education, but with
university degrees in mathematics and science.

During the 2008-09 financial year, 40% of both primary and secondary
schools were declared no-fee schools. Approximately 60% of the 12 million
learners in the system are currently benefiting from the system. The policy
of declaring no-fee schools, beginning in January 2007 and extended in
2008, meant that by 2008, 14 264 schools were not required to charge school
fees, thus removing the barrier to accessing education.

By 2010, there are supposed to be eight million learners in approximately
19 933 no-fee schools. It is clear that the department is making a
commendable effort to implement this decision. This has been the vision of
the ANC for years: a free, compulsory and universal education for all.

The no-fee schools are not only ensuring access for all learners, but are
also relieving many poor parents of the burden of having to pay school fees
for their children and thus releasing funds to be used to secure food and
other necessities. There is poverty alleviation in action, and it
contributes to enabling South Africa to meet the Millennium Development
Goal of reducing extreme poverty by 2015.

The Appropriation Bill has to ensure that schools serving the poor are
adequately provided with education resources. Numerous projects have been
initiated to improve teaching and learning in disadvantaged communities,
which are concentrated in the rural areas.

The development of school infrastructure in respect of quality improvement,
development, support and upliftment has ensured that 15 503 schools are
benefiting from this programme. There are still challenges remaining in
respect of the provision of basic services to rural schools. A national
framework for developing education in rural areas was developed and is
being refined in consultation with relevant stakeholders, including,
amongst other things, the Nelson Mandela Foundation and the United Nations
Children’s Fund, Unicef.

The provision of adult basic education and training through the Kha Ri Gude
mass literacy campaign launched in February 2008, was aimed at meeting the
Millennium Development Goals of enabling 4,7 million adults to become
literate between 2008 and 2012. By 2009, the Kha Ri Gude campaign enabled
613 637 learners to attend classes and had created approximately 40 000
short-term jobs.

A combined total of 1 700 blind and deaf learners were reached through
employing about 190 Braille and sign language educators. Government’s
commitment to the elimination of illiteracy is demonstrated by the fact
that expenditure has grown, through the appropriation from the fiscus, from
R17,1 million in 2007-08 to R443,2 million in 2009-10.

The expansion of early childhood development has been advanced a step
further through the 2010 Appropriation Bill. By 2009 there was a 77%
national enrolment for Grade R learners at public and independent primary
schools, with a further 200 000 learners in classes at community sites.
Bags and reading books were distributed to 6 750 Grade R and Grade 1
learners in the Free State and the Eastern Cape as part of the “Drop All
and Read Campaign”. A total of 2,5 million Ithuba books in all 11 languages
were delivered to 2 000 schools as reading material for the intermediate
phase learners.

By 2014 all children will participate in Grade R. In this regard, the
national funding norms for Grade R will be reviewed to ensure that they
consider key curriculum-related matters such as teacher qualifications and
class size. The review is expected to be complete by 2011. Through
successive Appropriation Bills, the expenditure for early childhood
development has grown from R3,9 million in 2007-08 to R11,4 million in 2009-
10. The growth is indicative of the intention of the ANC government to
expand the early childhood development provision.

The efforts to ensure that all early childhood development centres are
standardised to offer the same quality of knowledge to all children and are
mainstreamed to enable the Department of Basic Education to exercise
monitoring and oversight over them, are very encouraging. This will ensure
that all South African children are provided with the necessary learning
foundation by 2014.

In terms of this Appropriation Bill teachers are assisted in respect of
detailed daily lesson plans and easy-to-use workbooks in all official
languages. During 2010 enough workbooks for Grade R to Grade 6 learners,
accompanied by teacher manuals, were distributed to schools.
From the beginning of 2011 workbooks will be used by learners from Grade R
to Grade 9. Successive Appropriation Bills have seen the appropriation grow
from R750 million in 2009-10 to R913 million in 2010-11 and R1 billion in
2011-12. It will ensure that teachers do not spend a lot of time preparing
for lessons, but that their time will be spent on the core business of
teaching and learning.

On the other hand, the workbooks in all official languages also give
expression to the constitutionally entrenched right for everyone to receive
an education in the official language of their choice in public education
institutions wherever it is practically possible. Learners who learn in
their own language from an early age have a stronger potential to
understand the essence of what they are taught than those who learn in a
second language.

The Constitution calls upon government to heal the divisions of the past
and establish a society based on democratic, social justice and fundamental
human rights. In this regard, by ensuring that the poor are adequately
provided with educational resources, the ANC is demonstrating that the
children of the poor can be emancipated from poverty through education.

This fight against poverty not only gives us an opportunity for a better
life for all, but contributes towards the realisation of the Millennium
Development Goals to reduce extreme poverty.

Let me now turn to higher education in the context of the Appropriation
Bill. Of key concern for the ANC is that higher education institutions,
which are highly subsidised by the state, are not being closely monitored
to ensure that graduates emerging from them, in the main, are equipped to
respond to our society’s socioeconomic needs. The funnel effect in the
higher education institutions, in which the quantitative input is higher
than the throughput which, in turn, is higher than the output, deserves
more focused attention.

The ANC seeks to build a national democratic society through a
developmental state that is technically capable of driving the national
agenda and is organising to rally and unite behind that agenda. Such a
developmental state has to be capacitated through a broadened skills base
that has the capacity to shoulder the developmental imperatives in areas
such as infrastructure development and maintenance.

In that regard, adult education, training and skills transfer have to be
prioritised. Further Education and Training colleges, FET Colleges, should
also be reoriented to produce more of the critical skills that are
necessary for the pursuance of the new economic growth path which is job
driven.

The need to develop skills for rural development, for advanced
technological capabilities, and for growing the economy is critical. This
must inform the skills strategies that should support the engine of the new
growth path. At the same time, we must facilitate institutional linkages
that are flexible and dynamic to meet the differentiated and overlapping
demands and opportunities for skills across the sectors of the economy. We
should do so by directing skills development resources available to the
state so as to meet the dynamic needs efficiently and effectively. The
active support of stakeholders, labour, the community, and business, in
particular, must be one of our central concerns.

One of the priorities of the ANC-led government is the creation of decent
work and sustainable livelihoods, thus reducing unemployment and extreme
poverty to concomitantly respond to the Millennium Development Goals.
Research demonstrates a direct link between unemployment in South Africa
and the skills deficit, thus revealing a stark mismatch between the supply
and demand of skills. Employers have often indicated that knowledge,
skills, and capacities that people bring from their educational experiences
are insufficient for the needs of the workplace.

Commitment to vocational training should be demonstrated in resource
allocation to FET colleges and Sector Education and Training Authorities,
Setas, which are vessels through which students in general and adults, in
particular, receive skills that are needed to drive the engine of the new
economic growth path.

We must do more to capacitate FET colleges and Setas to drive the agenda of
skilling the South African society. This will include capitalising these
institutions, in order to make them attractive as providers of skills and
also to create relationships with business and other employers, to ensure
work-driven training and immediate systemic placement of students who exit
the training system.

The January 2010 ANC NEC lekgotla resolved that FET colleges should be
geared towards promoting scarce skills. The FET colleges have, in the
recent past, been focusing on the provision of soft skills which are either
subordinate or equip students for a subsistence that marginally contributes
to the economic life of the community. This needs a rethink in the light of
our massive infrastructure development programme and the skills needs that
this brings with it.

In conclusion, this Appropriation Bill must be in line with the ANC’s 2009
manifesto priorities. The ANC government will increase graduate output in
areas of skills shortages, and this will include measures to streamline
Setas and other institutions to address the existing and forecasted skills
shortages, as the manifesto requires. The ANC supports the Appropriation
Bill of 2010. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Before I call hon Rabie, I want to
take this opportunity to acknowledge the presence in the gallery of a
delegation from the European Parliament, led by Mr Michael Cashman. The
delegation is attending the SA-EU 15th Inter-Parliamentary Meeting. You are
all welcome. [Applause.]

Hon members, I also want to make an appeal to those members who choose to
talk and not to listen It becomes very distracting. Even here I can’t hear
what the speaker is saying. If you choose to talk, do so quietly so that it
doesn’t distract other people, please.

Dr P J RABIE: Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers and hon members, South Africa
is emerging from a recession in which approximately one million South
Africans have lost their jobs. Economic growth in South Africa, during the
past 10 years, was basically jobless, and I think the hon Professor Ben
Turok will agree with me on that.

The ANC’s economic policy and its Budget in 2010-11 use the phrase, “a
developmental state”. I think they use it very extensively. They also use
“a paradigm of change”, and I quote:


   ... a new growth path that will result in the eradication of widespread
   poverty and the present unacceptable levels of unemployment.


Whether it would happen under the present economic policy of the ANC is
questionable. What is of significance, however, is that this particular
Bill identifies the following five policy priorities of government, namely
job creation and infrastructure, which I think is very important; education
and skills development; improving health care services; rural development;
and justice and crime prevention.

The DA is a party for all the people. One of our core principles is to
establish an open society where all people, irrespective of race, colour or
gender, have equal access to opportunities. What South Africa needs at this
moment, more than ever before, is a public sector that is able to solve the
following priorities; and allow me to start with education.

The national Department of Education is responsible for policy development,
co-ordination, monitoring, and evaluation. The provincial departments of
education are responsible for the actual implementation of programmes in
schools. In a submission to the Standing Committee on Appropriations, the
Human Sciences Research Council, HSRC, states that current research
indicates that cognitive performance at an early age of six years can
predict later performance, especially in mathematics. Whether it actually
happens is debatable.

Strong, quality mother-tongue development is essential for literacy,
academic language, numeracy and other skills. Whether this is actually
occurring too is also questionable.

It also indicates high volatility amongst the youth-learner aspirations
that is failing to translate into student enrolments and high volatility
amongst the youth-learner aspirations failing to translate into skilled
enrolments. This was taken from what the HSRC said to us in the committee.

What this in essence means is that the current education system does not
provide the adequate skills required in the labour market. It is estimated
by the HSRC that before the present economic downturn, there were about 2,5
million people aged between 15 and 24 years who were out of work and not
studying. It is my contention that this problem is now considerably worse.

The Standing Committee on Appropriations had a hearing on the Expanded
Public Works Programme. What emerged during the hearing is that some
government departments have not yet implemented clear financial control
reporting; and the underspending in respect of the Expanded Public Works
Programme incentive hampers the national goal of job creation. And this was
crystal clear.

Another question that remains is whether there is adequate communication
between national, provincial and local spheres of government. All
indications are that there is room for improvement, but whether the
political will exists is questionable, if the lack of service delivery that
exists at local level is taken into account.

The DA is of the opinion that the commitment to maintain and to create new
infrastructure is essential. A thorough review of the capital expenditure
and operational efficiency of state-owned enterprises is required. It is of
national importance. It is not acceptable for ordinary taxpayers, who
already carry a heavy tax burden, to subsidise nonprofitable state-owned
enterprises. Privatisation of these entities is inevitable if we want our
manufacturing sector to grow and to compete in global markets.

The cost of doing business in South Africa is still too high. The DA
therefore urges government to reduce the red tape.

The DA welcomes the additional spending in this Bill on rural development.
More than 40% of the total population in South Africa lives in rural areas.
What is of concern, however, is that the present HSRC research indicates
that only 10% of this population is economically active in organised
agricultural production in these particular areas.

According to the 2010-11 Budget, spending on rural development will
increase from R6 billion to R8 billion by the year 2012-13. The department
also identified a number of priorities, for example, water management,
agricultural support, and extension for both household and commercial
farming. Rural development requires a holistic approach, and it is critical
that the private sector, the Departments of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries; Water and Environmental Affairs; Transport; Public Works; and Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, and other entities become
involved in rural development.

The DA also urges the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform not
to deviate from accepted international economic principles that relate to
private property sales. The willing seller, willing buyer principle remains
in force. We cannot afford another Zimbabwe. Our economy is vulnerable; we
are not yet out of the woods. Only 12 million South Africans are employed,
of which only 5,3 million actually pay income tax, whilst between 12 and 13
million people still depend upon social grants.

The portfolio committee took note of the submission by the Public Service
Commission that the Department of Police does not comply with the Public
Service Act that states that the suspension process should take 60 days. It
took them about 80 days to suspend something like 650 of their members.

The result of this was that the department lost R5,4 million from
suspensions with pay. What is further of concern is that this department
has lost R102 million to financial misconduct, and only 61% of this
particular total was recovered. This is clearly not acceptable. The DA
urges the hon Minister of Police to institute preventative measures to
rectify the financial misconduct in his department.
Violent crime and corruption threaten the economic and social future of all
South Africans. Statistics released by the SAPS for April 2008 until March
2009 puts South Africa’s murder rate ... I thank you, Madam. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Ms R J MASHIGO: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, MPs
and guests, the document on the reconstruction and development programme
speaks about, among other things, the democratisation of society and people-
driven needs.

The voters have spoken, through the inputs of the ANC branches that
represent the aspirations and hopes of their communities, irrespective of
political affiliations. The Budget speaks to the people’s needs, the ANC’s
2009 election manifesto and the government’s priority programmes.

This paper will focus on crime prevention, policing and health, explaining
why the appropriation is relevant. What is common in these two departments,
SAPS and Health, is that they both have a high capacity for job creation,
caring and patriotism, and are labour-intensive. The correlation between
the two departments is that a person has to be physically healthy to join
the police force.

In outlining the ANC’s strategic approach to crime, in our 2009 strategy
and tactics documents we state that:

   The battle against crime cannot be separated from war and want ...
   specific mind sets and historical conditions drive elements of crime
   problems ... the network of crime has grown in their reach and
   sophistication across national boundaries - this includes syndicates that
   deal with money laundering, human smuggling as well as drug trafficking
   and abuse.

The government is addressing those issues. The ANC will never abandon its
mass mobilisation towards crime prevention and protection of people,
communities and their properties. The strong community policing forums,
which emanated from our Stellenbosch conference resolutions, and again
emphasised at the Polokwane conference, showed these effects, because the
residents have such a lot of confidence in the policing forums.

This is because the policing forums do liaise with the communities and
relevant stakeholders, and they are also able to detect anti-social
behaviour in the communities and report them to relevant structures.

On top of this, we are strengthening this with our street committees, which
actually act as a neighbourhood watch. They know who lives within the areas
and in the neighbourhood; and as a result, they can easily detect criminal
elements among themselves and report them to the police and the policing
forums.

Through these structures, we can even strengthen the community courts. In
rural areas and in villages we also need to mobilise the implementation of
safety plans under our traditional leaders. The hon Minister of Police is
also involved in meetings with the farmers, trying to resolve the issue of
crime in that sector.

The National Youth Service Programme should involve youth in the massive
programme of community policing safety, which includes night patrols to
instil discipline among the youth as well as the value of serving and
protecting the community and public property.

We thank the President for the appointment of General Bheki Cele at the
helm of the Police Service. He is doing exactly what everybody in this
House wants. He is changing the mindsets and promoting professionalism and
discipline within the institution, which will earn the police the respect
and confidence of the community. This goes further with proper training and
the investigative eye of the police.

We should remember that re-enlistment of former senior police officers in
this regard means those who are fit to do the work. One should not cry foul
when members from the former police services are turned down, because we
really need fit people, who will still be able to do the job. This is a
very good programme. We wish that the fit, former police officers would
come back and join us in the prevention of crime.

The implementation of a single Police Service is long overdue. We
appreciate the announcement by the Minister of Police during the Budget
Vote debate on 6 May 2010 on this subject. There should be co-ordination of
police services for effective policing, under the control and management of
the office of the general of SAPS.

There should be co-ordination of the criminal justice system, so that
police investigators and prosecuting officers can ensure that some cases
are not thrown out of court because of fragmented processes and
technicallities. We should also strengthen the Independent Complaints
Directorate to ensure compliance with the implementation of the Domestic
Violence Act and that SAPS is doing as recommended.

There is also the integration of border controls, to ensure the prevention
of transnational crime and the security of the country. The Department of
Finance has to fill its 22 vacancies of the 97 964 posts, as at September
2009, in order to effectively fulfil this and its other core functions. The
strengthening of forensic capacity is also recommended as mentioned in our
2009 election manifesto.

We know that we have the trio which will make us effective in tracing all
those crimes through the assistance of forensic investigation and
integrated Information and Communications Technology, ICT, utilisation. The
intergovernmental co-operation under this co-ordination should also be
strengthened in order to prevent and combat cyber crimes.

The number of posts in SAPS, as at 31 September 2009, according to the
figures that we received yesterday, was 192 240; and the vacancy rate
between 2009-10 stands at 3,5%. This translates into 6 869 posts. All these
vacancies are at the lower levels of between one and six. These levels are
supposed to be the levels at which poverty and unemployment are meant to be
alleviated, as they are occupied by unqualified personnel and low-ranking
police officials. It is really necessary and imperative that those people
out there who are able to do the job effectively should be employed and
those posts should be filled because they don’t need any documentation.

Reference has been made to corruption, and the strategic plan of the
Department of Police is indicating that the prevention, detection and
investigation of corruption within the departments will be a major focus. I
do not dispute the fact that the Public Service Act has shown that many of
the suspended cases have gone long beyond 60 days, and this has led to
fruitless expenditure in the department. Hon Minister, this really needs
proper attention.

Under health, hon members, I will be talking about what the Freedom Charter
says concerning health for all. It commits the government to promote the
health schemes under the state, free medical care and hospitalisation, with
special care for mothers and children. We are focusing on primary health
care.

It should be noted that in South Africa, the first and most significant
policy for health promotion appeared in the ANC’s health policy document.
It recognised the power of health promotion in promoting the lives of South
Africans and in its vision for primary health care. It was endorsed by the
White Paper and the National Health Act of 2003 as a strategic approach for
ensuring an accessible, affordable and efficient health system with full
community participation and intersectoral collaborations.

We have seen achievements towards that, with health facilities closer to
communities. There are still areas without basic facilities, but with the
human settlement programmes, at last services will be where the people are.
The use of mobile clinics in remote areas should be seen as an interim
measure, as it has already proved to be unreliable.

Through the establishment of clinic committees, hospital boards and public
education, the communities will understand the importance of attending
local health care centres and clinics instead of going to hospital for
minor and chronic treatments. Instead of waiting for death to occur at any
public institution and then running to the media, let us all make it our
duty to address our constituencies and our political parties about the
importance of attending local health centres.

This is where the Millennium Development Goals on reduction of child
mortality and improvement of maternal health starts. It starts right at the
clinics. Many of the deaths relating to these two goals happen due to the
lack or sometimes underutilisation of resources, which include HIV/Aids and
mother-to-child transmission.

The ANC-led government is actively addressing the issues of inequality in
health systems, improving quality of care, public facilities and human
resources. The Declaration of Alma-Ata committed members of the
participating countries to health for all by 2000. One of the principles of
this promotion was to emphasise primary health care. This means providing
appropriate services to the people where they are and within the
communities.
HIV remains a threat in our country. The ANC has committed itself to
working hard towards the target of cutting new HIV infections by half by
2011 and ensuring that 80% of those infected have access to ARVs. We salute
President Zuma, the hon Minister of Health and others for leading by
example, when they confronted all perceptions and stigmas attached to the
pandemic. The ANC will continuously mobilise the people to practise safer
sex.

With the involvement of faith-based organisations, we will definitely
achieve what we want to by making sure that the moral fibre of the
community is upheld.

The South African National Aids Council, Sanac, has been revived and is
looking at the strategies that will address the fight against Aids. HIV
prevention is well-resourced within the government departments, for
example, the Social Services Developmental Co-ordination Programme
addresses, with other departments, the HIV prevention programmes.

I can only mention the caregivers’ programmes, which are under the Expanded
Public Works Programme, and others focusing on HIV awareness, condom
distribution and male circumcision.

The Comprehensive National Insurance Plan will address the review of
hospital revitalisation, and will be looking at the maintenance of the
existing facilities.
Human resources development is an issue. We are hoping that the departments
will come up with a human resources development programme that will address
the high vacancy rates. This will include the opening of nursing colleges.

We all know that, as a profession, nursing was associated with poverty
alleviation, because students used to receive salaries whilst training.
This then had a positive economic impact on their families.

We have all the oversight tools to make sure that the budget is going to be
used for the purposes that it is intended for. The Constitution expects all
of us to call for accountability. The people out there know what they want,
but depend on us to get it. Let us not fail them.

As a committee we debated so well today, which shows that all those members
of other parties who attended the hearings of the Standing Committee on
Appropriations understand exactly what we want.

We are inviting members from the FF Plus to attend one day. They should
understand that we are here for equity and not just to promote one sector
of the community. The ANC’s aim is to transform the imbalances of the past.
Let us all agree that everybody should get a better life. With the
assistance of everyone here, we are going to achieve whatever we want -
equity and equality for all members of the South African population.

With these words, we invite all those members who took part in the debate
today and supported the budget to please attend the committee hearings so
that they can understand what the Standing Committee on Appropriations
stands for; or they should at least ask for the documents containing the
terms of reference of the committee. The ANC supports the Bill. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the Acting President, and
colleagues. Let me also join the House in offering my condolences to the
Slabbert family. I met Van Zyl Slabbert in the early 80s when I was on the
other side of the political line. I can only commend his impeccable
integrity and resilience. [Interjections.] No, you will learn about it
soon, don’t worry.

On behalf of the Minister’s committee on the Budget and indeed the Cabinet,
I want to thank and extend our appreciation to the Standing Committee on
Appropriations and its chairperson, Mr Sogoni, and indeed all Members of
Parliament who have participated through the various portfolio committees
in interrogating the Appropriation Bill.

This is a new period during which a new, critical look had to be given to
the Division of Revenue, the Fiscal Framework and the proposed allocations
to the various departments. Of course, all of the committees heard what the
departments were delivering, but all of them also heard how each of the
departments wants more money. Of course, the amounts will range from
anything up to a billion rand as we have learnt. May I thank, on behalf of
Cabinet, Parliament for its vigilance and very constructive debate and
contributions to a very important process.
This year, Deputy Speaker, is an interesting year. It marks the first time
we have implemented the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters
Act. We did so in the middle of a serious recession which, every now and
then, seems to tell us it’s going away, but then decides to come back.

We have had to move into a deficit of 7,3% to secure our expenditure on
infrastructure, social commitment and other commitments in terms of
spending programmes. We have put in place measures to mitigate the impact
of this recession on workers and businesses. Also, we have conducted an
internal campaign — like many governments are doing now — to encourage
savings, to find value-for-money propositions and, more importantly, to get
a collective voice amongst us in our fight against corruption and the
virulent rent-seeking that seems to typify our society.

We must endorse Mr Sogoni’s words when he says these are public funds and
there is a lot more that politicians, administrative heads and others could
do to make sure that we get the right value for money.

In the past three days we have had some good news. Two days ago the Reserve
bank informed us that the leading indicators – these are indicators that
they monitor in the economy that tell us if the curve is moving up or down,
or just straight are showing that we are increasingly moving away from the
recession that we’ve been experiencing.

Yesterday we heard from Statistics SA that our GDP for the first quarter
was 4,6% and today we heard from them again that the Consumer Price Index,
CPI, came out at 4,8% - far below what many people expected. [Applause.]

I think we should rightly be happy that South Africa appears to have left
the recession behind; it certainly has. But when we look at the world
around us, we also have to be mindful that there are still risks in the
world around us. As I will illustrate to you in a moment, we are not
completely in a clear. Remember that the recession that we experienced in
South Africa wasn’t of our own making. It was the greed and avarice of
bankers in Wall Street that got us what the rest of the world had got
itself into.

At the same time, we must appreciate the good news, but the key challenge
before us is how to increase the volume of this good news into a roar which
says we are, indeed, on the path of an inclusive growth economy. The
warning for us, though, is that most of the world or many parts of the
world are on what we may call a fiscal watch.

Let me give you some examples of what this fiscal watch means. The United
Kingdom, UK, announced the other day - you might agree or disagree with the
current coalition administration - that they are going to cut £6,25 billion
in this year’s budget. A sum of £1 billion is to be cut in discretionary
areas like consultancy and travel costs; £95 million by cutting losts in IT
spending; £1,7 billion by delaying and stopping contracts and projects;
£170 million through reductions and property costs; £600 million from
cutting the costs of quangos, or what we call state entities; and another
£520 million by reducing other lower-value spending.

Local government must make a contribution of £1,1 billion to this overall
£6 billion and over.


Mr M J ELLIS: We would like to have those same cuts.

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: That is something you have to wait for, Mr Ellis,
until you get to Cabinet. [Laughter.]

Now what are other countries doing? Minnesota, a state in the United
States, has reduced state government aid by US$250 million, made reductions
in state health and human services programmes, and has reduced state
agencies and other programmes.

In Ireland a 2% pay cut has been imposed on all those earning between €15
000 and €75 000. Those earning incomes above €75 000 have to be levied at
between 4% and 9% of the income as an additional levy – I’d like to know
how many volunteers we have for that here in the House! There is also a
health levy increase to 5% and a number of other cuts in the various
services that government offers.

Greece, of course, has been in the news, but amongst the many things that
they had to do as part of their fiscal consolidation is that annual holiday
bonuses have been capped; pensioners’ bonuses will also be capped; taxes
will be increased; and deep cuts in defence spending and hospital
procurement have been made. Now this story goes on in Portugal, Spain and
France, and in the past 24 hours, Italy has joined the queue of those
making these cuts.

Notwithstanding that record of what the rest of the world is doing, we can
safely say that in South Africa we have a very clear plan, in spite of some
of the comments that we have heard today, to manage our debt.

Let me repeat that the increase in our borrowing wasn’t because of our own
choice; it was forced upon us. We did it because we wanted to protect the
programmes of government and to ensure that our people are not deprived of
the services that they need or that the investment in infrastructure
expenditure is not compromised in anyway.

We were not profligate like Greece or any other country and I believe that,
notwithstanding our challenges, we have a very clear fiscal consolidation
plan that will eventually take us from last year’s 7,3% deficit, which is
now 6,7%, of course, to 4,1% in three years’. And I think it will even be
lower than that if we manage ourselves carefully. [Applause.]

Hon Mr MacKenzie, your question around consultants is, in fact, answered in
the Estimates of National Expenditure booklet – the thick one - and I can
give you page references where you can actually find it. That might help
you to identify where those numbers are. Your point about the procurement
processes and so on is valid, but I think it’s improper to just finger one
department like the Department of Correctional Services, where I know the
Minister is putting in extraordinary efforts to ensure that the procurement
process is put right.

The concerns that we have about debt service costs are valid. This increase
from R57 billion last year to R104 billion in three years’ time. And we
require, if you like, a national consensus amongst all of us on the fact
that we can’t just borrow endlessly, neither can we spend endlessly on
interest payments on our borrowings. We need to manage our fiscus in the
right way, therefore, we certainly share the sentiments in that regard.

Many of our colleagues have raised questions around value for money,
savings and corruption. I think we have gone some way to understanding
where the gaps in the procurement system are. I don’t think we have done
enough, yet. There is some intensive work going on and hopefully, in the
next month or two, we will be able to announce further steps to close these
loopholes.

But the problem here, ladies and gentlemen, is that there is a significant
culture of rent-seeking that is developing in South Africa. Make easy
money; access it easily; make the right connections with politicians and
bureaucrats and without putting in any sweat equity at all - I don’t have
to sweat, I don’t have work hard, I don’t have to think hard - all I need
to do is make the right connection. We must end that. [Applause.]

On state-owned entities, all of us would agree that the kind of paradigm
within which these entities have operated for the past five or 10 years is
not quite the paradigm we want for the future. This is a matter that the
President, as you know, has taken in hand and I think in the next six
months or so we will begin to see some results on many of the issues that
colleagues have raised.

On the savings question, let’s remember that in this Budget itself the
efforts that we have put in over a very short period of time gave us some
R25 billion of savings which we have redistributed over the three-year
period to various priorities. This is a start, but we need to do a lot more
than we have done up to this point.

Colleagues, for example, the hon Lebenya-Ntanzi has raised various
questions about heads of departments taking more responsibility for the
funds and how they spend them. I think here we would agree with you that
there is more work that leaders within the Public Service can do in order
not to raise expectations of more money, but to find innovative ways to do
more with less money. That is the pattern that the rest of the world is
following.

How do we fund our infrastructure needs? If you listen to all the
announcements that we have had recently, including Mr Ndebele’s
announcement that we need R75 billion to fill the potholes in our road
system, then the list that we have is long. One of the things that we as a
country will have to look at is how to prioritise what we want to do on the
infrastructure side. Where do we get the maximum bang for our buck, if you
like, and the maximum impact on the economy as a whole.

It is interesting that one of the morning newspapers today gives credit to
government for its infrastructure investment and its contribution to the
GDP thus far. So, read that paper and its editorial; and it’s a welcome
acknowledgement of the efforts and plans of government itself.

The hon Ntapane raises questions about state-owned enterprises, SOEs, and
in particular the SABC and Eskom. On behalf of Minister Hogan, I can
certainly give you the assurance that Eskom is on a much better footing;
that its management team is really ticking and very cohesive. There are
very clear plans about where they want to take the organisation in order to
make sure that we have the energy suppliers that we actually need; and it
is beginning to correct some of the mistakes that might have been in the
system.

I can’t say the same for the SABC at the moment. There is a lot of work to
do in that entity and many other entities to ensure that this culture of
relying on government guarantees to keep them on this side of the auditors’
line is one that we need to put an end to. Management in these entities
must learn to take responsibility and they must deliver the goods. That is
the key.

Mr Alberts, I regret to tell you that the word “communist” is not an
unfriendly word these days, because we all refer to China and China is
headed by a communist party. I think many of us might want to emulate what
they do to get the kind of growth figure that they have; the kind of speed
at which they can implement their infrastructure projects; and the culture
of can-do. The days of “swart gevaar”, I’m afraid, have been left behind
sometime ago and we might have to find other ways of addressing some of the
questions and concerns that you have. [Applause.]

We want to agree with Mr Swart that issues - several other colleagues have
mentioned this as well - of roll-overs, wasteful expenditure, over- and
underexpenditure, and not quite abiding by the Public Finance and
Management Act, PFMA, are all issues which the Standing Committee on
Appropriations have come across. Ministers and heads of departments I’m
sure will give the appropriate attention to this.

In conclusion, let me say that we have done well, this year, to implement
the Money Bills Amendment procedure and Related Matters Act in Parliament;
to get the right level of interaction between Ministers and the portfolio
committees; and to give attention to the key issues that we have before us.


Let us recognise that we do have a very uncertain period ahead of us. There
are no guarantees that the revenues will come as we think or that the
economy will sustain the kind of growth indicators that it is giving us at
the moment. But there are two things that we need to bear in mind.

The first is that as we go into the next budget cycle we will have to learn
about what real prioritisation means; we will have to learn that we have to
take money from somewhere and give it somewhere else.

And we will have to learn that we have to make trade-offs, we can’t do
everything for everybody at the same time from the same pot of money, and
so I’m waiting for volunteers to say that I can take money from them and
give it to somebody else – not necessarily on this side, though.

Finally, we all need to take collective responsibility for the fact that
babies should not be dying in our hospitals; people shouldn’t be living in
the conditions they live in when the President visited Sweetwater; and that
a lot should be done to end the theft from the state and the rent-seeking
that is happening.

So let me recommend that you adopt the Appropriation Bill and I thank you
for this opportunity. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a first time.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                    (Consideration of Votes and Schedule)

Vote No 1-The Presidency-put.

Declarations of vote:
The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA has no option
but to call for a division on this Vote and make a declaratory statement in
this regard.

Besides the fact that the President’s first year in office has been
somewhat of an annus horribilis, and despite the enormous opportunity that
goes with being the host country for the 2010 football World Cup, there
have been many – too many - instances that have compromised not only the
person of the President, but also the office.

This Vote’s allocation has grown systematically over the past few years and
the projections for further exponential growth are frankly a matter of
grave concern. This budget has grown at an average rate of 45,6% between
2006-07 and 2009-10.

The Presidency has also recently adopted two infants, namely the National
Planning Commission and the monitoring and evaluation commission. This in
itself - despite the fact that their budgetary allocation is R50 million,
which makes up only 7% of the total budget of the Presidency, and the fact
that the two commissions have only recently began crawling, literally -
demands of this Parliament an appropriate oversight authority to evaluate
the performance of these commissions and monitor their expenditure, as with
all the other departments.

The balance of this not inconsiderable budget of R677 million is at the
disposal of the Presidency. It remains an anathema to me that there has to
date not been an oversight authority that has interrogated the expenditure
of the Presidency in preceding years, so as to appropriately interrogate
the current budget proposals. It is inconceivable that any budget can be
passed for any ensuing period without proper accounting for what has
previously been appropriated.

It is therefore just not possible to approve this allocation and we will
remain constrained in this regard until an appropriate oversight authority
or mechanism is established. The DA hereby notes its objection to the
Budget Vote No 1 - The Presidency.

Mr M S SHILOWA: Chairperson, any government which is inefficient tries to
correct that inefficiency by becoming bigger and more expensive. That is
exactly what this government has done. We have one of the most bloated
Cabinets in the world.

While a huge country like the United States of America has 15 executive
departments, we in South Africa now have 35 ministries! Similarly, the
Federal Republic of Germany has 15 ministries. Russia, which is another
huge country, has 17 ministries. The cost of government is imposing an
intolerable burden on the country. As we already have a fiscal deficit,
government is going to have to increase taxes because it will not be
willing to cut down on its size.

On top of that, we have a President who does not seem to relate very well
to the Constitution. On Sunday, 23 May 2010, the President told the
citizens in Nelspruit that anyone who dared to leave the party would be
exposed by the ancestors and will get stick! [Interjections.] People are
being intimidated and lied to.

Earlier, there was the incident of the jogger from the University of Cape
Town who was bullied. All in all, this President is not leading a
government that is delivering a better life for all. Cope will not support
this Vote. [Interjections.] Thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, when we debated the hon Dandala’s motion of
no confidence in the President of South Africa, the ACDP gave reasons why
we supported the motion. To show consistency and continuity on our part,
the ACDP will not be supporting Budget Vote No 1 - The Presidency.
[Interjections.]

Under President Zuma’s leadership, state expenditure has increased
substantially; the latest addition being the more than R15 million in
taxpayer’s money that will have to be paid to maintain his three wives and
fiance. [Interjections.]

The President has failed to show overall leadership in times of crisis and
violent protests which are a response to poor service delivery. The ACDP
will therefore not support this Budget Vote. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: House Chairperson, the ANC rises in
support of Budget Vote No 1 - The Presidency. The budget contains the key
elements to implement the vision and programme of action of this
government.

Upon assuming the high office of President of the Republic, President Zuma
committed the government to working tirelessly towards fundamental change
in the lives of all South Africans, especially the poorest of the poor.

The levels of interaction with ordinary people and key stakeholders in
society have become one of the salient features of the Presidency. The bulk
of the money, which totals R465,1 million, is targeting executive co-
ordination that includes policy co-ordination, the Cabinet office and the
National Youth Development Agency. As the ANC, we encourage the Presidency
to continue on this path.

We are really disappointed to learn that the only motivation of the DA to
challenge this budget is because there is no monitoring mechanism. This is
despite the fact that the DA has submitted names for the constitution of a
task team to do that. [Interjections.] So, in short, it means you have no
viable motivation for what you are doing. [Interjections.]

With regard to Cope, Cope is a chicken without a head. [Interjections.] How
can we listen to a chicken without a head; it will mislead us.
[Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:


   AYES - 215: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Baloyi, M R; Bam-Mugwanya, V; Bhengu, N
   R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Borman, G M;
   Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C V; Buthelezi, M G; Carrim, Y I;
   Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F I; Coleman, E M;
   Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; De Lille, P; Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M; Dlakude,
   D E; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo, A; Doidge, G Q M; Dubazana,
   Z S; Dube, M C; Dunjwa, M L; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M L; Frolick, C T;
   Fubbs, J L; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina, N;
   Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Gumede, D M; Gungubele, M; Gxowa,
   N B; Hajaig, F; Hogan, B A; Hoosen, M H; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery,
   J H; Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kekana, C D; Kenye, T E;
   Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M;
   Koornhof, G W; Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T; Lebenya-
   Ntanzi, S P; Lekgetho, G; Line, H; Lishivha, T E; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J;
   Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M C; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V;
   Magagula, V V; Magama, H T; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G;
   Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makhuba, H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele,
   Z S; Makwetla, S P; Malgas, H H; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, J M; Manamela,
   K B; Manana, M C; Mandela, Z M D; Manganye, J; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-
   Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashigo, R M; Mashishi, A C; Masilo, J M;
   Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F;
   Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Maziya, A M; Mbalula, F A; Mc
   Gluwa, J J; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Mfeketo, N C;
   Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A;
   Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A; Mohale, M C; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A;
   Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S;
   Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M S; Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E M; Mthethwa, E
   N; Mtshali, E; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F; Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba,
   L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V B; Nelson, W J; Newhoudt-
   Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J;
   Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J;
   Nkwinti, G E; Nonkonyana, M; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntuli, Z C;
   Nxesi, T W; Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M F; Nyekemba, E; Oliphant, G G;
   Oosthuizen, G C; Pandor, G N M; Petersen-Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J;
   Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-Mosoane, M E; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T;
   Ramatlhodi, N A; Rantsolase, M A; Saal, G; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G
   J; Sexwale, T M G; Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhida, N N ; Sithole, K
   P; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B P;
   Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T
   B; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E; Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tsebe,
   S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R;
   Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Rooyen, D D; Van
   Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 66: Alberts, A D; Boinamo, G G; Bosman, L L; Coetzee, T W;
   Davidson, I O; De Freitas, M S F; Doman, W P; Du Toit, N D; Dudley, C;
   Duncan, P C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Fritz, A T; George, D T;
   Groenewald, P J; James, W G; Kalyan, S V; Kloppers-Lourens, J C; Kohler-
   Barnard, D; Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lorimer, J R B; Lotriet, A; Louw, A;
   Lovemore, A T; MacKenzie, G D; Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Masango, S J;
   Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D; Mbhele, PD; Meshoe, K R J; Michael, N W A;
   Mnguni, P B; Mokgalapa, S; More, E; Morgan, G R; Motau, S C; Mubu, K S;
   Mulder, C P; Nhanha, M A; Njobe, M A A; Ntshiqela, P; Ollis, I M; Poho,
   P; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M W; Robinson, D; Ross, D; Schmidt, H C; Selfe,
   J; Shinn, M R; Smiles, D C; Steele, M H; Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Swart, M;
   Swathe, M M; Trollip, R A P; Van Dalen, P; Van der Linde, J J; Van der
   Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Waters, M; Wenger, M.


Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote 2 – Parliament – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr P D MBHELE: Chairperson, unfortunately for the members who are making a
noise, Cope will support the Budget Vote on Parliament, but with a strong
word of caution and much reservation. We need to develop and build a strong
culture of oversight, as this is one of the most important tools that we
can utilise to strengthen our democracy and take our nation forward.

The necessary policy and tools are in place. However, implementation is the
problem. We need to ensure that every Minister submits to the oversight
mechanism so that the government is seen to be placing a high premium on
accountability. This is what society is demanding and if we are the
people’s government, we should oblige.

Cope supports the demand for Ministers to respond to questions in earnest
and on time in order not to render the process futile. Cope also urges the
reintroduction of interpellations without any further delay. This is
supposed to be the year of action and the Speaker of the House must
actually lead from the very front. Thank you.

Mr C T FROLICK: Chairperson, the fourth democratic Parliament, which is an
activist Parliament, is tasked with oversight and I want to remind the hon
member from Cope that oversight is not only about asking questions to the
executive. Asking questions is one of those elements and there are other
areas of responsibility where parties need to exercise those
responsibilities.

It means that we need to ensure that the lawmaking process is improved in
such a way that it improves the lives of our people. Yes, we need to
intensify our oversight, but we also need to ensure that public
participation is not left behind.

We also need to ensure that all the structures that we have put in place
are operationalised to make the fourth democratic Parliament more
effective. In this light, the strategic plan that has been tabled by the
Speaker has been scrutinised, commented on and adopted.

May I finally add that I am glad to hear that Cope is not going to object
to the Budget Vote because it is the very same Budget Vote, that is
assisting them to organise their first congress. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 3 - Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs – put.
Declarations of vote:

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, last year the DA supported this Vote, believing
that the new Minister and Deputy Minister would ensure that the
department’s budget would help to turn around the poor service delivery
experienced at the majority of municipalities.

Unfortunately, the general state of municipalities and service delivery is
now worse with more than 50 major protests taking place all over the
country since the national elections. Twenty-four municipalities are
currently under administration and many others are in distress. The vacancy
rates at municipalities are not coming down.

Nepotism is rife and incompetent connected cadres are appointed. Exorbitant
packages are paid to top officials, resulting in salaries comprising more
than 50% of the total expenditure of municipalities.

Skuld aan munisipaliteite, desondanks gedeeltelike afskrywing, het
toegeneem tot R57 miljard. Goedkoop politiekery om stemme te koop,
veroorsaak dat die ANC-beheerde rade nie skuld invorder of streng
kredietbeheer toepas nie, en veral nie voor verkiesings nie.

Die weerhouding van betaling deur enige een is onwettig en dit is jammer
dat die Minister die rassekaart speel deur slegs op wit weerhouding te
konsentreer. Die Minister en sy departement het ook nie daarin geslaag om
nasionale en provinsionale departmente te kry om hul munisipale rekeninge
af te los nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Municipal debts, despite partial write-off, has increased to R57 billion.
Cheap politicking to buy votes gives rise to the fact that ANC-led councils
are not collecting debts or enforcing strict credit control measures,
especially not prior to elections.

It is illegal for anyone to withhold payment and it is a pity that the
Minister is playing the race card by only focusing on whites withholding
payments. The Minister and his department also failed in getting national
and provincial departments to settle their municipal accounts.]

It became glaringly obvious in recent visits to municipalities by the
oversight committees of Parliament that a number of them are misusing the
municipal infrastructure grant allocated by this department - and your
responsibility - for daily running costs of the municipality.

With the poor state of local government and a department, which according
to the Auditor-General’s report, had two fraudulent matters amounting to
R37,6 million to deal with and which, according to Auditor-General’s
report, also lacks the evidence to prove its actual performance in terms of
free basic service infrastructure and free basic co-ordination, the DA
cannot support this Vote. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, the Empowerdex Service-Delivery Index
released a damning report on the state of the 231 municipalities for the
six district municipalities and six metropolitan municipalities. According
to media reports, in some municipalities, less than 20% of households were
receiving basic services. Violent protests because of poor service delivery
are far too frequent.

The ACDP believes taxpayers and citizens in general do not get value for
the money they pay in rates and taxes. Even cities in the homelands and
under Bantustan administrations were much cleaner than the filth we see
today. Because local government is failing us dismally, the ACDP will not
support this Budget Vote.

Mr S L TSENOLI: Chairperson, the ANC will obviously support this Budget
Vote. Some of the criticisms that members are raising show that they were
listening to the Minister properly during his presentation of the report.
His frankness has bowled them over completely.

They are unable to deal with the reality that they have supported the
turnaround strategy and that for that to happen government needs to have
the money that this Budget provides. What sense does it make, therefore, to
object to this programme? The fact that they themselves have acknowledged
this, goes a long way. It is a very frank assessment of the state of
affairs; and it is a big, interesting programme to deal with the issues of
local government.

The ANC supports it also because we recognise that the developments that we
are dealing with are in no small measure because of the persistence of
levels of poverty in our country and the fact that incapacity is partly
attributable to that reality. We will not forget the reality that part of
the problem is reversing the effects of the past.

The President has announced that his regular interaction with his Ministers
is intended to provide support for the weaknesses we are identifying. The
reality of programmes that are now emerging, and developing and the signing
of outcomes-oriented government programmes are an indication of that
commitment. There is no way, given the programme of the Fourth Parliament
and administration, that those will see the light of day in nine months.
We are obviously hoping that the commitment shown by Salga, the
municipalities itself, provincial elements and others to deal with all the
problems identified will not be questioned. We hope that members will
support those activities to ensure a real turnaround so that people are
served better and given quality services to boot. Thank you. [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:

 AYES - 221: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Baloyi, M R; Bam-Mugwanya, V; Bhengu, N
 R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Borman, G M;
 Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C V; Buthelezi, M G; Carrim, Y I;
 Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F I; Coleman, E M;
 Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M; Dlakude, D E; Dlamini,
 B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo, A; Doidge, G Q M; Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M
 C; Dunjwa, M L; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M L; Frolick, C T; Gasebonwe, T M A;
 Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina, N; Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona,
 M F; Gumede, D M; Gungubele, M; Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hogan, B A; Huang,
 S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kekana,
 C D; Kenye, T E; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P;
 Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W; Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers,
 L T; Lebenya-Ntanzi, S P; Lekgetho, G; Line, H; Lishivha, T E; Luyenge, Z;
 Maake, J J; Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M C; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M
 V; Magagula, V V; Magama, H T; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G;
 Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makhuba, H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z
 S; Makwetla, S P; Malgas, H H; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, J M; Manamela, K
 B; Manana, M C; Mandela, Z M D; Manganye, J; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula,
 N N; Martins, B A D; Mashigo, R M; Mashishi, A C; Masilo, J M; Masutha, T
 M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matshoba, J
 M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Maziya, A M; Mbalula, F A; Mc Gluwa, J J;
 Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Mfeketo, N C; Mgabadeli, H C;
 Mjobo, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A; Mmusi, S G; Mnguni,
 P B; Mnisi, N A; Mohale, M C; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B E E;
 Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S; Motshekga, M A;
 Motshekga, M S; Mpontshane, A M; Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E M; Mthethwa, E
 N; Mtshali, E; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F; Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba,
 L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V B; Nelson, W J; Newhoudt-
 Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J;
 Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhanha, M A; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana,
 S J; Njobe, M A A; Nkwinti, G E; Nonkonyana, M; November, N T; Ntapane, S
 Z; Ntshiqela, P; Ntuli, Z C; Nxesi, T W; Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M F;
 Nyekemba, E; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Pandor, G N M; Petersen-
 Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-Mosoane, M E; Mlohele, P;
 Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A; Rantsolase, M A;
 Saal, G; Scheemann, G D; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J; Sexwale, T M G;
 Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhida, N N; Sithole, K P; Sithole, S C N;
 Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Smith, V G; Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B
 P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T
 B; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E; Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tsebe, S
 R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R;
 Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Rooyen, D D; Van
 Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z.


 NOES - 61: Alberts, A D; Boinamo, G G; Bosman, L L; Coetzee, T W;
 Davidson, I O; De Freitas, M S F; De Lille, P; Doman, W P; Du Toit, N D;
 Dudley, C; Duncan, P C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Fritz, A T; George, D T;
 Greyling, L W; Groenewald, P J; James, W G; Kalyan, S V; Kloppers-Lourens,
 J C; Kohler-Barnard, D; Kopane, S P; Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lorimer, J R B;
 Lotriet, A; Louw, A; Lovemore, A T; Marais, E J; Masango, S J; Maynier, D
 J; Mazibuko, L D; Meshoe, K R J; Michael, N W A; Mokgalapa, S; More, E;
 Morgan, G R; Motau, S C; Mubu, K S; Mulder, C P; Ollis, I M; Rabie, P J;
 Rabotapi, M W; Robinson, D; Ross, D; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Shinn, M R;
 Smiles, D C; Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swathe, M M; Trollip, R A P;
 Van Dalen, P; Van der Linde, J J; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van
 Schalkwyk, H C; Waters, M; Wenger, M.

ABSTAIN - 1: MacKenzie, G D.

Vote accordingly agreed to.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): For future voting, we will request
members to still press even though you cannot see whether you have voted or
not. You must just press because your names will reflect on the results.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, it is not the TV screens that are looking blank.
It is the faces of the ANC who don’t understand the system.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Chairperson, can we have manual counting?
[Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): If you are happy to stay here until
late tonight, no problem!

Vote No 4 – Home Affairs – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs C DUDLEY: Chair, hon Minister and hon members, the ACDP is very
concerned about the condition of migrant women and children, especially in
the border areas of Musina.

Despite promises, government appears not to have put any budget or
programme in place to cope with these people. Migrant orphans are sometimes
put in children’s homes, but many are kept separate from South African
school-going children for months while waiting for the Zimbabwean
authorities to confirm their status, which can take years. There are also
reports that sexual attacks on migrant women are increasing in these areas.


As Zimbabwean passports cost the equivalent of about R2 000 a passport,
this is outside the reach of any average person, and thousands of desperate
people in Zimbabwe will continue to cross the border at illegal crossing
points, and without papers.
This is a pressing problem and we urge government to address it in a
compassionate manner. Local residents say that these people are treated in
a way that one would not want to treat animals. These are people like us –
our neighbours.

The ACDP urges the Minister to focus urgent attention on these matters. The
ACDP will, however, be supporting this Budget Vote. Thank you.

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Chairperson, while the ID supports this Vote, we would like
to register our concern about the unanswered questions on the Who Am I
Online forensic audit report as well as the smart card project.

The Department of Home Affairs received the forensic report of the
investigation into corruption on these matters on 10 February 2009. South
Africa wants to know what is going on, because there is ongoing confusion
around these matters and it is our request that they are dealt with as a
matter of urgency. Thank you.

Mr B A D MARTINS: Chairperson, I rise on behalf of the ANC to express
confidence in the manner in which the Department of Home Affairs is
addressing the challenges it faces. The issues raised with regard to the
Who am I Online and the smart card project have been raised several times
in our portfolio committee, and they are issues that the department is
currently dealing with.
I also wish to express confidence in the manner in which the department is
carrying out its mandate as the protector and as the department responsible
for the integrity of citizenship in this country. The ANC supports Vote No
4. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 5 – International Relations and Co-operation – put.

Declarations of vote:

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, even though the ACDP will be supporting Vote
No 5, we nevertheless wish to appeal to the Minister of International
Relations and Co-operation to speak out and condemn the unending
kidnappings and brutal rape of women and children in East Congo. The
reports that are coming from that region are heartbreaking and shocking and
demand the urgent attention of different governments, including our very
own.

We further call on the hon Minister to use all available channels to
prevail upon the African Union to do more to protect the most vulnerable
women and children in East Congo. The ACDP will support this Vote. Thank
you.

Mr T W NXESI: Chairperson, the ANC supports this Vote. Thank you.
[Applause.]
Vote agreed to.

Vote No 6 - Public Works – put.

Declaration of vote:

Mr G G OLIPHANT: Chairperson, thank you very much. We stand here as the ANC
to support Vote No 6 and we are happy that Cope has realised that they have
to be part of this support. The Department of Public Works has made
tremendous progress in addressing the key priorities of government and much
more needs to be done.

We are satisfied that the internal capacity has improved drastically in the
department, and therefore the issues that were raised by the Auditor-
General are being addressed as well.

The implementation of our actual programme, the Expanded Public Works
Programme, has all the ingredients for success and needs to be accelerated.
Outstanding matters in the built environment also need serious engagement;
this includes the registration and grading of contractors, specially
emerging contractors; proper accreditation and experiential training for
professionals, particularly in the engineering discipline; plus proper
certification of building materials for good quality control. So the
resources that have been allocated for public works will take us a long way
in achieving all the issues that have been raised in the previous
engagements. The ANC supports this Budget Vote, thank you very much.

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 7 - Women, Children and People with Disabilities – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs D ROBINSON: Chair, the DA cannot support this Budget Vote as we believe
it’s hopelessly underfunded for the enormous task of providing a special
focus on the needs of vulnerable groups such as women, children and persons
with disabilities.

In creating this Ministry, the size of the government has been increased,
but it is not increasing the level of service to those who most desperately
needs it. The programmes for the vulnerable groups have been allocated a
mere R7,1 million respectively, which constitutes 0,01% of the country’s
Budget. Persons with disabilities continue to be marginalised and reduced
to the level of second-class citizens.

Our Constitution guarantees equal rights and opportunities for all people
including those living with disabilities. To level the playing field
special attention and funding are needed. The funds allocated to creating a
new Ministry with all the trappings, could be allocated more successfully
to the Department of Social Development, which actually provides the
dedicated services needed. There is no need for duplication; expenditure
needs to be efficient, effective and focused.

The creation of this Ministry was meant to signal a decisive change in the
status of these vulnerable groups, but I fear it was simply a matter of
expediency and window-dressing.

I call upon government for a change of heart. You need to put your money
where your mouth is. The DA objects to this Budget Vote.

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Chairperson, Cope opposes the Vote for Women, Children and
People with Disabilities. We do so with a very heavy heart as we believe
very strongly that this department needs all the support it can get to
advance the lot of women, children and people with disabilities.
Unfortunately, as everyone can see, this is not the case, if anything, the
advent of this department has set back the strides which we were making in
respect of gender parity and women issues.

This department is all cosmetic; it does not answer the needs of women,
children and people with disabilities. Because we stand for the advancement
of women, children and people with disabilities, we know that this
department will be more of an impediment rather than providing assistance.
We will not support this Vote for as long as it remains constituted the way
it is. [Interjections.]

Let me finish. Irrespective of the chicken with or without a head,
according to the Chief Whip of the Majority Party, Cope will not support
this Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, Chair. We note the priorities outlined by the
department in relation to improved performance monitoring and evaluation;
improved access to rights and developmental opportunities for women,
children, people with disabilities; and the department’s focus on the
protection of the rights of persons infected and affected by HIV/Aids.

It is not clear, however, how existing priorities are specifically
aimed at supporting and protecting family life. In the Department’s Mandate
Implementation Improvement Plan, the first point the department makes is
that:


   Family life is critical for delivery on the rights of women, children and
   persons with disabilities. Strengthening your family structures is
   therefore an important element of successful delivery on the rights of
   persons in these vulnerable groups.


The ACDP believes that the people of South Africa would like to see more
 being done to prioritise this important aspect. There are approximately
 18,3 million children living in South Africa; the allocated budget for the
 children’s programme amounts to an expenditure of R2,65c per child in South
 Africa. This makes it an enormous challenge. Also, many doubt that figure
 and say it is much lower.


R7,1 million has also been allocated to meet the challenge of existing
 disability targets as well as for finalising the draft national disability
 policy.


The 2070 community survey indicates there are an estimated 1,9 million
 people living with a disability in South Africa; this constitutes
 approximately 4% of the total population - another enormous challenge.


In June 2009 the Minister referred to an immediate deliverable of the
 department being the establishment of the fund for women’s empowerment,
 which is aimed at enabling them to start their own businesses and assisting
 NGOs in civil society in the undertaking of women’s empowerment programmes.




The ACDP would like to know if this fund has, in fact, been established and
what financial resources have or will be dedicated to it. Taking into
account the limited financial support for the human resources capacity of
the new department and the enormous scope of the mandate ... [Time
expired.]
Ms B THOMSON: Thank you, Chair. The ANC supports Vote No 7. However, as the
ANC we declare that we are dissatisfied with the limited budgetary
allocation to the Department of Women, Children and Persons with
Disability, as it results in limitations on the scope of programmes of the
department. Notwithstanding these concerns, we acknowledged that this is
not enough reason not to support the Budget Vote.

We also note that the department is new and requires significant support
and increased resources for it to progress and deliver on its mandate. We,
therefore, as the ANC support Vote No 7.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 225: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Alberts, A D; Baloyi, M R; Bam-
   Mugwanya, V; Bhengu, N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-Zulu, H I;
   Booi, M S; Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C V;
   Buthelezi, M G; Carrim, Y I; Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S;
   Chohan, F I; Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; De Lille, P; Diale, L
   N; Dikgacwi, M M; Dlakude , D E; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo,
   A; Doidge, G Q M; Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Dudley, C; Dunjwa, M L;
   Fihla, N B; Fransman, M L; Frolick, C T; Fubbs, J L; Gasebonwe, T M A;
   Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina, N; Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L;
   Gona, M F; Groenewald, P J; Gumede, D M; Gungubele, M; Gxowa, N B;
   Hajaig, F; Hogan, B A; Hoosen, M H; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H;
   Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kekana, C D; Kenye, T E; Khoarai, L
   P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G
   W; Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T; Lebenya-Ntanzi, S P;
   Lekgetho, G; Line, H; Lishivha, T E; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X;
   Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M C; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V;
   Magama, H T; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G
   L; Makhuba, H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P;
   Malgas, H H; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, J M; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C;
   Mandela, Z M D; Manganye, J; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B
   A D; Mashigo, R M; Mashishi, A C; Masilo, J M; Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D
   K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M
   M; Mavunda, D W; Maziya, A M; Mbalula, F A; Mc Gluwa, J J; Mdakane, M R;
   Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Meshoe, K R J; Mfeketo, N C; Mgabadeli, H
   C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A; Mmusi, S G;
   Mnisi, N A; Mohale, M C; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B E E;
   Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S; Motshekga, M
   A; Motshekga, M S; Mpontshane, A M; Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E M; Mthethwa,
   E N; Mtshali, E; Mulder, C P; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F; Nchabeleng, M
   E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V B; Nel, A C;
   Nelson, W J; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo,
   E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhlengethwa, D G;
   Njikelana, S J; Nkwinti, G E; Nonkonyana, M; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z;
   Ntuli, Z C; Nxesi, T W; Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M F; Nyekemba, E;
   Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Pandor, G N M; Petersen-Maduna, P;
   Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-Mosoane, M E; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G
   S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A; Rantsolase, M A; Saal, G; Scheemann, G
   D; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J; Sexwale, T M G; Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni,
   J B; Sibhida, N N; Sisulu, M V; Sithole, K P; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P
   S; Skosana, J J; Smith, V G; Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B P;
   Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T
   B; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E; Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tsebe,
   S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R;
   Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Rooyen, D D; Van
   Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L E; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 62: Boinamo, G G; Bosman, L L; Coetzee, T W; Davidson, I O; De
   Freitas, M S F; Doman, W P; Du Toit, N D; Duncan, P C; Ellis, M J;
   Farrow, S B; Fritz, A T; George, D T; James, W G; Kalyan, S V; Kloppers-
   Lourens, J C; Kohler-Barnard, D; Kopane, S P; Lamoela, H; Lee, T D;
   Lorimer, J R B; Lotriet, A; Louw, A; Lovemore, A T; MacKenzie, G D;
   Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Masango, S J; Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D;
   Mbhele, P; Michael, N W A; Mnguni, P B; Mokgalapa, S; More, E; Morgan, G
   R; Motau, S C; Mubu, K S; Nhanha, M A; Njobe, M A A; Ntshiqela, P; Ollis,
   I M; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M W; Robinson, D; Ross, D; Schmidt, H C;
   Selfe, J; Shinn, M R; Smiles, D C; Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Swart, M;
   Swathe, M M; Trollip, R A P; Van Dalen, P; Van der Linde, J J; Van der
   Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Waters, M; Wenger, M;
   Zikalala, C N Z.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 8 - Government Communication and Information System – put and
agreed to.

Vote No 9 - National Treasury – put and agreed to.

Vote No 10 - Public Enterprises – put.

Declarations of vote:

Dr S M VAN DYK: Voorsitter, die DA is bly dat die begroting van die
Departement van Openbare Ondernemings, ten opsigte van oordragte na
openbare ondernemings, afgeneem het vanaf R2 miljard verlede jaar, na net
R138 miljoen vanjaar.

Die DA is egter van mening dat te veel geld na openbare ondernemings
oorgedra word. Baie van die openbare ondernemings soos SAL, Denel en Eskom
kan nie finansieel van die grond af kom nie, en daarom het daar ’n
spreekwoord onstaan wat na openbare ondernemings as “bakhandstaan
ondernemings” verwys, omdat hulle van die belastingbetaler afhanklik is vir
finansiële oorlewing.

Een van die groot redes vir hierdie swak prestasie is, eerstens, omdat die
Departement van Openbare Ondernemings nie daarin slaag om die prestasies
van openbare ondernemings behoorlik te monitor nie. Die tweede rede vir
hierdie swak prestasie is dat die departement nie daarin slaag om die
staatsaandeelhouer bestuursfunksie suksesvol toe te pas nie. Dit plaas
geweldige druk op die belastingbetaler.

Die DA sê al lankal dat sekere openbare ondernemings soos SAL geprivatiseer
behoort te word om hulle ekonomies onafhanklik te maak. Minister Manuel,
sekere openbare ondernemings soos Denel, wat reeds bankrot is, behoort
gelikwideer te word. Ander openbare ondernemings soos, onder andere, die
South African Forestry Company Ltd, Safcol, wat selfstandig kan bestaan,
behoort verkoop te word.

Dit is onaanvaarbaar dat die departement nou die belastingbetaler gebruik
om in te staan vir ’n funksie waarin hy faal, en dit is om die ekonomie
deur openbare ondernemings te probeer bestuur. Daarom sal die DA teen
hierdie begrotingspos stem. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans speech
follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Chairperson, the DA is glad that the budget of the
Department of Public Enterprises, in respect of transfers to public
enterprises, decreased from R2 billion last year to a mere R138 million
this year.

However, the DA is of the opinion that too much money is being transferred
to public enterprises. Many of the public enterprises such as SAA, Denel
and Eskom cannot get off the ground financially and, therefore, a saying
has developed referring to public enterprises as “bakhandstaan
ondernemings”, as they are dependent on the taxpayer for financial
survival.

One of the main reasons for this poor performance is, firstly, that the
Department of Public Enterprises is unable to monitor the performance of
public enterprises adequately. Secondly, this poor performance is also due
to the department’s failure to implement the state-owned management
function successfully. This places enormous pressure on the taxpayer.

The DA has been saying for a long time that certain public enterprises,
such as SAA, ought to be privatised in order to make them economically
independent. Minister Manuel, certain public enterprises such as Denel, who
is already bankrupt, ought to be liquidated. Other public enterprises such
as the South African Forestry Company Ltd, Safcol, that can exist
independently, ought to be sold.

It is unacceptable that the department now makes use of the taxpayer to
take responsibility for a function in which he has failed, namely trying to
manage the economy through public enterprises. Hence, the DA will not
support this Budget Vote. Thank you.]

Mr M A NHANHA: Hon Chairperson, I have decided to resign and go back to my
back bench because the Chief Whip of the Majority Party has shot down my
ambition of being the head of this party one day! [Laughter.] Besides, we
are headless chickens. So, in protest, I have returned to my seat.

Through state-owned enterprises, SOEs, the Department of Public Enterprises
is plagued by issues of mismanagement, negligence, corruption and
ignorance, to name only a few. The Minister is trying to smooth-talk issues
that are on the table when she should be taking the bull by the horns in
addressing these pressing issues that continue to threaten the survival of
our SOEs.

Our leaders, in essence, and unintentionally at times, advocate stealing
from the poor to give big packages to elite officials at the expense of
poor workers. This government shows it is soft on mismanagement and below-
par performance by giving elite officials big packages for not performing
or for leading SOEs to the brink of bankruptcy.

Every one of us should remember that the road to hell is paved with good
intentions. South Africans are sick and tired of excuses for why SOEs are
not performing and why money is just being thrown at them as though there
is plenty where it comes from. However, Cope will support this Vote. I
thank you. [Applause.]
Adv A D ALBERTS: Mr Chair, we would like to focus specifically on Eskom in
this regard.

Weens Eskom se gebrek aan beplanning; die verhoging wat toegestaan is
voordat die geïntegreerde energieplan gereed is; korrupsie en wanbestuur in
Eskom; en die verraad van Suid-Afrikaners se verwagtinge vir
energiesekuriteit, stem ons teen hierdie begrotingspos. Dankie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Owing to Eskom’s lack of planning; the increase that was approved before
the integrated energy plan was ready; corruption and mismanagement in
Eskom; and the betrayal of South Africans’ expectations for energy
security, we are voting against Budget Vote.]

Ms M P MENTOR: Hon Chairperson, the ANC supports the Budget Vote.
Yesterday, the figures for the GDP for the quarter were released for the
South African economy, and it stand at 4,6%. This surprised everybody. In
fact, the Minister of Finance had projected this to be 2,7%.

This success is because of state-owned enterprises as the backbone of the
economy. [Applause.] If they were not performing, we would not have
realised the 4,6% growth, which is actually one of the highest for the
quarter amongst the world’s economies. [Applause.]

A few days ago, the International Monetary Fund, IMF, commended the South
African government for having handled the world economic recession very
well and having led South Africans unscathed out of recession. The SOEs
were again central to that success - Eskom in particular. Transnet and SAA,
which are responsible for the energy that is so necessary for growth, as
well as transportation of people and goods, were at the centre of this
success that the IMF was praising South Africa and South Africans for.

These two indicators show that the Department of Public Enterprises and
South Africa, as well as SOEs themselves, are on track and are doing well.
I need to educate the opposition over and over again on three issues. You
are not throwing money into SOEs when you do equity injection. When you own
an asset, you have the responsibility and obligation to do equity
injections into your own assets. The SOEs are assets owned by the South
African public, and they are held in trust by the state. [Interjections.]
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 222: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Baloyi, M R; Bam-Mugwanya, V; Bhengu, N
   R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Borman, G M;
   Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C V; Buthelezi, M G; Carrim, Y I;
   Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F I; Coleman, E M;
   Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; De Lille, P; Diale, L N; Dlakude, D E; Dlamini,
   B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo, A; Doidge, G Q M; Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M
   C; Dudley, C; Dunjwa, M L; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M L; Frolick, C T;
   Fubbs, J L; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina, N;
   Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Gumede, D M; Gungubele, M; Gxowa,
   N B; Hajaig, F; Hogan, B A; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H; Joemat-
   Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kekana, C D; Kenye, T E; Khoarai, L P;
   Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G W;
   Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T; Lebenya-Ntanzi, S P;
   Lekgetho, G; Line, H; Lishivha, T E; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X;
   Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M C; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V;
   Magama, H T; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G
   L; Makhuba, H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P;
   Malgas, H H; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, J M; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C;
   Mandela, Z M D; Manganye, J; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B
   A D; Mashigo, R M; Mashishi, A C; Masilo, J M; Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D
   K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M
   M; Mavunda, D W; Maziya, A M; Mbalula, F A; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M
   S; Mentor, M P; Meshoe, K R J; Mfeketo, N C; Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N;
   Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A; Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A;
   Mohale, M C; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J
   C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S; Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M
   S; Mpontshane, A M; Mthethwa, E M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mushwana, F
   F; Muthambi, A F; Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T;
   Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V B; Nel, A C; Nelson, W J; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S;
   Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W;
   Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhanha, M A; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njikelana, S J;
   Njobe, M A A; Nkwinti, G E; Nonkonyana, M; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z;
   Ntshiqela, P; Ntuli, Z C; Nxesi, T W; Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M F;
   Nyekemba, E; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Pandor, G N M; Petersen-
   Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-Mosoane, M E; Mbhele, P;
   Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A; Rantsolase, M A;
   Saal, G; Scheemann, G D; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J; Sexwale, T M G;
   Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhida, N N; Sisulu, M V; Sithole, K P;
   Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Smith, V G; Snell, G T;
   Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Suka, L; Sulliman, E
   M; Sunduza, T B; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E; Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B;
   Tinto, B; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete,
   P; Tsotetsi, D R; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van
   Rooyen, D D; Van Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi,
   K M; Zulu, B Z.

   NOES - 58: Alberts, A D; Boinamo, G G; Bosman, L L; Coetzee, T W;
   Davidson, I O; De Freitas, M S F; Doman, W P; Du Toit, N D; Duncan, P C;
   Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Fritz, A T; George, D T; Groenewald, P J; James,
   W G; Kalyan, S V; Kloppers-Lourens, J C; Kohler-Barnard, D; Kopane, S P;
   Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lorimer, J R B; Lotriet, A; Louw, A; Lovemore, A T;
   Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Masango, S J; Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D;
   Michael, N W A; Mokgalapa, S; More, E; Morgan, G R; Motau, S C; Mubu, K
   S; Mulder, C P; Ollis, I M; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M W; Robinson, D; Ross,
   D; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Shinn, M R; Smiles, D C; Steyn, A; Steyn, A C;
   Swart, M; Swathe, M M; Trollip, R A P; Van Dalen, P; Van der Linde, J J;
   Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Waters, M; Wenger, M.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 11 - Public Service and Administration – put.
Declarations of vote:

Dr H C VAN SCHALKWYK: Chairperson, the Public Service Commission, a Chapter
10 institution, has always had its own budget. However, this year, without
any reason, its budget has been removed and it now falls directly under the
department, as if it were one of its own programmes. The DA believes that
this was a step in the wrong direction and that it could compromise the
independence of the Public Service Commission.

This proud institution has a record of executing its responsibilities
without fear or favour. This must be protected at all costs.

I must add that this morning, at a portfolio committee meeting, the
Minister gave the assurance that this was only an interim arrangement,
which will be revisited in the Medium-Term Budget in October.

At this stage, all I can say to the Minister is that seeing is believing.
Therefore, at this stage, the DA cannot support the Budget Vote. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mrs J C MOLOI-MOROPA:  Chairperson, in support of the Budget Vote, the ANC
will continue emphasising the significance of the Public Service
Commission’s existence as an important organ of oversight.
The Public Service Commission’s Vote allocation was not correct in the past
arrangement and is still not correct currently, so there is nothing new in
this arrangement. This provides us with a good opportunity to correctly
locate the Public Service Commission in a position that will assert its
independency completely.

The process has already been started and will be concluded quite soon. The
Minister, the presiding officers, and the committee, together with the
Public Service Commission itself, have started the process of allocating
this important organ to the correct structure. In the committee we have
continued to engage objectively, constructively and openly on these
matters.

Any other matter that comes before us will be confronted quite
constructively. We therefore don’t say that it was correct in the past or
that it is correct now, but we are actually saying that this has provided
an opportunity for us to deal with it correctly, and not for grandstanding
politically. I thank you. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 12 - Statistics South Africa – put and agreed to.

Vote No 13 – Arts and Culture – put.

Declarations of vote:
Dr A LOTRIET: Chairperson, although the DA supports the Arts and Culture
budget, it is important that notice is taken of the following matters.

The first issue concerns the situation of South African artists. It is a
major reason for concern that the transfers to the National Arts Council
have been reduced by R15 million in 2010-11. However, what makes it even
worse is the reason for the cut in the budget. This is because of the
council’s large accumulated surpluses, mainly due to unallocated grants
over a number of years. This is totally unacceptable.

A number of performing arts are literally on the verge of closing down.
Emergency steps have to be taken by the performers themselves to save their
arts. This is why the National Arts Council has not been able to allocate
the funds available for this purpose.

Secondly, the Investing in Culture programme is a reason for concern. This
programme has the aim of providing empowerment opportunities for unemployed
people. However, the reality is that the department is underspending on
this programme. Surely, this is not on the interest of the people who have
to benefit from this programme. Therefore, it should be a main priority
with proper utilisation of the allocated funds.

The priority should not be international trips on which there seems to be
overspending. It is clear that the department has a challenge in terms of
financial planning. In this regard, it has to be stated that although the
efforts in trying to root out corruption in the department are commendable,
the department will have to ensure that the financial challenges are
addressed and that the suspension of officials does not impact negatively
on service delivery.

The recent court ruling on language legislation that has to be complied
with within two years, does have specific implications for the department
and specifically also for the budget. Again, the language programme has the
smallest allocation, which is not sufficient. In the light of the language
ruling, provision will have to be made to cater for this process. This is
also a matter which will have to be taken into account by different
government departments in future, especially where there is direct service
delivery to people. [Applause.]

Muf T J TSHIVHASE: Mulangadzulo, ANC i khou tikedza hoyu mugaganyagwama nga
mbilu yayo yoṱhe. Musi ro thetshelesa vha ḽihoro ḽikangi vha tshi khou ḓi
ambela zwenezwo zwidayonyana zwavho zwi sa ri tshithu, ri tou zwi ḓivha
zwauri pfunzo yo rangaho phanḓa vhana vhashu vha fhano Afurika Tshipembe,
ndi ya uri hu vhe na mvelaphanḓa kha vhathu vhashu vha mahayani,
zwihulwanesa ro sedza vhushai havho na zwibveledzwa zwavho.

Vha ḽihoro ḽa DA vha khou sokou ḓi ambela ngeno vha tshi tou zwi ḓivha
zwavhuḓi zwauri zwithu zwoṱhe zwo vha zwi zwanḓani zwavho. Ndi lwa u tou
thoma vhutshiloni ha vharema vha tshi vhonala-vho vha tshi vho kona u
ḓiitela zwiṅwe zwithu. Hezwo zwithu zwi pfi mvelaphanḓa ngauri u rangani
zwo vha zwi siho. Ho vha hu tshi sedzwa vhone vhe vhoṱhe nahone vha tshi
tou nga ndi vhone vhathu vhe vhoṱhe.

ANC na riṋe vha Muhasho wa Vhutsila na Mvelele, ri ri kha i khidzhane i
tshi ya phanḓa. Mvelaphanḓa i khou ṱoḓea vhathuni vha hashu u itela uri vha
kone-vho u vha na zwine vha vhanḓa. Musi vhaendelamashango vha tshi ṱuwa,
vha ṱuwa vho kukuṱa zwithu zwoṱhe vha tshi tou ḓiphina. Zwi ḓi nga na henei
bola ine ya khou ḓa, vha ḓo vha vha tshi khou mvumvusiwa nga vhathu vha
hashu lwa u tou thoma, ngauri hezwo zwithu zwo vha zwi si ho. Zwino ri khou
pfa ri tshi ḓihudza vhukuma. ANC i khou tikedza hoyu mugaganyagwama nga
nungo dzayo dzoṱhe. [U vhanda zwanḓa.] (Translation of Tshivenda speech
follows.)

[Mrs T J TSHIVHASE: Mr Speaker, the ANC supports this Budget Vote
wholeheartedly. Listening to the opposition party speaking about their
useless bylaws, we know that the education that our children in South
Africa are receiving is meant for the development of our rural communities,
especially when we look at their poverty and their resources.

The DA is just talking knowing very well that everything was in their
hands. It is for the first time in the history of black people that they
are seen doing certain things by themselves. This is what is called
development because it wasn’t there before. The whole focus used to be on
them alone as if they were the only people.

The ANC and us, the Department of Arts and Culture, say let us keep doing
what we are doing. Development is needed in our communities to ensure that
they can also have something for themselves. When tourists leave, they
leave with many things and are happy. Even with the soccer tournament that
is to be hosted, they will be entertained by our people for the first time,
which has never happened before. We feel so proud now. The ANC fully
supports this Budget Vote. [Applause.]]
Vote agreed to.

Vote No 14 - Basic Education – put.

Declarations of vote:

Dr J C KLOPPERS-LOURENS: Chairperson, the DA does not support the Budget
Vote for the following reasons. Firstly, not enough emphasis has been
placed on learners with special educational needs or the in-service
training of and assistance to teachers to provide for mother tongue
education for learners from Grade R to 6.
Secondly, not enough emphasis has been placed on the provision of a library
and librarian for each school in our country. The amount required is R2,2
billion per year for a period of 10 years.

Thirdly, the DA is also concerned about the money that was allocated to the
department for workbooks for Grades R to 6 when the adjustment
appropriation was conducted in October 2009.

These books will no longer be published by publishing companies. The tender
was cancelled in December 2009. It was announced at the recent portfolio
committee meeting that these books are currently being developed by the
department. How will the approved sum of R254 million be spent? Will it be
more of a cost-saving exercise? Will it be done according to regional
specifications? Will there be a surplus? We need answers.
Fourthly, money spent on teachers’ salaries is wasted when those teachers
do not attend schools due to union activities without the department taking
action.

Finally, given the dismal state of education in our country, it is certain
that there is not enough money in this budget for basic education; more
money is required to meet the many neglected needs.
The DA provided for these needs in its alternative budget by adding an
additional R1,4 billion to the amount appropriated. It is possible to put
more money in education. If government’s overall spending programme was
more efficient ... [Time expired.]

Ms F I CHOHAN: Chairperson, I assume that when we speak in this House, in
particular, that everyone here is motivated by the desire to realise a
successful and equitable education system. The portfolio committee is
currently engaged in public hearings. And Chairperson, we have engaged
South Africans from all walks of life, be it teachers, principals, experts
or ordinary parents and learners.

Two things have become quite clear in our engagements. Firstly, everybody
acknowledges that transformation of the education system is a process and
not an event.

Secondly, teachers are central to the success of the education system. The
clarion call to us as public representatives is to do everything we can to
support these professionals when they go about their normal duties and
their noble task. They are teachers but they are also social workers,
psychologists and caregivers. The burden on teachers is incredible.

Therefore, as we are in this House, to sit here and say that we will vote
against this budget, is really a disgrace. And I hope that the DA will not
be going out to our schools and lying to our teachers that they support
them because the truth of the matter is that they are voting against this
budget.

The DA is saying government must not spend R80 million on new equipment and
workshops for our technical schools to help teachers to teach the subjects
that they offer. We must not spend R750 million on workbooks for the
poorest of our schools. There is no person with integrity that cannot
support this Budget Vote, and we do! Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I now call for the vote. Those in
favour say “Aye”.

HON MEMBERS: Aye!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Are there any objections? No
objections; therefore the Vote is agreed to. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I did not hear the Noes.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, we said it very loudly; very loudly indeed. I
now have to be little bit concerned about your hearing, sir. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Are you raising an objection?
Mr M J ELLIS:  Mr Chairman, I want to do far more than that once you put it
to the vote because certainly what the hon Chohan has said cannot go
unquestioned. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I did not understand you. Should I
put the question now?

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, we would be remarkably glad and obliged to you,
sir, if you would put the question now.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Ok, thank you very much. It is very
clear now. Those in favour will say “Aye”.

HON MEMBERS: Aye!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I think the Ayes have it.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, before you don’t hear me, sir, I want to say
very loudly indeed, the DA calls for a division.
Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 219: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Baloyi, M R; Bam-Mugwanya, V; Bhengu, N
   R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Borman, G M;
   Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C V; Buthelezi, M G; Carrim, Y I;
   Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F I; Coleman, E M;
   Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; De Lille, P; Diale, L N; Dikgacwi, M M; Dlakude
   , D E; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo, A; Doidge, G Q M;
   Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Dudley, C; Dunjwa, M L; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M
   L; Frolick, C T; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina,
   N; Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Gumede, D M; Gungubele, M;
   Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hogan, B A; Hoosen, M H; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L;
   Jeffery, J H; Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kekana, C D; Kenye, T
   E; Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M;
   Koornhof, G W; Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T; Lebenya-
   Ntanzi, S P; Lekgetho, G; Line, H; Lishivha, T E; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J;
   Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M C; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V;
   Magagula, V V; Magama, H T; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G;
   Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makhuba, H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele,
   Z S; Makwetla, S P; Malgas, H H; Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, J M; Manamela,
   K B; Manana, M C; Manganye, J; Manuel , T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N;
   Martins, B A D; Mashigo, R M; Mashishi, A C; Masilo, J M; Masutha, T M;
   Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matshoba, J M;
   Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Maziya, A M; Mbalula, F A; Mc Gluwa, J J;
   Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Meshoe, K R J; Mfeketo, N C;
   Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A;
   Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A; Mohale, M C; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A;
   Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S;
   Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M S; Mpontshane, A M; Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E
   M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F; Nchabeleng, M
   E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V B; Nel, A C;
   Nelson, W J; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo,
   E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhlengethwa, D G;
   Njobe, M A A; Nkwinti, G E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntshiqela, P;
   Ntuli, Z C; Nxesi, T W; Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M F; Nyekemba, E;
   Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Pandor, G N M; Petersen-Maduna, P;
   Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-Mosoane, M E; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G
   S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A; Rantsolase, M A; Saal, G; Scheemann, G
   D; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J; Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhida, N
   N; Sisulu, M V; Sithole, K P; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J;
   Smith, V G; Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J
   E; Sotyu, M M; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T B; Surty, M E;
   Thabethe, E; Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G
   K; Tsenoli, S L; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi,
   I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Rooyen, D D; Van Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L
   E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 56: Alberts, A D; Boinamo, G G; Bosman, L L; Coetzee, T W;
   Davidson, I O; De Freitas, M S F; Doman, W P; Du Toit, N D; Duncan, P C;
   Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; George, D T; Groenewald, P J; James, W G;
   Kalyan, S V; Kloppers-Lourens, J C; Kohler-Barnard, D; Kopane, S P;
   Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lorimer, J R B; Lotriet, A; Louw, A; Lovemore, A T;
   Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Masango, S J; Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D;
   Michael, N W A; Mokgalapa, S; More, E; Motau, S C; Mubu, K S; Mulder, C
   P; Ollis, I M; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M W; Robinson, D; Ross, D; Schmidt,
   H C; Selfe, J; Shinn, M R; Smiles, D C; Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Swart, M;
   Swathe, M M; Trollip, R A P; Van Dalen, P; Van der Linde, J J; Van der
   Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Waters, M; Wenger, M.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 15 – Health – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr M WATERS: Chairperson, the DA has stated on previous occasions that we
would give the Minister all our support in turning the Department of Health
around. While the Minister has been making the right noises, it has failed
to translate into any action.
As things are standing now, we fear they are getting worse. The nine
provincial departments have overspent by an astonishing R12 billion this
year, which is up from the past financial year. This is due to the chronic
underfunding by the national government as well as a gross underestimation
of actual health costs.

Another direct consequence of failed ANC policy is that of human resources.
In 1994 and 1995 the ANC closed down many nursing colleges and thus reduced
the number of nurses we were producing. It also continued to refuse the
private sector permission to train doctors. The consequence of that is that
we currently have a shortfall of 40 000 nurses and 12 500 doctors in the
public sector. The department still has no comprehensive human resources
plan.

Coupled with the chronic lack of staff and the ever-increasing burden of
disease, health standards are declining in our public hospitals and nothing
brings this home more than the deaths of newborn babies that have shocked
the country. How can 180 babies die in one hospital in five months without
the alarm bells ringing?

The fact that it took 180 babies to die before an investigation was
initiated shows how cheap life has become under the ANC government. We are
only one of 12 countries in the world where the child mortality rate is
actually increasing.

If we had had the Office of Standards Compliance fully operational as is
stipulated in the National Health Act of 2003, which is seven years old
now, many of those many deaths would have been averted. Under the current
circumstances the DA cannot possibly support the Health Budget Vote. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P B MNGUNI: Thanks, Deputy Speaker, concerns have been raised with
regard to the readiness of the country’s health sector to meet the
challenges arising from the coming Soccer World Cup. A surgeon at Groote
Schuur Hospital in Cape Town recently made a comment on the fact that the
hospital was not ready. He said that they were not able to treat all the
patients over a weekend in the current situation. This is without the
influx of spectators expected for the World Cup.

Currently, Groote Schuur Hospital has a shortage of surgeons and its
resuscitation area is unable to cope with the current demand. Many may
argue that this was just an isolated case, but Groote Schuur Hospital is
one of the leading hospitals in the Western Cape and in South Africa. One
can be assured that it would not be an isolated case.

According to reports, a National Health Insurance system in South Africa
would cost something in the area of R200 billion annually. That would
roughly be equal to building a new stadium every week for 52 weeks a year
forever. As much as national health insurance is a noble idea, its
implementation is where the problem lies.

To give this kind of responsibility to a department that overspent its
budget by R12 billion at a provincial level is irresponsible or risky.
However, the manner in which the Minister is going about addressing the
health concerns of the nation deserves support. Cope supports the Vote. I
thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, the words of this doctor tell it like it is:

   Instead of the hopeful anticipation usually associated with the
   announcement of the annual Budget Speech, it is now met with anger. If so
   much money has been allocated to HIV, why do our pharmacies constantly
   run out of lifesaving ARVs? Why are HIV babies going hungry because there
   is no baby formula in the clinics?

  I would like the powers that be to justify why my hypertensive-diabetic
  patients have to go for months without HCTZ and aspirin. How can I be
  expected to offer emergency procedures like caesarean sections when the
  autoclave machine hasn’t worked for months?

  Of course these are just isolated incidents, but these and many more
  horror stories are becoming the norm in hospitals around the country.

  The system is neither friendly to the people it is meant to serve nor to
  the health care workers operating it. It serves the larger part of the
  population, but is allocated a chunk of the budget that is inadequate for
  what it is attempting to achieve. The feeling amongst most healthcare
  workers is that we are being expected to perform miracles on scraps. We
  have a mammoth task to fight HIV and TB; as if that isn’t enough we have
  the growing battle of social issues like poverty, unemployment and
  alcohol abuse, which all come with their own complications.

  The ever-growing queues in our clinics and hospitals are a testament of
  how much sickness and disease are in our communities. Most doctors in the
  state sector do not mind the increased workload and have come to accept
  it as a normal part of their job. What they do mind is being expected to
  do the job under the most difficult conditions without being given proper
  tools.

  The Department of Health dragged the wage negotiations on for months but
  failed to tackle core issues. They still cannot justify the lack in
  supply of standard equipment like latex gloves and syringes.

In view of these considerable concerns including the shocking mortality
rate of women and children, especially babies, and government’s continued
commitment to aborting babies indiscriminately, the ACDP will not support
this Budget Vote. I thank you.

Mr E M SULLIMAN: Deputy Speaker, the hon member of Cope mentioned the World
Cup and I would like to use this opportunity to indicate that we, as South
Africans, are very excited and, without a doubt, we are looking forward to
it. The ANC wishes Bafana Bafana the very best and assure them of our
support as they make us all proud of being South Africans.

Since we had the ability to organise and manage a successful World Cup, it
will not be impossible for us to reverse the decades of oppression. The
approach we are adopting now of establishing key deliverables in the
Department of Health, would make it easier for us to monitor progress.

The Department of Health’s 10-point plan includes, among other things,
providing strategic leadership and the creation of a social compact for
health outcomes; implementation of a National Health Insurance plan;
improving quality of health services; human resources management;
revitalisation of physical infrastructure and improving management;
accelerated implementation of the HIV/Aids plan; and reduction of mortality
due to co-infection.
South Africa enjoys a much bigger Health budget than most developing
countries, but we are faced with an increasing burden of diseases. That is
a fact - and HIV/Aids is our greater challenge.

The majority of our people are still living in poverty. The policy on HIV
treatment has been revised. They now provide ARV treatment to people with a
CD4 count of less than 350, whereas previously it had to be less than 200.

For increased access to health care, a bold approach is needed. We need a
more holistic approach, hence the need for National Health Insurance. The
status quo cannot remain where 86% of our people do not have the privilege
of medical aid. The ANC supports this Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 217: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Baloyi, M R; Bam-Mugwanya, V; Bapela, K
   O; Bhengu , N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-Zulu, H I; Booi, M S;
   Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C V; Buthelezi, M G;
   Carrim, Y I; Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F I;
   Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; De Lille, P; Diale, L N; Dikgacwi,
   M M; Dlakude , D E; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo, A; Doidge, G
   Q M; Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Dunjwa, M L; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M L;
   Frolick, C T; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina, N;
   Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Greyling, L W; Gumede, D M; Gxowa,
   N B; Hajaig, F; Hogan, B A; Hoosen, M H; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery,
   J H; Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kekana, C D; Kenye, T E;
   Khoarai, L P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Koornhof, G W;
   Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T; Lebenya-Ntanzi, S P;
   Lekgetho, G; Line, H; Lishivha, T E; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X;
   Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M C; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V;
   Magama, H T; Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G
   L; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P; Malgas, H H;
   Maluleka, H P; Maluleke, J M; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C; Mandela, Z M D;
   Manganye, J; Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashigo, R
   M; Mashishi, A C; Masilo, J M; Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H;
   Mathebe, P M; Mathibela, N F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W;
   Maziya, A M; Mbalula, F A; Mc Gluwa, J J; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S;
   Mentor, M P; Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M;
   Mlangeni, A; Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A; Mohale, M C; Mokoena, A D;
   Molebatsi, M A; Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L
   N; Motimele, M S; Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M S; Mpontshane, A M;
   Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mushwana, F F;
   Muthambi, A F; Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele,
   J S; Ndlovu, V B; Nel, A C; Nelson, W J; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S;
   Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T; Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W;
   Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhanha, M A; Nhlengethwa, D G; Njobe, M A A;
   Nkwinti, G E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntuli, Z C; Nyalungu, R E;
   Nyanda, M F; Nyekemba, E; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C; Pandor, G N M;
   Petersen-Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-Mosoane, M E;
   Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A; Rantsolase, M A;
   Saal, G; Scheemann, G D; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J; Sexwale, T M G;
   Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhida, N N; Sisulu, M V; Sithole, K P;
   Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Smith, V G; Snell, G T;
   Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M M; Suka, L;
   Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T B; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E; Thobejane, S G;
   Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S L; Tshivhase, T
   J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi, I; Van der
   Merwe, S C; Van Rooyen, D D; Van Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L E;
   Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 59: Alberts, A D; Boinamo, G G; Bosman, L L; Coetzee, T W;
   Davidson, I O; De Freitas, M S F; Du Toit, N D; Dudley, C; Duncan, P C;
   Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B; Fritz, A T; George, D T; Groenewald, P J; James,
   W G; Kalyan, S V; Kloppers-Lourens, J C; Kohler-Barnard, D; Kopane, S P;
   Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lorimer, J R B; Lotriet, A; Louw, A; Lovemore, A T;
   Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Masango, S J; Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D;
   Meshoe, K R J; Michael, N W A; Mokgalapa, S; More, E; Morgan, G R; Motau,
   S C; Mubu, K S; Mulder, C P; Ollis, I M; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M W;
   Robinson, D; Ross, D; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Shinn, M R; Smiles, D C;
   Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swathe, M M; Trollip, R A P; Van Dalen,
   P; Van der Linde, J J; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C;
   Waters, M; Wenger, M.

Vote accordingly agreed to.
Vote No 16 – Higher Education and Training – put.

Declarations of vote:

Dr W G JAMES: Deputy Speaker, the purpose of Budget Vote 16 is to support
much-needed industrial skilling to grow the further education and training
college sector and to increase both access to and quality of education at
our 23 universities and 53 FET colleges.

The Sector Education and Training Authorities, Setas, are not financing or
assembling programmes of skill acquisition and training on scale. Many are
glaringly dysfunctional, and have been so for a very long time. The problem
with the Setas is that they are not spending their money effectively. The
FET sector colleges must grow their enrolment from a current 125 000 to one
million students by 2016 to reach their potential.

The funding for growth on scale is simply not there. We have no
difficulties at all with the funding going to universities.

It is for these reasons that the DA opposes the Budget Vote. It is an
exercise in business as usual. We need real change and not fictional, paper
transformation. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M L FRANSMAN: Deputy Speaker, the ANC supports the Vote on Higher
Education and Training. In fact, we support it because between the
Departments of Higher Education and Training and Basic Education, this
government, led by our President, is in fact putting at least 20% to 23% of
the national fiscus into education.

We all know that more money can be given in terms of universities and
colleges, etc, but the reality is that with the money that’s there now,
there is a balance between that and support for the Seta interventions.
And we know there were problems with at least five of the Setas.

Therefore, as a committee, we indicated that that needs to be strengthened.
[Interjections.] The Minister and the department are busy with that. We are
also, for example, supporting the intervention in expansion, both on
infrastructure development and also on the quality of interventions in the
FET training environment.

Therefore, as the ANC, both in the committee and in the House here, we
support it.

It is, in fact, a disgrace for the DA not to support investment in
education in this particular case. Thank you. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:
   AYES - 216: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Alberts, A D; Baloyi, M R; Bam-
   Mugwanya, V; Bapela, K O; Bhengu, N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-
   Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C
   V; Buthelezi, M G; Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F
   I; Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; De Lille, P; Diale, L N;
   Dlakude , D E; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo, A; Doidge, G Q M;
   Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Dudley, C; Dunjwa, M L; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M
   L; Frolick, C T; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina,
   N; Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Groenewald, P J; Gumede, D M;
   Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hogan, B A; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H;
   Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kekana, C D; Kenye, T E; Khoarai, L
   P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G
   W; Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Line, H;
   Lishivha, T E; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M
   C; MacKenzie, G D; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V; Magama, H T;
   Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makhuba,
   H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P; Malgas, H H;
   Maluleka, H P; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C; Mandela, Z M D; Manganye, J;
   Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashigo, R M; Mashishi,
   A C; Masilo, J M; Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P
   M; Mathibela, N F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Maziya, A M;
   McGluwa, J J; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Meshoe, K R J;
   Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A;
   Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A; Mohale, M C; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A;
   Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S;
   Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M S; Mpontshane, A M; Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E
   M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mulder, C P; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F;
   Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V
   B; Nelson, W J; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T;
   Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhlengethwa,
   D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkwinti, G E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntuli, Z C;
   Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M F; Nyekemba, E; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C;
   Pandor, G N M; Petersen-Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-
   Mosoane, M E; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A;
   Rantsolase, M A; Saal, G; Scheemann, G D; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J;
   Sexwale, T M G; Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhida, N N; Sisulu, M V;
   Sithole, K P; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Smith, V G;
   Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
   M; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T B; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E;
   Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S
   L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi,
   I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Rooyen, D D; Van Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L
   E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 53: Boinamo, G G; Bosman, L L; Coetzee, T W; Davidson, I O; De
   Freitas, M S F; Du Toit, N D; Duncan, P C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B;
   Fritz, A T; George, D T; James, W G; Kalyan, S V; Kloppers-Lourens, J C;
   Kohler-Barnard, D; Kopane, S P; Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lorimer, J R B;
   Lotriet, A; Louw, A; Lovemore, A T; Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Masango,
   S J; Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D; Michael, N W A; Mokgalapa, S; More, E;
   Morgan, G R; Motau, S C; Mubu, K S; Ollis, I M; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M
   W; Robinson, D; Ross, D; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Shinn, M R; Smiles, D C;
   Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swathe, M M; Van Dalen, P; Van der Linde,
   J J; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Waters, M;
   Wenger, M.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 17 – Labour - put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr A LOUW: Deputy Speaker, the DA will not support the Budget Vote for
Labour this year because the director-general, Mr Jimmy Manyi, artificially
created future expenditure to justify an additional R1 billion to the
budget. The shortage of labour inspectors in all provinces is not
adequately addressed in this budget. Currently, the inspectors are not
adequately resourced to enable them to do their work.

The Compensation Fund does not deliver on its mandate of compensating
injured workers. Instead, it admitted recently before the Standing
Committee on Public Accounts, Scopa, that the Fund has been defrauded to
the amount of R24,6 million in false claims.

A contract agreement between Siemens and the Department of Labour for the
amount of R1,7 billion resulted in fruitless and wasteful expenditure.

The Portfolio Committee on Labour did an oversight visit in provinces last
week, and we have seen that the poor do not benefit from the services in
labour centres, especially with the Compensation and Unemployment Insurance
Fund. Thank you.

Mr P D MBHELE: Madam Deputy Speaker, Cope is encouraged by some of the
developments, but is concerned that government has not been able to
stimulate the economy sufficiently to create better labour market
conditions. Government knows the significance of job creation, but seems
not to have the answers. Meanwhile, the unemployed are languishing in
casual jobs or in a total state of despair.

This government has made extravagant promises, but its delivery on those
has been minuscule. The suffering of the people must be brought to an end
through an effective stimulation of the labour market.

The Department of Labour has admitted before Scopa that the Compensation
Fund has been defrauded to the tune of R24,6 million in false claims. Much
more remains unaccounted for in this financial year’s statements.
[Interjections.] Nevertheless, amidst this howling and hackling, Cope will
support this Vote.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Deputy Speaker, the Department of Labour is facing the
following challenges. The inspectorate has to be monitored properly;
supervision has to be done in order to make sure that inspectors go
everywhere where they need to go; and there should be communication between
the employer and the employee on outstanding issues, especially where there
are cases that are postponed by the employer at the expense of the
employees.

There are good people in the department, but there are also those who do
not care about their work. It is unacceptable that a person can return to
the offices of the department more than three times, especially for CCMA
cases, without getting proper results.

The service delivery of this department should be more orderly, and let’s
eliminate those people who are not suitable to do the job. Let’s fire them.
I am specifically referring to the UIF section where people are doing what
they like. Those who are not prepared to work within this department should
be replaced by people who care for other people, especially the unemployed.
[Interjections.]

Ngeke ningizwe phela uma nibanga umsindo. [You won’t hear me if you
continue making a noise.]

Accountability, responsibility and enforcement of employees to account for
every department and section that they lead should be key factors. Thank
you.

Adv A D ALBERTS: Weens die volgende kwessies, die strukturele diskriminasie
teen blankes en informele diskriminasie teen bruinmense en Indiërs by wyse
van regstellende aksie, asook die diskriminerende oriëntasie van die
departement se direkteur-generaal, mnr Jimmy Manyi, teenoor blankes en
minderhede, en sy weiering om afstand te doen van sy posisie by die Black
Management Forum waardeur hy die lede van dié organisasie kan bevoordeel,
vra ons dat mnr Manyi vervang word as direkteur-generaal en stem ons teen
die begrotingpos. Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Adv A D ALBERTS: As a  result  of  the  following  issues,  the  structural
discrimination against whites and informal discrimination  against  coloured
and  Indian  people  by  means  of  affirmative  action,  as  well  as   the
discriminative orientation of the director-general  of  the  department,  Mr
Jimmy Manyi, against whites and minorities and his  refusal  to  vacate  his
position at the Black Management Forum through  which  he  can  benefit  the
members of that organisation, we  request  that  Mr  Manyi  be  replaced  as
director-general and we do not support the Budget Vote. Thank you.]

Mrs L E YENGENI: Deputy Speaker, The Portfolio Committee on Labour is aware
of all the challenges that the Department of Labour is facing. We are in
the process of addressing those problems. This includes the members who
stood up and did not want to support the budget. They are fully aware of
all these problems, and the department has agreed that it is in the process
of addressing most of them.

In its manifesto, the ANC promises all the citizens of our country - in
particular workers - that it will deal with the problems of labour broking
and prohibition of abusive practices. That was not an empty promise.
[Interjections.] This budget is going to fulfil those promises. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs T M JOEMAT-PETTERSSON: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a point of order: I
would just like the hon member to explain who the “bruinmense” [brown
people] are.

I believe that it’s extremely racist and that it should be withdrawn.
[Interjections.] It was the hon member Alberts from the FF Plus. Thank you.

Adv A D ALBERTS: Minister, daar is mense in Suid-Afrika wat hulself so
noem, en ek aanvaar dit ook so. Ek ken persoonlik sulke mense.

Party mense noem hulself “kleurlinge” en dan is daar mense wat hulself Suid-
Afrikaners noem. Maar daar is al hierdie tipes in Suid-Afrika, en ek weet
dat daar teen daardie spesifieke groep mense ook gediskrimineer word.

As u ’n beter benaming het, dan sal ek dit gebruik. Ek wil nie minagting
teenoor u of enige mense in die Parlement of in Suid-Afrika toon nie. As u
enige beter benamings het om ’n groep mense te omskryf, sal ek dit
waardeer. Baie dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Adv A D ALBERTS: Minister, there are people in South Africa who call
themselves this and therefore I accept that this is how it is. I personally
know such people.

Some people call themselves “coloured” and then there are people who call
themselves South Africans. But there are all these people of this
description in South Africa and I am aware that this specific group of
people are also discriminated against.
If you have a more suitable term, then I will use that. I do not want to
disrespect you or any person in Parliament or in South Africa. If you have
a more suitable term to describe a group of people, I would appreciate it.
Thank you.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I am not going to allow a dialogue here. I’m sure
that there can be an explanation later.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote 18 – Social Development – put.

Declaration of vote:

Mrs Y R BOTHA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC supports Vote 18. The budget
of R95,9 billion aims to protect the vulnerable by creating an enabling
environment for the provision of services that are comprehensive,
integrated and sustainable. The bulk of this budget goes to Programme 2,
which deals with social security. Social security remains a crucial tool in
terms of impacting positively on the lives of families living below the
poverty line.

The extension of the child support grant to children up to the age of 18
years remains one of the greatest milestones of this department and
government. The continued improvement of the service will clearly enhance
its efficiency in reaching out to those who need it most.

Social development is key to the development of social cohesion in our
communities. It does this by developing policies that impact on social
crimes and therefore protects the rights of victims that are affected by
these crimes, as well as to prevent these crimes.

Gender-based violence and substance abuse are still too prevalent in our
communities. The cohesion of families needs to be attended to so that we
can see an improvement in the stability of community life. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 19 - Sport and Recreation – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr T D  LEE:  Adjunkspeaker,  in  die  jaar  wat  Suid-Afrika  die  grootste
sportskouspel ter  wêreld  aanbied,  is  dit  baie  teleurstellend  dat  die
Departement van Sport  en  Rekreasie  ’n  gekwalifiseerde  verslag  van  die
Ouditeur-generaal kry.

Dit het gebeur omdat daar mense aangestel is wat nie die mas kon  opkom  nie
en nou moet ons die wrange vrugte pluk. Die slagoffers in die proses is  die
jeug wie se  talent  verlore  gaan.  (Translation  of  Afrikaans  paragraphs
follows.)

[Mr T D LEE: Deputy Speaker, it is very  disappointing  that,  in  the  year
that South Africa hosts the biggest sporting spectacle  in  the  world,  the
Department of Sport and Recreation received  a  qualified  report  from  the
Auditor-General.

It happened because the people who were appointed were not up  to  the  task
and now we have to bear the brunt. The  victims  in  this  process  are  the
youth whose talents are being lost.]

Then there is Boxing SA, which has been a disaster since its inception  some
years ago. It again  received  a  qualified  Auditor-General’s  report  this
year.

In 2007 the Minister called them, and I quote, “a nuisance”  and  last  year
the Minister labelled them the Achilles heel of our work. But Boxing  SA  is
still a bottomless pit into which state resources  are  poured  without  any
meaningful returns.

It is for this and many other reasons that the DA has introduced  a  Private
Members’ Bill to disestablish Boxing SA. South Africa is a nation of  sports
lovers. As citizens, we all deserve more from our sporting  institutions.  I
hope that the department  takes  these  criticisms  to  heart  and  has  the
courage and political will to make the necessary policy changes.

The DA will not support this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]
Mr G P D MACKENZIE: Madam Deputy Speaker, with the minimal resources
allocated to this budget, we cannot reach our goals and objectives of
social cohesion, transformation, nation-building and creating a healthy and
winning nation.

The three goals of the department, namely mass participation, sports
development and high performance also cannot be effectively achieved with
the reduced budget.

School sports has been downgraded as a priority, as the budget has been
slashed from R35 million to R22 million. Sixty-six of our sports
federations received a total of R27,62 million, yet Lovelife received
R28,693 million. Clearly, our priorities are not correct.

As a committee, we agree that school sport, rural sport and development
were the key areas of focus, but this budget does not reflect this
position. Transformation has been pushed into the background.

We need to create opportunities for the disadvantaged throughout our
country. Cope will shortly be forwarding a far-reaching proposal to help
address these critical issues. We believe that this proposal will go some
way in tackling these vexing issues. We wish the department well and every
success in trying to reach the set priority areas.

Cope will not support this Budget Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, I want to use this opportunity to wish
our national team, Bafana Bafana, all the courage and confidence. They will
need it to hold their own against Mexico, which is currently placed 17th in
the Fifa world rankings. The sterling performance and entertaining football
they played against Bulgaria should inspire them to cause a major upset in
their first game.

The ACDP supports the Bafana Bafana coach, Carlos Alberto Parreira, and the
entire team, and also this Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC supports Vote 19 – Sport and
Recreation. The social cohesion the nation is building through sports this
year is at its highest peak, and it would never change again as from this
year.

The issue of the Auditor-General’s qualification on Sport and Recreation is
not a qualification. I want to tell the DA that those were matters of
emphasis, which, if the department did not adhere to it or deal with
certain things, would have resulted in a qualification. It was not a
qualification. I think hon Lee will learn a bit more when we are at the
portfolio committee level.

On the issue of loveLife, loveLife is an international agreement. The R28
million that is given to Sport and Recreation is an international
agreement. National Treasury sends that money to Sport and Recreation,
which in turn takes the money and gives it to loveLife.

But central to that is the fact that issues of HIV and Aids, through the
awareness of sport, are more easily recognised, and they could be easily
profiled when they are situated within Sport and Recreation. Therefore, it
is correct that that programme of loveLife should be with Sport and
Recreation to assist our children to be conscious of HIV and Aids and all
other challenges that face them.

The issue of less money for sports at schools is not correct. The baseline
for Sport and Recreation in 2009 and 2010 was R22 million. After the
adjustment, it went up to R35 million. So it is not correct to say to this
House that the money has been reduced when the baseline for 2010-11 is R23
million.

An adjustment will therefore come and then it is going to be moving it up.
Therefore, the ANC confidently supports this Budget Vote unequivocally. It
is correct for all of us to support this Budget Vote. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 216: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Alberts, A D; Baloyi, M R; Bam-
   Mugwanya, V; Bapela, K O; Bhengu, N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-
   Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C
   V; Buthelezi, M G; Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F
   I; Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; De Lille, P; Diale, L N;
   Dlakude , D E; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo, A; Doidge, G Q M;
   Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Dudley, C; Dunjwa, M L; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M
   L; Frolick, C T; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina,
   N; Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Groenewald, P J; Gumede, D M;
   Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hogan, B A; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H;
   Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kekana, C D; Kenye, T E; Khoarai, L
   P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G
   W; Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Line, H;
   Lishivha, T E; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M
   C; MacKenzie, G D; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V; Magama, H T;
   Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makhuba,
   H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P; Malgas, H H;
   Maluleka, H P; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C; Mandela, Z M D; Manganye, J;
   Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashigo, R M; Mashishi,
   A C; Masilo, J M; Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P
   M; Mathibela, N F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Maziya, A M;
   McGluwa, J J; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Meshoe, K R J;
   Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A;
   Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A; Mohale, M C; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A;
   Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S;
   Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M S; Mpontshane, A M; Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E
   M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mulder, C P; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F;
   Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V
   B; Nelson, W J; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T;
   Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhlengethwa,
   D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkwinti, G E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntuli, Z C;
   Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M F; Nyekemba, E; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C;
   Pandor, G N M; Petersen-Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-
   Mosoane, M E; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A;
   Rantsolase, M A; Saal, G; Scheemann, G D; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J;
   Sexwale, T M G; Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhida, N N; Sisulu, M V;
   Sithole, K P; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Smith, V G;
   Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
   M; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T B; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E;
   Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S
   L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi,
   I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Rooyen, D D; Van Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L
   E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 53: Boinamo, G G; Bosman, L L; Coetzee, T W; Davidson, I O; De
   Freitas, M S F; Du Toit, N D; Duncan, P C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B;
   Fritz, A T; George, D T; James, W G; Kalyan, S V; Kloppers-Lourens, J C;
   Kohler-Barnard, D; Kopane, S P; Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lorimer, J R B;
   Lotriet, A; Louw, A; Lovemore, A T; Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Masango,
   S J; Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D; Michael, N W A; Mokgalapa, S; More, E;
   Morgan, G R; Motau, S C; Mubu, K S; Ollis, I M; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M
   W; Robinson, D; Ross, D; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Shinn, M R; Smiles, D C;
   Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swathe, M M; Van Dalen, P; Van der Linde,
   J J; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Waters, M;
   Wenger, M.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, we know that members may not leave the House
until the results have been declared!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Madam Deputy Speaker, on a
point of order: Just for the record, we have now completed voting, but in
the Budget Vote, both the DA and Cope expressed their support. It’s in
Hansard. So, some forces changed their minds from then till now. Thank you.

Vote No 20 - Correctional Services – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr J SELFE: Deputy Speaker, we would like to welcome the newly-appointed
National Commissioner for Correctional Services. We hope that his
appointment and that of the new Chief Financial Officer will improve the
situation in the department.

We say this because all is not well in the department. The department has
had six successive qualified audits, and the national commissioner is the
third incumbent in this post in the last two years. As a result of that
there has been a massive leadership vacuum.

Partly because of this, this budget is not aligned with the aims and
objectives of the White Paper on Corrections, five years after that White
Paper’s adoption by the ANC government.

The department is plagued by instances of corruption that lead to prisoners
escaping, as recently occurred in Durban Westville, and to the unhealthy
influence of prison gangs.

Every oversight visit to prisons we undertake exposes managers who cannot
manage, staff vacancies that are not filled, maintenance work that is
incomplete, expensive security equipment that is not working and inmates
who are not productive.

Five years ago government promised eight new prisons. Only one has been
built in Kimberly, but it was delivered 18 months late and commissioned
without telephones or IT equipment. The construction of the other prisons
awaits the advice of transactional advisers, at the same time serious
overcrowding is a feature of two-thirds of the prisons in South African

Under these circumstances, we cannot support the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Mr V G SMITH: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC supports the Budget Vote. I
think that the hon Selfe and others should support the budget, because
unless you support the budget and make an undertaking to monitor and
oversee on a greater basis, we cannot do the things that you are talking
about, Mr Selfe.

Those things are only achievable - and we agree with you that there have
been shortcomings - if we all support the budget. They are only achievable
if you and I and everybody else, in supporting the budget, monitor what is
being spent through the budget.

The Minister and everybody else agree with us that there are shortcomings.
What we need is for this whole House to support the budget and for the
whole House to be there to assist in this difficult task. We support the
Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote 21-Defence and Military Veterans - put

Declarations of Vote:

Mr D J MAYNIER: Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Defence and Military
Veterans, Lindiwe Sisulu, took command of the defence department a year
ago. Since then the Minister has notched up some significant achievements,
not least the deployment of the Defence Force to safeguard the landward and
maritime borders of our country.

However, these achievements have been overshadowed by the secretisation, or
perhaps more correctly, the resecretisation of virtually all matters
relating to the Defence Force. This has had the effect of building up
suspicion, breaking down trust and effectively insulating the Defence Force
from any proper scrutiny and oversight by Parliament. The fact is that the
Minister is fast turning the Defence Force into a state within a state.

I am sure that most hon members are familiar with Senator Owen Horwood, the
less than hon Minister of Finance during the information scandal, who
signed payment cheques without looking at them or checking on the purpose
of the expenditure.

The fact is that if this Parliament supports the defence budget, then
Parliament is in danger of doing a collective Owen Horwood: effectively
signing a cheque for R30,7 billion, made out to the defence department
without really knowing on what or to what effect the money is being spent.

This we will not and cannot do. The DA will therefore not support the
Defence and Military Veterans budget for the 2010-11 financial year. I
thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member, did you forget to add “hon” to Lindiwe
Sisulu or was it deliberate?

Mr D J MAYNIER: Deputy Speaker, I addressed the hon Lindiwe Sisulu as “the
Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, Lindiwe Sisulu”.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not hear it like that and therefore I asked. You
said, “Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, Lindiwe Sisulu”.
[Interjections.]Are you all responding on his behalf?

Mr V B NDLOVU: Deputy Speaker, a challenge facing this department is the
involvement of young people in service training. It is important that
provinces and all the different stakeholders should be involved in
recruiting young people to ensure that these people are attending the
service training.

The IFP supports this action because we believe that it will not be used
politically for the propaganda machinery, especially for people who are
known to you.

Co-operation and working together with labour unions is of paramount
importance and if they are recognised, they should work together. If they
are not recognised, they should not be given a platform to work together.
It must be quite clear. They must draw a line.

The IFP awaits the amendments of the Defence Amendment Bill in order to
ensure that the trade unions within the department are curtailed because
there are so many of them with powers that they are not supposed to have.
Thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Adjunkspeaker, ek wil net vir die agb Maynier sê dat
Owen Horwood presies geweet het wat hy geteken het. Hy het net gelieg toe
hy gesê het dat hy nie geweet het nie.

Ek is bly baie lede van die Kabinet is vanmiddag hier. Die Kabinet gee
opdragte aan die SA Nasionale Weermag. Hulle verwag van die SANW om ’n
sekere mandaat uit te voer, maar die Kabinet gee nie die geld daarvoor nie.
Wat tans in die weermag gebeur, is dat die hoofde nou geld van hul
operasionele begrotings neem om die salarisse van die soldate te betaal.

As jy die operasionele gelde begin aanwend daarvoor, dan is jou
gevegsgereedheid besig om tot niet te gaan. Daar is nie eers genoeg geld om
ammunisie aan te koop om in die Material Safety Data Sheet program
opleiding te gee in skietwerk nie. Daar is nie eers genoeg geld dat die
vliëniers van die Suid-Afrikaanse Lugmag in die nag operasioneel kan wees
nie.

Ons moet besluit of ons ’n weermag wil hê of nie. As u as ’n Kabinet
besluit dat u ’n weermag wil hê, moet u toesien dat die geld daar is. Die
VF Plus wil dit ook op rekord stel dat daar nou nie eers genoeg geld is om
die bestaande weermag aan die gang te hou nie; daar sal nog minder geld
wees om ’n nasionale dienspligstelsel aan die gang te hou.

Ons kan nie werk skep in die weermag nie. Die weermag is ’n professionele,
konstitusionele instelling wat die integriteit van die land moet beskerm.
Dit hang van u af. Ten spyte van die tekort aan geld, sal die VF Plus
steeds die begrotingspos ondersteun. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans
speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Deputy Speaker, I just want to tell the hon Maynier
that Owen Horwood knew exactly what he was signing. He was simply lying
when he said that he did not know.
I am glad that many Cabinet members are present here this afternoon.
Cabinet issues instructions to the SA National Defence Force. Cabinet
expects the SANDF to fulfil a particular mandate, but fails to provide the
necessary funds. What currently happens in the Defence Force is that those
in charge take funds out of their operational budgets to pay soldiers’
wages.

Once you start using operational funds for that purpose, your battle
preparedness goes downhill. There is not even enough money to buy
ammunition for marksmanship training in respect of the Material Safety Data
Sheet, MSDS, programme. There is not even enough money to allow South
African Airforce pilots to be operational at night.

We have to decide whether we want a defence force or not. If you as Cabinet
decide that you want a defence force, you must see to it that the money is
available. The FF Plus also wishes to place it on record that at present
there is not even enough money to keep the existing Defence Force going;
there will be even less money to maintain a system based on compulsory
military service.

We cannot generate employment in the Defence Force. The Defence Force is a
professional, constitutional institution mandated to protect the integrity
of the country. It is up to you. Despite the financial shortfall, the FF
Plus supports the Budget Vote. Thank you.]

Mr M S BOOI: Deputy Speaker, I really want to clarify this matter. If you
say that the DA will not support this Budget Vote, clearly you should then
ask yourself how much pride you take in your country. How do you reflect on
the issues of national security?

We are dealing here with national security. We are not dealing here with
issues of people who are social workers. We keep on emphasising all the
time that if you don’t want to understand the issues of confidentiality
within the SA National Defence Force, SANDF, then you must accept the fact
that these are not National Intelligent Agency, NIA, workers.

These are men who are highly trained and are supposed to defend the
sovereignty of South Africa.

At no stage did the Minister say that she will never avail you of any
information that you are looking for. She has always said to Parliament to
sit down and to speak to its own Chief Whip to sit in the Joint Rules
Committee and define what confidentiality in Parliament is.

Don’t make sweeping statements here. You know for a fact that within the
rules of Parliament, there is no definition of confidentially when it comes
to dealing with the lives of soldiers. It is a sweeping statement that you
are making. It is not informed at all. We will continue to try and lecture
you in the committee. The ANC will definitely support this Vote. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 216: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Alberts, A D; Baloyi, M R; Bam-
   Mugwanya, V; Bapela, K O; Bhengu, N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-
   Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C
   V; Buthelezi, M G; Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F
   I; Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; De Lille, P; Diale, L N;
   Dlakude , D E; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo, A; Doidge, G Q M;
   Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Dudley, C; Dunjwa, M L; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M
   L; Frolick, C T; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina,
   N; Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Groenewald, P J; Gumede, D M;
   Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hogan, B A; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H;
   Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kekana, C D; Kenye, T E; Khoarai, L
   P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G
   W; Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Line, H;
   Lishivha, T E; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M
   C; MacKenzie, G D; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V; Magama, H T;
   Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makhuba,
   H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P; Malgas, H H;
   Maluleka, H P; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C; Mandela, Z M D; Manganye, J;
   Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashigo, R M; Mashishi,
   A C; Masilo, J M; Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P
   M; Mathibela, N F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Maziya, A M;
   McGluwa, J J; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Meshoe, K R J;
   Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A;
   Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A; Mohale, M C; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A;
   Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S;
   Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M S; Mpontshane, A M; Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E
   M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mulder, C P; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F;
   Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V
   B; Nelson, W J; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T;
   Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhlengethwa,
   D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkwinti, G E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntuli, Z C;
   Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M F; Nyekemba, E; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C;
   Pandor, G N M; Petersen-Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-
   Mosoane, M E; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A;
   Rantsolase, M A; Saal, G; Scheemann, G D; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J;
   Sexwale, T M G; Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhida, N N; Sisulu, M V;
   Sithole, K P; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Smith, V G;
   Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
   M; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T B; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E;
   Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S
   L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi,
   I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Rooyen, D D; Van Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L
   E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z.
   NOES - 53: Boinamo, G G; Bosman, L L; Coetzee, T W; Davidson, I O; De
   Freitas, M S F; Du Toit, N D; Duncan, P C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B;
   Fritz, A T; George, D T; James, W G; Kalyan, S V; Kloppers-Lourens, J C;
   Kohler-Barnard, D; Kopane, S P; Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lorimer, J R B;
   Lotriet, A; Louw, A; Lovemore, A T; Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Masango,
   S J; Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D; Michael, N W A; Mokgalapa, S; More, E;
   Morgan, G R; Motau, S C; Mubu, K S; Ollis, I M; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M
   W; Robinson, D; Ross, D; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Shinn, M R; Smiles, D C;
   Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swathe, M M; Van Dalen, P; Van der Linde,
   J J; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Waters, M;
   Wenger, M.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 22 - Independent Complaints Directorate – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr M A NHANHA: Madam Deputy Speaker, as Cope we can only hope that this
Vote will not be sub judice according to the words of hon Mbalula. Section
205(3) of the Constitution states that the Police Service’s job is to
prevent, combat and investigate crime; maintain public order; protect and
secure the inhabitants of the Republic and their property; and to uphold
and enforce the law.

The statistics, on the other hand, reveal that over the past six years the
following has happened: 112 982 people were murdered; 132 398 people
survived murder attempts; 403 791 sexual offences were committed; 1 368 301
assaults with grievous bodily harm were committed; 746 435 robberies with
aggravating circumstances were committed; and 81 761 car hijackings took
place.

On average, 100 000 South Africans experience some form of serious crime
every month. Even hon President Jacob Zuma publicly acknowledged that
serious crime is a problem in South Africa. At a time when the country is
in serious economic difficulties ...

Unfortunately, Madam Deputy Speaker, we cannot support this Vote. [Time
expired.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP welcomes the newly appointed
Executive Director of the ICD, Mr Francois Beukman. The ACDP also trusts
that, under his leadership and guidance, the efficiency of the ICD and the
turnaround time for the finalisation of investigations into corrupt and
abusive police officers will be greatly improved.

The ACDP will support the increased Budget Vote No 22 - Independent
Complaints Directorate. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms L N MOSS: Madam Deputy Speaker, I think it is important to mention that
the ICD is Vote No 22. I think Cope’s declaration is misplaced; it is for
Vote No 24 and not No 22. [Interjections.]

The mandate of the ICD is to investigate any misconduct or offences
committed by SAPS, or municipal police services, not the crime statistics
you were telling us about. Sorry, sir, we welcome the ACDP comment. The ANC
will support the Budget Vote. It’s misplaced. Thank you. [Applause.]

Prof B TUROK (ANC): Madam Chair, on a point of order: It seems the House
cannot have a division because Cope is having its own division outside.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I’m sure we are all comfortable about sleeping here!

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 23 - Justice and Constitutional Development – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mrs N W A MICHAEL: Madam Deputy Speaker, the DA cannot support the R2,4
billion in this Vote which is being allocated to the National Prosecuting
Authority, NPA. The National Director of Public Prosecutions Advocate
Simelane’s strategic plan did not match the Estimates of National
Expenditure or of that of the Appropriation Bill. For example, R81 million
is specifically allocated to the Asset Forfeiture Unit, which Advocate
Simelane attempted to shut down. And an amount of R481 million was
allocated to co-operative services, which he has decided to move to Justice
without the permission of hon Minister Radebe.

We welcome the hon Minister Radebe’s attempt to reverse the changes of the
Director of Public Prosecutions, but he was simply ignored by Advocate
Simelane. We welcome the hon President Zuma’s more successful instruction
to stop all proposed changes. However, deferring any restructuring until
the Ministerial cluster has resolved how they will implement their
performance agreements and mandate is unsatisfactory and remains dangerous.

Advocate Simelane should have been called back and told by the justice
committee that we would not vote in favour of the budget unless he formally
undertook to stop restructuring, shutting down units and demoting
prosecutors.

We are deeply concerned about the trends at the NPA, including, amongst
other things, that the NDPP seems to make unilateral decisions and that not
even hon Minister Radebe is aware of this.

The DA would want to see, for example, Advocate Gerry Nel’s salary paid.
However, we need to register our protest at the fact that he and his team
were taken off a case like that of defeating the ends of justice against
the former crime intelligence head, Mr Mulangi Mphego, resulting in the
case being thrown out.

Our objection is specifically against the R2,4 billion for the NPA.
However, due to the intertwined nature of the departments, we have no
choice but to voice our dissatisfaction in the strongest way by voting
against the budget as a whole. [Applause.]

Mr M A NHANHA: Deputy Speaker, I’m sure I have this one right this time
around! [Laughter.] We need to ensure that life is valued again. In the
recent past, life has become cheap. People are being killed left, right and
centre for no apparent reason. It is the judiciary’s responsibility to
uphold the law and to make certain that we can again be proud of what we
have achieved.

In assisting the judiciary in performing their important task, we need to
ensure that it’s independent. This is of the utmost importance because it
would seem as if one can get away with anything these days if one is well-
connected.

We hope that the new proposed Bills will go a long way in ensuring the
independence of the judiciary, but only time will tell. There is still a
big problem with access to the courts of our country. Ordinary South
Africans are finding it hard to get justice.

What is happening at the NPA is cause for grave discomfort. Cope will
support this Vote. Thank you.

Mr N A RAMATLHODI: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC supports Vote No 23. We do
so informed by an understanding that the principle of separation of powers
is the inimitable cornerstone of our constitutional democracy.

Whilst the legislature, the executive and the judiciary are independent of
each other, they constitute three legs of one pot, making them
interdependent organs of one body. We therefore support the submissions of
strategic plans to the legislature, not for approval by us, but in order to
empower us to know what the budgets are financing so that we can exercise
effective oversight.

In exercising this oversight, the legislature will be well advised not to
descend into the arena of policy implementation and operations as this
resorts in the exclusive domain of the executive. For instance, as the
legislature sitting here, we cannot reconstitute ourselves as the high
court of Parliament as happened previously. Otherwise we will be usurping
the power of the judiciary.

Similarly, in exercising its oversight role within this legislature, the
Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Scopa, has to do so having consulted
with the relevant departments; otherwise Scopa’s actions would constitute
encroachments onto the functions of other committees. The ANC supports the
Budget Vote. Thank you. [Applause.]

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 216: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Alberts, A D; Baloyi, M R; Bam-
   Mugwanya, V; Bapela, K O; Bhengu, N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-
   Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C
   V; Buthelezi, M G; Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F
   I; Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; De Lille, P; Diale, L N;
   Dlakude , D E; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo, A; Doidge, G Q M;
   Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Dudley, C; Dunjwa, M L; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M
   L; Frolick, C T; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina,
   N; Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Groenewald, P J; Gumede, D M;
   Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hogan, B A; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H;
   Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kekana, C D; Kenye, T E; Khoarai, L
   P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G
   W; Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Line, H;
   Lishivha, T E; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M
   C; MacKenzie, G D; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V; Magama, H T;
   Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makhuba,
   H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P; Malgas, H H;
   Maluleka, H P; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C; Mandela, Z M D; Manganye, J;
   Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashigo, R M; Mashishi,
   A C; Masilo, J M; Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P
   M; Mathibela, N F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Maziya, A M;
   Mc Gluwa, J J; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Meshoe, K R
   J; Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A;
   Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A; Mohale, M C; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A;
   Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S;
   Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M S; Mpontshane, A M; Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E
   M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mulder, C P; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F;
   Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V
   B; Nelson, W J; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T;
   Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhlengethwa,
   D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkwinti, G E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntuli, Z C;
   Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M F; Nyekemba, E; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C;
   Pandor, G N M; Petersen-Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-
   Mosoane, M E; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A;
   Rantsolase, M A; Saal, G; Scheemann, G D; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J;
   Sexwale, T M G; Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhida, N N; Sisulu, M V;
   Sithole, K P; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Smith, V G;
   Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
   M; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T B; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E;
   Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S
   L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi,
   I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Rooyen, D D; Van Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L
   E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 53: Boinamo, G G; Bosman, L L; Coetzee, T W; Davidson, I O; De
   Freitas, M S F; Du Toit, N D; Duncan, P C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B;
   Fritz, A T; George, D T; James, W G; Kalyan, S V; Kloppers-Lourens, J C;
   Kohler-Barnard, D; Kopane, S P; Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lorimer, J R B;
   Lotriet, A; Louw, A; Lovemore, A T; Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Masango,
   S J; Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D; Michael, N W A; Mokgalapa, S; More, E;
   Morgan, G R; Motau, S C; Mubu, K S; Ollis, I M; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M
   W; Robinson, D; Ross, D; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Shinn, M R; Smiles, D C;
   Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swathe, M M; Van Dalen, P; Van der Linde,
   J J; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Waters, M;
   Wenger, M.

Vote accordingly agreed to.


Vote No 24 – Police – put.

Declarations of vote:

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Deputy Speaker, there is just one phrase that keeps on
coming to mind as the group of SAPS personnel came in to present before the
Police Portfolio Committee: “Show me the money”.

Certainly the Minister has dodged my questions in relation to expenditure
after expenditure, such as the party held in Bloemfontein. Certainly no one
is telling which programmes these millions came from. Who knows which
programme is being used as a slush fund?

There are about 50 or more citizens who are murdered here daily, coupled
with an increase in violence that shocks the nation. Yet the Minister has
seen it fit to quietly drop the target, according to which our Police
Service should decrease violent crime, to just 4% to 7%. So, the target has
been dropped, yet, the money asked for is up to R53 billion, which boils
down to a 3% target decrease in exchange for a 13% budget increase.

We have watched the Minister and his deputy squandering R7,1 million on
bling and five-star hotels - and that is just what we have uncovered to
date. On top of that, the Minister has gone against those sages at the
outset of our democracy, who determined that this protection entity should
be a service rather than a force of the apartheid era. Indeed, he is now
pretending as if he is running an army, although we already have one.

While there is a crisis of crime, millions and millions, which could have
been used for building and renovating police stations, simply can’t be
accounted for. Imagine any corporation allowing this sort of report on
finances that SAPS property management attempted to fob us off with a
fortnight ago; heads would roll!

Patently, the Minister has no idea of what is going on, and certainly not
in property management. His predecessor hid away a
R7 million report from the head of the SAPS legal services division, and
this Minister is choosing to use taxpayer’s money as though it were his
own.

The SAPS has been galvanised by the Football World Cup, but whether or not
we are going to see the same dedication when August comes, is anyone’s
guess.

To be voting for this Bill, would suggest that the DA supports the
Ministry’s intention to spend in the same unwise, unaccountable manner.
There is no indication that they will do otherwise. Therefore we cannot
support this Budget Vote. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M A NHANHA: Deputy Speaker, just for the record, it was not misplaced,
but I was just overenthusiastic to do my work. That is why I came in a few
Votes ahead of everyone! [Laughter.]

Let me not bore this House. I have read the declaration before and suffice
it to say, with good conscience, that Cope is not going to support this
Vote.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, with the kick-off to the Fifa Soccer
World Cup only 15 days away, the ACDP does not want the police to worry
about budgetary constraints. We want them to leave no stone unturned in
ensuring that criminals have no place to hide and that all our visitors and
spectators from all over the world are going to feel safe in our beautiful
country.

Therefore, the ACDP will support this Budget Vote in order to give those
committed and disciplined police officers encouragement to ensure that the
World Cup games will be incident-free and that the accommodation and
transportation of all the players and officials will go according to plan.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Iphini likaSomlomo, ngiyaxolisa ukukumemeza, bekungafanele
ngikumemeze, okokuqala thina njengeNkatha Yenkululeko, sithi, laba bantu
abafuna umsebenzi kufanele bahlungwe kahle ukuze izigebengu zingangeni kulo
msebenzi. Ngoba isigebengu esisodwa senza ukuthi amaphoyisa abukeke
eyizigebengi wonke. Kanti akhona asebenza ngokuzimisela, asebenza kanzima
aze afele emsebenzini. Izigebengu zimbalwa nje. Ngakho-ke izigebengu
asibhekane nazo ngqo.

Okwesibili, mhlonishwa, Phini likaSomlomo, besithi bekungakuhle ukuthi uma
umuntu kutholakele ukuthi kukhona akwenzile-unecala, kufanele ukuthi
ayohlala ekhaya kubo. Ahlale kubo kunesikhathi esibekiwe ukuthi uzohlala
isikhathi esingakanani. Angalokhu ehola imali kahulumeni ebeqethuka evuka
ngo 10h00, alale ngo 18h00. Ngoba lokho kwenza ukuthi imali kahulumeni
engenzi lutho kanti umsebenzi ukhona, futhi abanye abantu bayawudinga
umsebenzi.

Ngakho-ke izinyathelo kufanele zisheshe kakhulu futhi ziphumelele.
Amaphoyisa lawo agcwele ubugebengu mhlonishwa, Phini likaSomlomo, ngihlale
ngisho zonke izinsuku, awagxoshwe emaphoyiseni. Ngoba ngeke sibe
nezigebengu ezingamaphoyisa, ngoba iphoyisa uma lingqongqoza kwami kufanele
ngithembe. Uma kungqongqosha iphoyisa eliyisigebengu, ngeke ngithembe.

Okukugcina, ngihlale ngisho ukuthi amaphoyisa kufanele siwahlunge siwenze
ukuthi angabi kwezombusazwe, angasebenzisi futhi ezombusazwe, angalekeleli
umbusazwe othuli phezu kweminye. Kufanele asebenze ngokuzimisela
njengamaphoyisa ukugada wonke umuntu ezweni. Awayeke ukuhlukumeza abantu
abangenacala. Awabambe izigebengu okufanele azibambe, Nyambose!
(Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Deputy Speaker, pardon me for shouting at you - I was not
supposed to shout at you. Firstly we, as the IFP, are saying that these
people who are applying for this job must be thoroughly scrutinised so that
people with criminal intentions cannot access this sector as one such
person can incriminate the whole Police Service. There are police officers
who are very committed to their work and even lose their lives in the line
of duty. There are very few criminal elements in the Police Service.
Therefore let us face criminals directly.

Secondly, Deputy Speaker, if someone is alleged to have committed a crime,
we propose that they be suspended. Their suspension should not be
indefinite, to prevent them from earning the state’s money whilst lying on
their backs doing nothing – waking up at 10h00 and going to bed at 18h00.
Because that would be wasting the state’s money on someone who is doing
nothing whilst there is work that is supposed to be done and there are
people who need that job.

Therefore, there are steps that need to be taken quickly and they need to
be successful. The criminal elements within the Police Service should be
fired. I mention this every day, Deputy Speaker. We cannot afford to have
police officers who are criminals, because if a police officer knocks at my
door I must trust him. But if it is a criminal police officer who is
knocking at my door, I cannot trust him.

Lastly, I always say that we should scrutinise police officers and ensure
that they are apolitical, that they do not use political means to gain
something and that they also not assist any political party in any way. As
police officers they should commit themselves to looking after everyone in
this country. And they must refrain from harassing innocent people. They
must catch criminals as they are supposed to, Nyambose!]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Deputy Speaker, I always wanted to ask the Minister what
he said to the AWB leaders. I know some of those people and they are not
easy to handle. When I saw them on television they were so mesmerised. So,
I don’t know what the hon Minister told them. I don’t know whether it was
Mthethwa magic or something like that. [Laughter.]

Hon Minister, unfortunately I want to tell you that the
FF Plus is not mesmerised. The public of South Africa should have trust in
the police.

Ek is jammer om vir die agb Minister te sê dat ek steeds gereeld oorval
word deur mense wat klagtes het waar hulle net eenvoudig deur
polisiebeamptes, kan ek amper sê, op ’n rassistiese wyse hanteer word.
Hierdie is mense wie klagtes wil gaan lê en vir wie die polisie nie bereid
is om ’n klagstaat te open nie. Die polisie is nie bereid om hul
verklarings te neem nie. [Tussenwerpsels.]

Ja, dis ’n goeie vraag. Hoekom nie? Enige burger van Suid-Afrika het die
reg om na ’n polisiekantoor te gaan en ’n klag te gaan lê wat die polisie
moet ondersoek.

Agb Minister, dit is vir my onaanvaarbaar dat ’n lid van die publiek by ’n
polisiekantoor opdaag en sien dat die polisieman agter die toonbank ’n man
is wie hom ’n paar weke tevore wou beroof. Ek moes eers ’n vraag aan u in
die Parlement vra: hoekom is daardie man nog aan diens? Ek praat spesifiek
van die geval by die Boskop-polisiekantoor.

Hy is nou verwyder nadat ek die vraag gevra het, maar dit mag nie gebeur
nie. U is op rekord waar u sê dat u die polisie wil reinig van korrupsie.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[I am sorry to have to tell the hon Minister that I am still regularly
being swamped by people who have complaints where, I can almost say, police
officers simply treat them in a racist manner. These are people who want to
lay a charge, but for whom the police are not prepared to open a charge
sheet. The police are not prepared to take their statements.
[Interjections.]

Yes, that is a good question. Why not? Any citizen of South Africa has the
right to go to a police station to lay a charge that the police must
investigate.

Hon Minister, I find it unacceptable that a member of the public should
arrive at a police station to find that the police officer behind the
counter is a man who had wanted to rob him a few weeks earlier. I had to
ask you a question in Parliament first: why is that man still on duty?

I am talking specifically about the case of the Boskop Police Station.

He has now been removed after I had asked the question, but it must not be
allowed to happen. You are on record as saying that you want to rid the
police of corruption.]

Hon Minister, we support you in that. We can see that you are trying to put
an effort to rid the police of corruption, but we need more. The public
still does not trust the police; neither does the FF Plus and we will,
therefore, not support the Vote.

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Deputy Speaker, the ANC will definitely support this
Budget Vote. It is important to inform the House that the Minister of
Police spent 94% of the Ministry’s budget during the 2008-09 financial
year.

About 94% is well within the acceptable standards of budget spending. What
is true though is that the hon Kohler-Barnard simply dislikes the Minister
as a person. [Applause.]

This dislike is compounded by the fact that the Minister’s department is
investigating irregularities in the ICT unit of SAPS. Its director,
passionately liked by hon Kohler-Barnard, is being investigated for
irregularities and her husband, who was a deputy director, reporting to the
wife, was removed. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

While this could have been characterised as nepotism, including corruption,
it did not earn the Minister appreciation, but instead he was attacked. The
investigation by international experts of the forensic science laboratory
will definitely exacerbate the attacks on the hon Minister, because, again,
it is likely to unearth many untold stories about some who are liked by the
hon member.

The fact-finding investigations on who is providing services in SAPS, which
the Minister is initiating, will earn him other names because it will most
likely unearth other untold stories by the member. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): We will not ring the bells because
we assume everyone is in the House.

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. I would like to
suggest that you cannot rule that we should not ring the bells, even if it
is just for 30 seconds. I think that is not in accordance with the Rules.
Maybe a member went out for a second and needs to be informed that we are
going to vote. I thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Ok, let’s ring the bells for 30
seconds, if possible. The technology has given me one minute. Right, now it
is able to do 30 seconds.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, just while the bells are still ringing, could I
just ask you about certain points made by the member who spoke on behalf of
the ANC in the Police Budget Vote. Some of the things she said may have
been very important, but I am not sure if they were all parliamentary.

I could not quite understand what she was saying. I want to ask you, sir,
if I can get a copy of the Hansard tomorrow, and if necessary, raise the
matter in the House with you tomorrow.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, you will definitely get
the Hansard.

Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 216: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Alberts, A D; Baloyi, M R; Bam-
   Mugwanya, V; Bapela, K O; Bhengu, N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-
   Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C
   V; Buthelezi, M G; Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F
   I; Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; De Lille, P; Diale, L N;
   Dlakude , D E; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo, A; Doidge, G Q M;
   Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Dudley, C; Dunjwa, M L; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M
   L; Frolick, C T; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina,
   N; Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Groenewald, P J; Gumede, D M;
   Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hogan, B A; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H;
   Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kekana, C D; Kenye, T E; Khoarai, L
   P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G
   W; Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Line, H;
   Lishivha, T E; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M
   C; MacKenzie, G D; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V; Magama, H T;
   Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makhuba,
   H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P; Malgas, H H;
   Maluleka, H P; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C; Mandela, Z M D; Manganye, J;
   Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashigo, R M; Mashishi,
   A C; Masilo, J M; Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P
   M; Mathibela, N F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Maziya, A M;
   Mc Gluwa, J J; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Meshoe, K R
   J; Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A;
   Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A; Mohale, M C; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A;
   Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S;
   Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M S; Mpontshane, A M; Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E
   M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mulder, C P; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F;
   Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V
   B; Nelson, W J; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T;
   Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhlengethwa,
   D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkwinti, G E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntuli, Z C;
   Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M F; Nyekemba, E; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C;
   Pandor, G N M; Petersen-Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-
   Mosoane, M E; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A;
   Rantsolase, M A; Saal, G; Scheemann, G D; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J;
   Sexwale, T M G; Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhida, N N; Sisulu, M V;
   Sithole, K P; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Smith, V G;
   Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
   M; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T B; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E;
   Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S
   L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi,
   I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Rooyen, D D; Van Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L
   E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 53: Boinamo, G G; Bosman, L L; Coetzee, T W; Davidson, I O; De
   Freitas, M S F; Du Toit, N D; Duncan, P C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B;
   Fritz, A T; George, D T; James, W G; Kalyan, S V; Kloppers-Lourens, J C;
   Kohler-Barnard, D; Kopane, S P; Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lorimer, J R B;
   Lotriet, A; Louw, A; Lovemore, A T; Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Masango,
   S J; Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D; Michael, N W A; Mokgalapa, S; More, E;
   Morgan, G R; Motau, S C; Mubu, K S; Ollis, I M; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M
   W; Robinson, D; Ross, D; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Shinn, M R; Smiles, D C;
   Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swathe, M M; Van Dalen, P; Van der Linde,
   J J; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Waters, M;
   Wenger, M.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 25 – Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries – put.

Declarations of vote:

Dr L L BOSMAN: Chairperson, the DA is disappointed that the agricultural
sector was severely neglected and grossly underfunded after being allocated
only 0,4% of the total Budget. The Department of Agriculture, Forestry and
Fisheries’ budget is further not used for effective service delivery. It is
clear that the current human resources, ICT capacity and budget are not
adequate to deliver the required level of management and services.

The DA believes that the following issues are critical for food security.
Taking into account the importance of research for the sector, it is clear
that the Agricultural Research Council is grossly underfunded and that many
posts are currently vacant. About R300 million is needed annually to
address this constraint.

Onderstepoort Biological Products renders a world-class service to the
livestock industry, but has to survive without any budgetary support from
government.

The Perishable Products Export Control Board is in charge of monitoring our
borders for the import and export of unwanted products, but is not
supported financially by government to effectively execute this important
function.

Proper management of natural disasters is of critical importance for long-
term sustainability of the sector. The allocated budget for this purpose is
also insufficient.

Rural safety and stock theft is completely out of control. Farmers lost
R366 million to stock theft in the 2008-09 financial year. This
demonstrates the size of the problem.

Daar is ’n behoefte aan ’n landbouhandelsbeleid wat beter na Suid-Afrika se
belange sal omsien. Die aangekondigde invoertarief op koring is onvoldoende
en gaan tot ’n verdere afname in koringproduksie, en gevolglik ’n toename
in invoere met gepaardgaande werkverlies en verdere terugslae vir landelike
ontwikkeling, bydra.
Die beweerde wanbestuur binne Mariene en Kusbestuur word klaarblyklik onder
die mat gevee. Die vissery-afdeling van die departement sal dringend alle
aspekte van die bedryf moet aanspreek. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[There is a need for an agricultural trade policy that will take better
care of South Africa’s interests. The announced import tariff on grain is
insufficient and will contribute to a further drop in grain production, and
subsequently to higher imports accompanied by job losses and further
setbacks to rural development.

The alleged mismanagement within Marine and Coastal Management is evidently
being swept under the carpet. The fisheries section of the department must
urgently address all aspects of the industry.]

An example of wasteful expenditure is the R600 million which was spent on
patrol vessels and the disastrous deployment which followed it.

The DA will not support this Vote.

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Chairperson, while Cope will support the Budget Vote, we
would like the Minister to note the following concerns.

From being a food-exporting country, South Africa has now become a net
importer of food. From being a major employer, agriculture has been
shedding jobs.

Agriculture is one of the most sensitive topics across racial groups in
this nation, but proper engagement is necessary to achieve equity and
stability. A great deal needs to be done to revitalise agriculture.

The Minister stated that we no longer want to call people emerging farmers.


After 16 years of democracy, Cope agrees that by now we ought to have had
skilled farmers ready to make South Africa a food-secure nation. More
importantly, we need South Africa to be a country where food is affordable
and accessible.

Why has the skills development programme fallen short? Why is knowledge
transfer not taking place? Why have 90% of the farms transferred via the
land restitution process collapsed?

At a time when joblessness and hunger are acute problems, this department
has a lot to answer for. It may not necessarily be this Minister’s failure,
but, nonetheless, it is her department which is failing South Africa.

Human resource development programmes must be strengthened and food
production capacity must be expanded, as should jobs within this sector.
The Minister is right in stating that jobs, food security and sustainable
livelihoods must be the ultimate aims of this year.
As I have already said, Cope will, however, support this Budget Vote.

Mr M JOHNSON: Chairperson, this is one area among the many that does not
need any political gamesmanship at all. Food must be produced and everybody
must agree with that fact. The ANC and the committee on agriculture,
forestry and fisheries are in sync with the Budget Vote of the Department
of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries.

South Africa needs food that is safe and sufficient to feed its own people.
This budget enjoins us to do just that and more.

We are mindful of the fact that 0,4% of the total R9 007 billion is not
enough to cover all the programmes required to have safe and secure food in
our country. As spelt out in the 2003 declaration of the African Union
summit at Maputo, all member countries had to increase their agriculture
budgets to no less than 10% of their total budgets by 2008. We as the ANC,
however, are confident that, with little, we can do more towards the
eradication of poverty.

To do so, we are aware that, among other things, our programmes would need
to address stock theft, tariff reduction and subsidies. These are the sore
points in the field of agriculture. The ANC, regardless of all those
inconveniences, supports Budget Vote 25, and its implementation under the
able leadership of Comrade Tina Joemat-Pettersson. Amandla! [Power!]

HON MEMBERS: Awethu! [To the people!] [[Applause.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Vote No 26 – Communications – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr M A NHANHA: Chairperson, Cope welcomes the decision by the SABC Board to
withdraw the appointment of Mr Phil Molefe, who is a known sympathiser of
the ANC. We, therefore, congratulate the SABC Board for taking this bold
step.

Not enough has been done to champion broadband access to the people of
South Africa. Hon Minister, we insist that your department take up this
matter very seriously, so that all of our people can have access to the
knowledge highway. This is vital in pursuing a people-centred and
development-oriented paradigm. We must empower the people to empower
themselves. This department should create a new infrastructure highway.
Cope would want to urge the Minister to make a move in this regard. Cope
will not support this Vote. Thank you.
Mr S E KHOLWANE: Chairperson, the ANC will support this Vote. I must say,
it is clear that the hon member does not understand what he is talking
about. If you care about the people of South Africa, you must agree with
this budget because in order to roll out the broadband, you will need a
spectrum, which is currently trapped somewhere.

The process of digital migration is going to assist us to release the
spectrum, which is so much needed for social and economic development.

I will urge the member that, in future, he must attend committee meetings.
I know Cope agreed with us in the committee and during the Budget debate. I
hoped this time their head was still intact, but now the head has been
surgically removed. Maybe this is the reason why they cannot remember what
they have supported all along. The ANC supports the Vote. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Chairperson, on a point of order: I understand that our
colleague from Cope is a new member; however, it’s the second Vote now
where the hon member has indicated that they objected and would not support
the Vote. Still, they did not object and they did not ask for a division.
[Laughter.] I would suggest that the Chairperson assist the hon member in
order to facilitate the proceedings. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Are you assisting the hon member?
Hon member, have you been doing that exactly?

Mr M A NHANHA: I’ve just raised my hand, Chairperson, to
register our objection.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): You should stand up, go to the
microphone and then say: “On behalf of the party, I want my objection to be
noted or recorded.” So is it recorded? Thanks, your objection is recorded,
but the Vote is agreed to.

Vote agreed to (Congress of the People dissenting).

An HON MEMBER: Chairperson, is it parliamentary to conduct induction
in the House? [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): We did inductions at the beginning
of the Fourth Parliament! [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: That party is leaderless now.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): But let’s proceed with the work.

Vote No 27 – Economic Development – put.

Declarations of vote:

Dr P J RABIE: Chairperson, the DA is concerned about the number of
Ministries created by the Fourth Parliament. Apart from the escalation in
costs with regard to the already overburdened fiscus, there are substantial
overlaps and duplications between the functions of Finance, the National
Planning Commission, Trade and Industry, and Economic Development.

Up to now, the Department of Economic Development has achieved nothing of
value except to fund a bureaucracy which became necessary to appease a
faction within the ruling party. Current legislation is very clear that the
functions to be performed by the Department of Economic Development are
adequately covered by the National Treasury and the Department of Trade and
Industry.

All the establishment of this department has achieved is the
intensification of the present turf war amongst the numerous departments.
This has resulted in conflicting signals to investors and the market. If
it’s left unchecked, it will further undermine the ability of our economy
to grow and provide decent work.

Therefore, the DA does not support this Budget Vote, and we recommend the
closure of this department. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs E M COLEMAN: Chairperson, the ANC supports Vote No 27. The DA’s call
for a division on this Vote is countered by the ANC because it is premised
upon wrong assumptions and a misunderstanding of what the aims of this Vote
are.

Irrespective of continual and numerous explanations by the Minister, the
President and the cluster itself, it seems that the DA is not ready to
accept what the President has come up with — unless it came from them;
that’s the only time they will accept that there needs to be change.

The aim of this particular department is to address the critical gaps in
the implementation of economic development strategies and plans within the
three spheres of government and the private sector because that co-
ordination is needed.

Problems related to inconsistencies and a lack of a common strategic view
in respect of the interface between macro and micro economic plans across
the key stakeholders in society have been identified by economists as
having detrimental effects on implementation, and ultimately on the overall
economic development of the country.

The Department of Economic Development is a critical capacity in building a
developmental state. It is capable of fostering integrated development
planning and interfaces the macro and micro economic policies; guides
effective implementation; and promotes continuous monitoring and
evaluation. So, this is very necessary for our economy to grow. Thank you.
[Time expired.]
Division demanded.

The House divided:

   AYES - 216: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Alberts, A D; Baloyi, M R; Bam-
   Mugwanya, V; Bapela, K O; Bhengu, N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-
   Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C
   V; Buthelezi, M G; Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F
   I; Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; De Lille, P; Diale, L N;
   Dlakude , D E; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo, A; Doidge, G Q M;
   Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Dudley, C; Dunjwa, M L; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M
   L; Frolick, C T; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina,
   N; Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Groenewald, P J; Gumede, D M;
   Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hogan, B A; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H;
   Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kekana, C D; Kenye, T E; Khoarai, L
   P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G
   W; Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Line, H;
   Lishivha, T E; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M
   C; MacKenzie, G D; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V; Magama, H T;
   Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makhuba,
   H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P; Malgas, H H;
   Maluleka, H P; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C; Mandela, Z M D; Manganye, J;
   Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashigo, R M; Mashishi,
   A C; Masilo, J M; Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P
   M; Mathibela, N F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Maziya, A M;
   McGluwa, J J; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Meshoe, K R J;
   Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A;
   Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A; Mohale, M C; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A;
   Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S;
   Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M S; Mpontshane, A M; Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E
   M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mulder, C P; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F;
   Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V
   B; Nelson, W J; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T;
   Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhlengethwa,
   D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkwinti, G E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntuli, Z C;
   Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M F; Nyekemba, E; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C;
   Pandor, G N M; Petersen-Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-
   Mosoane, M E; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A;
   Rantsolase, M A; Saal, G; Scheemann, G D; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J;
   Sexwale, T M G; Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhida, N N; Sisulu, M V;
   Sithole, K P; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Smith, V G;
   Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
   M; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T B; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E;
   Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S
   L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi,
   I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Rooyen, D D; Van Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L
   E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 53: Boinamo, G G; Bosman, L L; Coetzee, T W; Davidson, I O; De
   Freitas, M S F; Du Toit, N D; Duncan, P C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B;
   Fritz, A T; George, D T; James, W G; Kalyan, S V; Kloppers-Lourens, J C;
   Kohler-Barnard, D; Kopane, S P; Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lorimer, J R B;
   Lotriet, A; Louw, A; Lovemore, A T; Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Masango,
   S J; Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D; Michael, N W A; Mokgalapa, S; More, E;
   Morgan, G R; Motau, S C; Mubu, K S; Ollis, I M; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M
   W; Robinson, D; Ross, D; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Shinn, M R; Smiles, D C;
   Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swathe, M M; Van Dalen, P; Van der Linde,
   J J; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Waters, M;
   Wenger, M.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 28 - Energy – put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr S C MOTAU: Chairperson, the DA has welcomed the establishment of the new
Department of Energy under Minister Dipuo Peters. The DA has long called
for a stand-alone Ministry. We believe that this will facilitate progress
and the ability to meet set targets.

However, during the Portfolio Committee on Energy’s interaction with the
department’s budget and strategic plan for the next three years, we
expressed certain reservations that the department has promised to address.
Amongst them were issues identified by the department that have retarded
progress towards the goal to reach the targeted one million solar water
heaters in households by 2014.

The Minister has said that this target will be met. The DA will be watching
its progress, or the lack thereof, like a hawk. In this regard, I would
like to alert the Minister that we are aware of the fact that the target
date has somehow shifted from 2013 to 2014, making the five-year term a
moving target. This deadline cannot be moved if the demand-side management
targets are to be met.

The department has also committed itself to establishing a buying office,
an independent sales and marketing office, to break Eskom’s monopolistic
hold on the buying and selling of electricity in the country and to
facilitate the participation of independent power producers in the
electricity generation arena. This office should as quickly as possible
move out of Eskom, as the Ministry has assured us it would.

The process to produce the Integrated Resource Plan 2, IRP2, seems to be
turning sour. The Minister should be aware that we are getting worrying
reports that Eskom is hijacking the process for its own narrow interests.
This should be stopped as it will negatively impact on the credibility of
the report.

This process has not been put in place for the interests of Eskom, but for
the country’s energy security over the next 20 years. We dare not fluff
this process through procedural failures. The DA has already made the point
that the department’s budget is quite stretched, and we welcome the
commitment by senior managers to doing more with less. Thus, we support the
Budget Vote. [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member Poho, before you speak -
and this is nothing personal against you - part of our duties as presiding
officers is to protect the decorum of this House. The way you are dressed
today is not dignified and honourable like all other hon members are.
[Applause.]

In future, when you come to the House, take into consideration its decorum
and the respect it deserves in the nation and amongst hon members here. You
may proceed with your debate.

Mr P D MBHELE: Chairperson, the last time I checked, it was acceptable to
wear a traditional shirt. I don’t know if that has changed.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, it’s obviously open to
interpretation. I don’t see tradition, although you say you are
traditional. Let’s be decent and be respectful to the decorum of the House
and that’s it. Let’s not argue about whether you are traditional today or
not.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Chairperson, is it acceptable to wear an
overall in the House?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I have addressed the matter. But in
future people must know that powers are there to throw you out of the House
to go and dress appropriately.

I’m not applying those powers now. I am reminding members to respect the
decorum of the House and be decent. You may proceed, hon member.

Mr P D MBHELE: Chairperson, the recent electricity hikes that were imposed
on consumers will have far-reaching effects and the brunt of this burden
will be felt by the poor and the middle class.

Increasingly more people will not be able to afford electricity. For years,
corporations paid less for the electricity than it cost to generate it. Now
ordinary people must carry the cost.

The issue of Hitachi and Chancellor House has been raised many times in
Parliament, but the ruling party is still putting profit before ethical
conduct. Cope is also dismayed that only R36 million has been set aside for
renewable energy when that is the path to the future.

This department is not earnest about achieving its target of generating 10
000 GWh of electricity from renewable sources by 2013. For these reasons,
Cope will not support the Budget Vote.

Mr L W GREYLING: Chairperson, I have decided to discard colonial
traditions, and, therefore, I’m not wearing a tie. Hopefully, you will not
kick me out. The ID is forced to rise in objection to the Budget Vote on
Energy. We do this because we believe that this department should be taking
the lead in setting a progressive agenda for our energy future over the
next 20 years.

Instead, what we have witnessed is that the capacity of this department has
not been adequately built and it is woefully understaffed. Key priorities
like energy efficiency, which should be one of our greatest national
priorities, is being driven by a National Energy Efficiency Agency with a
staff component of only two people and no money to drive the actual
programmes.

The much-needed integrated energy plan, which the department is supposed to
have drawn up in terms of the National Energy Act, is also way behind
schedule as there was previously no budget allocated to set up the
modelling capacity in the department.

Instead, the department is trying to fast-track a second integrated
resource plan for the country with very little time being given for public
consultation or proper modelling of all the different parameters as
stipulated in the National Energy Act.

We cannot develop a plan for our energy future over the next 20 years in
such a manner. It is for this reason that the ID feels compelled to object
to this Budget Vote until such time as we feel confident that the
Department of Energy is sufficiently empowered and committed to developing
energy plans and policies that are truly in the best interest of all South
Africans. I thank you.

Mrs E THABETHE: Chairperson, I agree with some of the issues raised by
members in terms of underfunding for the department. With regard to the
Integrated Resource Plan 1, IRP1, the department briefed us. They
apologised to the committee for not informing us on time.

The Integrated Resource Plan 2, IRP2, was supposed to be discussed by the
committee in June, but due to the World Cup it has been changed to July.
Hon Greyling wrote a letter to me to which I responded and said that we
were waiting to put that on the committee’s programme. I am sure that he
likes to grandstand in any way.

If we are serious about renewable energy in terms of the challenges of
climate change, we would support this Budget Vote. We believe that what is
in the strategic plan talks exactly to what he is raising. As members, we
were able to engage the department. We stated our disagreements with them.
At the end of the day, we said that we will do our oversight work and make
sure that they deliver according to the strategic plan.

In this regard, as a country we are forced to deal with renewable energy.
With this budget we believe that they will try to do what they can. It was
said in the committee that they will try to do more with the little money
that they have. This is a new department; we need to give them space.

With regard to what the President has mentioned about the Independent Power
Projects, IPPs, they are going to deal with that. We hope that we will be
able to take them forward and do oversight work on whether or not they have
done so. The energy that members have is good, but we must be able to
exercise it in the right way. We support the Budget Vote. [Applause.]

Vote agreed to (Congress of the People and Independent Democrats
dissenting).

Vote No 29 – Environmental Affairs – put and agreed to.

Vote No 30 – Human Settlements – put and agreed to.

Vote No 31 – Mineral Resources – put.

Declarations of vote:

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Chairperson, proceedings at the public hearings of the
Portfolio Committee on Mining this morning illustrate exactly why the DA
cannot support the budget. The ANC Youth League, represented by Julius
Malema, pleaded for the nationalisation of the mining sector.

He furthermore, on behalf of the ANC Youth League – and, by the way, the
ANC as well - indicated that this issue had been discussed at the level of
the National Executive Committee of the ANC and that a workshop had been
held to facilitate the implementation of this process of nationalisation.

Maybe the ANC should indicate to us what’s coming. The causes of these
extreme and displaced arguments are clear. They emanate from a failure by
government to ensure that the Department of Mineral Resources effectively
monitors and ensures compliance with the various laws and policies adopted
by Parliament.

The failure by the department to ensure implementation of the BEE
requirements, affirmative action, the social labour plans required by the
Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act, and compliance with the
Mine Health and Safety Act, has led to a failure of government policy.
This, apparently, is also the view of the Portfolio Committee on Mineral
Resources which seems to have upheld it; hence the so-called need for
supporting the state-owned mining company and the nationalisation of the
mines.

It is therefore imperative that the department implements these decisions
contained in the Mining Charter, as agreed to by the mining industry, the
unions and government. As such, we cannot support the Budget Vote. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr M F GONA: Chairperson, the ANC definitely supports this Budget Vote. The
reasons advanced by the DA for objecting to this Budget Vote are very
unclear, because the proceedings today - the public hearings that we
convened today - have nothing to do with compliance enforcement by the
department. They have nothing to do with this Budget Vote.

The public hearings today are an initial attempt to address serious issues
in the country, such as the rising levels of poverty, unemployment and
joblessness of our people in the country.

The country has been declared to be the world’s wealthiest country in terms
of mineral resources, yet the inequality levels are on the rise. Now we are
looking at a solution, because it is not sustainable to have mineral wealth
that is acknowledged worldwide, but, at the same time, have citizens of the
country that continue to be poor. Therefore, let us not use different
reasons.

We, in the portfolio committee, including the DA, acknowledge the fact that
this department is new and that it has been established within the shortest
space of time, to the extent that it had an unqualified audit report from
the Auditor-General.

Therefore there are no substantial reasons for this Budget Vote not to be
supported. We need to support it. We will come back to deliberate on the
establishment of the state-owned mining company and, at that stage, the DA
must raise its views. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I must apologise, sir. I was so captivated by
the hon Radebe and hon Manuel sitting there eating while the rest of us are
so hungry ... [Laughter.] ... that I forgot to stand up, sir, and I
apologise. The DA would like its objection to be recorded.

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 32 – Rural Development and Land Reform – put.

Declarations of vote:
Mr M M SWATHE: Chairperson, the DA is concerned that the government is not
fulfilling its constitutional mandate because it is not budgeting
adequately for and reform and rural development. The R6,7 billion is too
little to fully execute the department’s mandate.

The department signed commitments and contracts with landowners worth over
R3 billion. It allocated a mere R1,5 billion to the Land Restitution
Programme. Effectively, the Land Restitution Programme can only use
R800 million to buy farms. The department has shifted its focus from land
restitution to land reform and rural development.

The restitution of land rights is a pillar of the Constitution to address
land rights issues and, if it is not addressed urgently, it may cause
havoc. The DA, therefore, is very concerned that the government is not
honouring its commitment to priorities. Rural development and land reform
remain on the back burner, and is not one of government’s top priorities in
terms of budget allocation.

The DA, in its alternative budget, recommended to government that it
increase the budget by R3 billion. The government failed to increase the
budget. The DA, therefore, will not support the Budget Vote. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Chairperson, Cope seriously favours reviewing the current
land tenure system during this Medium-Term Strategic Framework period. This
must be done through rigorous engagement with all South Africans, so that
the tenure system will satisfy the aspirations of all South Africans
irrespective of race, gender or class.

The need to prioritise land reform and rural development is obvious. Land
is a fundamental national asset. Used well and fairly, land can be a
launching pad for the equitable wealth of a nation. It was never by mistake
that the primary aim of the conquest of the past was to acquire land. It
therefore should surprise no one that land will play a central role in the
reversal of such injustices.

Land is not only an asset for food security, but also a deeply emotive
issue, as it is part of the self-definition of a people. It is this
tightrope that our processes of rural development and land reform must seek
to walk.

Cope supports the department in wanting to achieve its objectives, such as
aggressively implementing land reform policies, stimulating agricultural
production with a view to contributing to food security, promoting rural
development, and so on.

It is a fact that our rural poverty is a result of policies that, over
centuries, deliberately sought to impoverish our people in order to use
them as a source of cheap labour. This fundamental injustice of the past
has to be reversed and rural life must be transformed without delay. A
proper and meaningful distribution of land must be undertaken at once. The
major disgruntlement of the people must be properly and expeditiously
addressed.

Lastly, in each area, through the Comprehensive Rural Development
Programme, the CRDP, rural communities themselves must become central to
their own development. This must be our aim. Cope trusts that the Minister
will try to achieve the objectives of this department with single-
mindedness and deep passion. Cope will support this Budget Vote. [Time
expired.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, daar is net een ding waaroor ek
sekerheid wil hê. Die DA het netnou met die agb Minister van Polisie
baklei, en nou sien ek die agb Minister van Polisie gee vir die agb Ellis
sjokolade daar agter u. [Gelag.] Dit is nou amper soos ’n kattegeveg. Ek
weet nie of hulle vry of baklei nie! [Gelag.] (Translation of Afrikaans
paragraph follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, there is only one thing  I want
certainty about. Just now the DA fought with the hon Minister of Police and
now I see the hon Minister of Police giving chocolates to the hon Ellis
there behind you. [Laughter.] It is almost like a cat fight. I do not know
whether they are courting or fighting! [Laughter.]]
Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: the hon member of the FF
Plus is not telling the truth, sir. The hon Minister said he was going to
give me some chocolate and then withdrew it at the last minute, so I didn’t
get it. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): But I saw you chewing something, so
I wonder what you were chewing. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, that was with the compliments of the hon Trevor
Manuel, who is an outstanding chap and I like him very much indeed.
[Laughter.]

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, ek het baie respek vir die agb lid, maar hy
klink nou soos Horwood na wie daar netnou verwys was. [Gelag.]

Om by die debat uit te kom, ek wil vir die agb Minister sê dat grond ’n
baie sensitiewe aangeleentheid is. Dit is ’n emosionele aangeleentheid na
beide kante, maak nie saak na watter kant toe ons praat nie.

Ek wil graag ’n beroep op u doen: u het in u begrotingsdebat gesê u erken
die reg op private besit, maar skaars ’n week daarna sê u in die media dat
u persoonlik saamstem dat die beloftes wat gemaak is in die “struggle” deur
die ANC, naamlik dat grond genasionaliseer moet word, ook u persoonlike
standpunt is.
Agb Minister, in regsterme sê ons dis contradictio in terminis. U skep
totale verwarring. Die grondeienaars vra, “Maar kan ons die agb Minister
vertrou?” Vandag sê hy in sy debat dat hy probeer sekerheid skep, maar
daarna kom praat hy met ’n ander benadering en in ’n ander taal.

U moet daardie sekerheid skep en ek wil vir die agb Minister sê, voordat
die VF Plus nie daardie sekerheid het nie, kan ons u nie in die begroting
ondersteun nie. Sorg dat daardie plase wat alreeds toegeken is produktief
raak, dan sal dit tot voordeel van Suid-Afrika wees.

Ons sal nie hierdie begrotingspos ondersteun nie. Ek dank u. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Chairperson, I have a lot of respect for the hon
member, but he now sounds like Horwood to whom reference was made earlier.
[Laughter.]

To turn to the debate, I want to tell the hon Minister that land is a very
sensitive issue. It is an emotional issue for both sides, it does not
matter to which side we are talking to.

I would like to make an appeal to you: during your Budget Vote debate you
said that you acknowledge the right to private ownership, but not even a
week after that, you said in the media that you personally agree with the
promises made by the ANC during the struggle, namely that land should be
nationalised, and that this is also your personal viewpoint.

Hon Minister in legal terms we call this contradictio in terminis. You are
creating total confusion. The landowners are asking, “But can we trust the
hon Minister?” Today, in his debate he is saying that he is trying to
create certainty, but after that he is talking with a different approach
and in a different language.

You must create that certainty and I want to tell the hon Minister that
unless we as the FF Plus have that, certainty, we cannot support you in
this budget. Ensure that farms that have already been allocated become
productive, and then this will be to the advantage of South Africa.

We will not support this Budget Vote. I thank you.]

Mr P S SIZANI: Chairperson, the ANC supports this budget, as it translates
the 2010-11 and 2012-13 strategic plans of the Department of Rural
Development and Land Reform into programmes to build vibrant, equitable and
sustainable communities in the vast hinterland of South Africa, where the
vast majority of our citizens live.

Further, we do so in full confidence that our communities in these areas
believe that the ANC-led government leads this department with integrity;
unlike the hon member from the FF Plus who claims that the Minister says
one thing today and wakes up and says something else tomorrow, simply
because he did not get the explanation he was looking for. We don’t run the
country by scaring people; we run the country by being certain of every
step we take.

There is no nationalisation policy, hon member. The Green Paper will
explain the processes that the government and the ANC will take in sorting
this out - I repeat – in sorting out the smash-and-grab policies of
previous regimes, from that of colonialism in 1652 until now.

We will sort this out, because there will be certainty at long last for
everybody who holds a piece of paper and calls it his “freehold title”.
Why? Because today we are calling upon those people who hold that title -
ill-begotten title - to come forward so that, once and for all, they have
certainty that this document belongs to them and that the piece of land
that they hold belongs to them. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, I’m thoroughly enjoying myself. We would like to
call for a division.

Division demanded.
The House divided:

   AYES - 216: Abram, S; Adams, P E; Alberts, A D; Baloyi, M R; Bam-
   Mugwanya, V; Bapela, K O; Bhengu, N R; Bhengu, P; Bikani, F C; Bogopane-
   Zulu, H I; Booi, M S; Borman, G M; Boshigo, D F; Botha, Y R; Burgess, C
   V; Buthelezi, M G; Cebekhulu, R N; Chauke, H P; Chikunga, L S; Chohan, F
   I; Coleman, E M; Cronin, J P; Cwele, S C; De Lille, P; Diale, L N;
   Dlakude , D E; Dlamini, B O; Dlamini-Zuma, N C; Dlodlo, A; Doidge, G Q M;
   Dubazana, Z S; Dube, M C; Dudley, C; Dunjwa, M L; Fihla, N B; Fransman, M
   L; Frolick, C T; Gasebonwe, T M A; Gelderblom, J P; Gigaba, K M N; Gina,
   N; Godongwana, E; Gololo, C L; Gona, M F; Groenewald, P J; Gumede, D M;
   Gxowa, N B; Hajaig, F; Hogan, B A; Huang, S-B; Jacobus, L; Jeffery, J H;
   Joemat-Pettersson, T M; Johnson, M; Kekana, C D; Kenye, T E; Khoarai, L
   P; Kholwane, S E; Khumalo, F E; Khunou, N P; Komphela, B M; Koornhof, G
   W; Kota-Fredericks, Z A; Kubayi, M T; Landers, L T; Lekgetho, G; Line, H;
   Lishivha, T E; Luyenge, Z; Maake, J J; Mabasa, X; Mabedla, N R; Mabuza, M
   C; MacKenzie, G D; Madlala, N M; Mafolo, M V; Magagula, V V; Magama, H T;
   Magau, K R; Magazi, M N; Magwanishe, G; Mahlangu-Nkabinde, G L; Makhuba,
   H N; Makhubela-Mashele, L S; Makhubele, Z S; Makwetla, S P; Malgas, H H;
   Maluleka, H P; Manamela, K B; Manana, M C; Mandela, Z M D; Manganye, J;
   Manuel, T A; Mapisa-Nqakula, N N; Martins, B A D; Mashigo, R M; Mashishi,
   A C; Masilo, J M; Masutha, T M; Mataboge, D K; Mathebe, D H; Mathebe, P
   M; Mathibela, N F; Matshoba, J M; Maunye, M M; Mavunda, D W; Maziya, A M;
   McGluwa, J J; Mdakane, M R; Mdladlana, M M S; Mentor, M P; Meshoe, K R J;
   Mgabadeli, H C; Mjobo, L N; Mkhulusi, N N P; Mlambo, E M; Mlangeni, A;
   Mmusi, S G; Mnisi, N A; Mohale, M C; Mokoena, A D; Molebatsi, M A;
   Molewa, B E E; Moloi-Moropa, J C; Morutoa, M R; Moss, L N; Motimele, M S;
   Motshekga, M A; Motshekga, M S; Mpontshane, A M; Msweli, H S; Mthethwa, E
   M; Mthethwa, E N; Mtshali, E; Mulder, C P; Mushwana, F F; Muthambi, A F;
   Nchabeleng, M E; Ndabandaba, L B G; Ndabeni, S T; Ndebele, J S; Ndlovu, V
   B; Nelson, W J; Newhoudt-Druchen, W S; Ngcengwane, N D; Ngcobo, B T;
   Ngcobo, E N N; Ngele, N J; Ngwenya, W; Ngwenya-Mabila, P C; Nhlengethwa,
   D G; Njobe, M A A; Nkwinti, G E; November, N T; Ntapane, S Z; Ntuli, Z C;
   Nyalungu, R E; Nyanda, M F; Nyekemba, E; Oliphant, G G; Oosthuizen, G C;
   Pandor, G N M; Petersen-Maduna, P; Phaahla, M J; Phaliso, M N; Pilusa-
   Mosoane, M E; Radebe, B A; Radebe, G S; Radebe, J T; Ramatlhodi, N A;
   Rantsolase, M A; Saal, G; Scheemann, G D; Segale-Diswai, M J; Selau, G J;
   Sexwale, T M G; Shiceka, S; Sibanyoni, J B; Sibhida, N N; Sisulu, M V;
   Sithole, K P; Sithole, S C N; Sizani, P S; Skosana, J J; Smith, V G;
   Snell, G T; Sogoni, E M; Sonjica, B P; Sonto, M R; Sosibo, J E; Sotyu, M
   M; Suka, L; Sulliman, E M; Sunduza, T B; Surty, M E; Thabethe, E;
   Thobejane, S G; Thomson, B; Tinto, B; Tsebe, S R; Tseke, G K; Tsenoli, S
   L; Tshivhase, T J; Tshwete, P; Tsotetsi, D R; Turok, B; Twala, N M; Vadi,
   I; Van der Merwe, S C; Van Rooyen, D D; Van Wyk, A; Xaba, P P; Yengeni, L
   E; Zikalala, C N Z; Zondi, K M; Zulu, B Z.


   NOES - 53: Boinamo, G G; Bosman, L L; Coetzee, T W; Davidson, I O; De
   Freitas, M S F; Du Toit, N D; Duncan, P C; Ellis, M J; Farrow, S B;
   Fritz, A T; George, D T; James, W G; Kalyan, S V; Kloppers-Lourens, J C;
   Kohler-Barnard, D; Kopane, S P; Lamoela, H; Lee, T D; Lorimer, J R B;
   Lotriet, A; Louw, A; Lovemore, A T; Marais, E J; Marais, S J F; Masango,
   S J; Maynier, D J; Mazibuko, L D; Michael, N W A; Mokgalapa, S; More, E;
   Morgan, G R; Motau, S C; Mubu, K S; Ollis, I M; Rabie, P J; Rabotapi, M
   W; Robinson, D; Ross, D; Schmidt, H C; Selfe, J; Shinn, M R; Smiles, D C;
   Steyn, A; Steyn, A C; Swart, M; Swathe, M M; Van Dalen, P; Van der Linde,
   J J; Van der Walt, D; Van Dyk, S M; Van Schalkwyk, H C; Waters, M;
   Wenger, M.

Vote accordingly agreed to.

Vote No 33 – Science and Technology – put and agreed to.

Vote No 34 - Tourism - put.

Declarations of vote:

Ms M R SHINN: Mr Chairperson, while the DA supports this budget, we do so
with reservations. The total amount allocated by the Treasury is
insufficient for this department’s main task, which is to market South
Africa to the world’s tourists.

Tourism generates considerable profits for the fiscus. The marketing
initiatives of South African tourism helped contribute R173,9 billion to
the economy last year. For the past six years, this ANC government has
encouraged the hospitality industry to invest untold millions of rands in
expanding their operations to ensure they could capitalise on the 2010 Fifa
World Cup.

Tourism, they told us, would be the major money spinner this year and
beyond, but at this crucial moment, this government has cut SA Tourism’s
budget by 20% this year, and during the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework,
by a total of R160 million, funds previously earmarked to exploit the
positive exposure from the World Cup. Any first-year marketing student will
tell you that this is precisely the time when SA Tourism should be
increasing its marketing spend.

To properly resource SA Tourism would require an amount less than one-tenth
of one per cent of our current national Budget. South Africa can easily
afford this when it is viewed against the potential revenue this sector is
expected to generate. We urge the department, as we did during the Budget
debate, to reprioritise its inadequate allocation of funds to ensure SA
Tourism is properly funded. This is essential if the industry is to get its
deserved return on World Cup-inspired investment.

Mr D M GUMEDE: Hon Chairperson, the ANC supports the budget of the
Department of Tourism and in doing so, notes concerns around the reduction
of the budget in line with our national response to the global recession,
and believes that the exposure from the 2010 Fifa World Cup will more than
compensate for this. Therefore it is confident that the industry will
generate more jobs, more sustainable livelihoods, particularly in the rural
areas, thus increasing their share of growth in the GDP for the benefit of
all. The ANC supports this Budget Vote. I thank you.

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 35 - Trade and Industry-put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr G P D MACKENZIE: Chairperson, the biggest issue in South Africa is
unemployment. The great job losses during the recent financial crisis have
been devastating. However, it would be unfair to blame this unemployment
solely on the department. This department has the ability as well as the
resources to address this issue on a large scale. There are millions of
underemployed people walking the streets reduced to begging. These are
people with some sort of skill that can be used within the industrial
sector.

In the Minister’s words, the programmes of his department must interface
with the range of social and economic development strategies across all
spheres of government. Therefore the R2,4 billion training lay-off scheme
must now become active to start employing those who lost their jobs during
the recession.

In addition, while Cope is supportive of the help being offered to
companies in distress, we want the Minister to ensure that these companies,
indeed, have long-term prospects and are therefore deserving of support.
One area in which we can certainly emulate the Asian markets is in
stimulating domestic sales by offering buyers subsidies for the purchase of
durable consumer products fully manufactured in South Africa.

Cope wants to encourage government to provide for eco-housing, co-
ownership, co-housing and modular housing to keep the construction sector
busy. We should strive to build a developmental state which is democratic,
people-driven and people-centred. Cope will support the Vote. Thank you.

Prof B TUROK: Chair, I would like to say that it is a pity that the hon
member from Cope has been absent from the portfolio committee meetings. I
see they are nearly all absent here now, for some reason I do not know. We
can only speculate.

Let me say right away that this Department of Trade and Industry is one of
the most dynamic and innovative of all the departments. They have come
forward with an industrial policy programme which should make a huge
difference to our industrial capacity. Can one ask the question: What would
South Africa be like without a substantial manufacturing industry? That is
the job of this department.

They have launched a programme, and they are doing everything they can to
get it moving. So, it is not a welfare department, and therefore
subsidising consumer goods is the wrong approach. Subsidies can go to the
manufacturing industry where they innovate, build new capacity, and make
South Africa proud. We really do not want subsidies for consumers. That is
the way of a welfare state, which is not the direction that we want to
take. The ANC supports this particular Vote. Thank you.

Vote agreed to.

Vote No 36 – Transport-put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr S B FARROW: Chair, I think next year we are going to reverse the order
of these Votes and start from Vote 37 upwards. When our study group looked
at this department’s Vote for 2010, we were in two minds as to whether to
support it or not. Regretably, the consensus was that we oppose it and wait
and see whether some of the positive signals that the Minister made in his
budget speech become a reality.

It is now a well-known fact that the road infrastructure has been
underfunded for many years now, resulting in many of our roads being in a
state of disrepair. This has happened despite the continued efforts by the
DA to get National Treasury to increase its allocation to the department
through the creation of a dedicated road maintenance fund from the general
fuel levy.

Now that this fund is a reality, it is incumbent upon the Minister to
ensure a regular supply of funds flowing into it in order to gradually
eliminate the backlogs which stand between R75 billion and R100 billion,
and, at the same time, to improve access to basic services for many rural
communities. The promised R3 billion injection over three years is a good
start, but, clearly, it is below the needs.

The same can be said of our rail networks and rolling stock. Our economy
cannot grow on the foundation of a deteriorating infrastructure. Massive
investments are needed and where applicable and appropriate the private
sector must be included to alleviate the fiscal drain that would result if
these backlogs are funded solely from state coffers.

Public transport subsidisation is a necessity in a developing country such
as ours, and with the massive World Cup spend in this area over the past
three years, we have now been left with more mouths to feed in the way of
Bus Rapid Transit systems, BRTs, buses and the recapitalised taxi fleet.
Looking for additional funds is therefore very important if we are not
going to go cap in hand again next year. So, the department must come up
with a model that looks at subsidising the commuter as opposed to the
system presently in use which is open to inefficiencies and abuse.

Finally, a serious look must be taken at the transfers going out into the
hands of some of the department’s agencies, which pay huge salary bills,
and give little back in return, yet ask for more and more funds each year
to undertake their mandates. Put these few things right, Minister, and you
will get our support, but until then, you will have to live with the DA
opposing your Vote, once more.

Ms N R BHENGU: Chairperson, it is interesting for the DA to agree with the
ANC in terms of the Road Maintenance Fund. It is an initiative of the ANC,
the problem was identified by the ANC, we initiated that debate and we are
implementing that programme.

Thina-ke singuKhongolose asikhulumeli ukujabulisa abantu, silungisa
okudinga ukulungiswa futhi sincome okwenziwe. Uma sibuka isabiwozimali
zoMnyango Wezokuthutha sibhekisisa ukuhambela kwezidingo zezokuthutha
nesabiwozimali esinikezwa uMnyango. Uma isabelo sisincane siyasho ukuthi
sincane isabelo futhi izidingo zinkulu.

Sibuka ukusetshenziswa kwemali ngendlela okuyiyo, ukuhleleka ngendlela
ehambisanayo kwezinhlelo zoMnyango nezezinhlaka ezisebenza ngaphansi
koMnyango, ukuthuthuka kwezimpilo zabantu nokwezokunotha ngenxa yezinhlelo
nokusetshenziswa kwemali uMnyango Wezokuthutha. Uhlelo lukaKhongolose
kwezokuthutha luqonde ukwehlisa imali yokuhamba kwabantu nezimpahla,
ukwehlisa isikhathi sokuhamba, ukuxhumanisa okokuhamba ngomgwaqo,
ngezitimela nangezindiza ukuze kwenziwe ukuthi ezokuthutha ziphephe futhi
zithembeke.

Uhlelo lwezokuthutha kulelizwe lucace bha njengezinqe zeselele, ngakho
uKhongolose akanaso isizathu sokungaseseki isabiwomali soMnyango
Wezokuthutha. Isiphukuphuku kuphela esingebone ukuthi ungakanani umsebenzi
owenziwe uhulumeni kaKhongolose, owokwakha izikhumulo zezindiza, imigwaqo,
imizila yezitimela nako konke okwenziwe uMnyango Wezokuthutha
ukulungiselela u-2010 okuyosala kuyifa labantu baseNingizimu Afrika
iminyaka ezayo. UKhongolose uyaseseka isabiwomali soMnyango Wezokuthutha.
[Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[We as the ANC do not speak to please people; we correct what needs to be
corrected and appreciate what has been done. If we look at the budget of
the Department of Transport, we look at its service delivery and the budget
allocated to it. If the allocation is too small, we say so and that more
needs to be done.

We look at whether the money is spent accordingly, and that the
organisation is in line with the structures that work under it. We also
look at socioeconomic development brought about by the programmes and the
way in which the Department of Transport spends its money. The ANC’s
programme for the transport industry is aimed at reducing money and time
spent on travelling in respect of people and goods, and to integrate road
transport, trains and aeroplanes in order to make transport safe and
reliable.

The way in which the transport system of this country operates is very
clear, therefore the ANC has no reason not to support the Budget Vote of
the Department of Transport. Only a foolish person will not see how much
work has been done by the government of the ANC, with regard to the
building of airports, roads, and railway lines. This the Department of
Transport has done in preparation for the 2010 Soccer World Cup which will
remain a legacy for the people of South Africa in some years to come. The
ANC supports the Budget Vote for the Department of Transport. [Applause.]]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance and Freedom Front Plus dissenting).

Vote No 37-Water Affairs-put.

Declarations of vote:

Mr G R MORGAN: Chair, it goes without saying that the water sector is
underfunded in South Africa. That is not the reason the DA opposes this
budget. There are several other departments which could do with more funds.
The problem with the Department of Water Affairs is that its outcomes are
poor, its long-term planning is abysmal, and its ability to enforce the
provisions of the National Water Act is weak.

There is a skills crisis in this department, and no discernable plan to
fill the vacancies, despite the commitments of the Water Sector Leadership
Group. Over 200 posts for civil engineers are vacant, which is about two
thirds of the full complement needed. Notably, the director-general of this
department has been on special leave, on full pay, for more than 10 months
now, with no end in sight.

While the acid mine drainage below the city of Johannesburg rises by 15
metres a month and while acid mine drainage is already decanting into the
Tweelopiespruit, the department has, at best, come up with short-term
solutions, albeit very tenuous ones, to deal with the disaster that acid
mine drainage will cause in Gauteng and the surrounding provinces. Despite
the first warnings of acid mine drainage problems emerging more than a
decade ago, there is still no acceptable response to it. Added to that,
more than 100 mines in South Africa are still operating without water
licences and hence, are in transgression of the National Water Act.

While we welcome the earmarked funds for enforcement and compliance, and
eagerly await the results, it is simply woeful that there are only 14
accredited Blue Scorpions in South Africa. The number of transgressions by
municipalities when it comes to the discharge of sewage into the
environment is substantial and growing. There is no doubt that we are
facing localised water quality crises. Madibeng municipality and the sewer
that the Hartbeespoort Dam has become is just one example.

The enforcement protocols by this department are weak and must be improved,
but that will require political will. Who will step up to the plate? We
will see over the coming year. The DA does not support this Budget Vote.

Ms M M SOTYU: Chairperson, it is obvious that the ANC supports the Budget
Vote of this important commodity, water, which gives life to the people of
South Africa, including the DA.

We acknowledge the challenges raised by the DA, but the DA knows very well
that there are mechanisms that have been put in place by the department to
address some of these challenges. On the issue of the director-general’s
suspension ...

... lithanda izindaba leli lungu ... [... this member is inquisitive ...]

... and knows very well that we did get a progress report from the Minister
a month ago and we know exactly how far that report is at this moment.

Ukuthanda izindaba nokuthanda ukubukwa ... [That is inquisitiveness and
wanting to show off ...]

On the issue of the vacancies in the department, you know, Chair, as well
as we do that the challenge we are faced with in that department is that of
scarce skills: design engineers, construction engineers, technical
engineers, and so forth. The problem that we are faced with is for these
vacancies.

The responses that we get ...

... ngenxa yengcindezelo kolwabo uhlangothi ... [... because of the
pressure on their side ... ]

... are people that were advantaged to have those courses in previous
years. It is white males who apply for these vacancies. I do not know if
there is a better word to describe white males. In respect of disadvantaged
communities, that is the graduates from our own community, the department
took a decision that they are going to invite all these graduates into the
department so that there will be shadow engineers within the department ...

... basebenze namaxhegu ahleli phaya angafuni ukuphuma ... [... who would
be working with older people who do not want to retire ... ]

... so that they should transfer their skill to these young, previously
disadvantaged students. The ANC supports this Budget Vote. [Time expired.]

Vote agreed to (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

Schedule put and agreed to.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

There was no debate.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 20:44.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             FRIDAY, 14 MAY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

  1. Submission of Private Member’s Legislative Proposal

       1) The following private member's legislative proposal was submitted
          to the Speaker on 13 May 2010 in accordance with Rule 234:

            a) Legislative proposal to repeal the South African Boxing Act,
               No 11 of 2001 (Mr T D Lee).

          Referred to the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
          Proposals and Special Petitions for consideration and report.

  2. Membership of Committees

     1) The following changes to Committee membership have been made by
        AZAPO:


          Portfolio Committee on Basic Education


          Appointed:   Dikobo, Mr K J (Alt)


          Portfolio Committee on Health


          Appointed:   Dikobo, Mr K J (Alt)


          Portfolio Committee on Higher Education


          Appointed:   Dikobo, Mr K J


          Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises


          Appointed:   Dikobo, Mr K J


          Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology


          Appointed:   Dikobo, Mr K J (Alt)

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) on the South
        African Gender Barometer Project  –  2009.

    (b)     Report of the Commission  for  Gender  Equality  (CGE)  on  the
        Gender in the Curriculum - 2007.

    (c)     Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) on Widowhood
        Rites and Rights - 2008.

    (d)     Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE)  on  Threads
        of Pain and Resilience - 2008.

    (e)     Report of the Commission  for  Gender  Equality  (CGE)  in  the
        Private Sector- December 2008.

    (f)     Report of the Commission  for  Gender  Equality  (CGE)  on  the
        National Dialogue on Elections 2009.

    (g)     Research Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE)  on
        the Victims’ Charter – February 2009.

    (h)     Report of the Commission  for  Gender  Equality  (CGE)  on  the
        National Monitoring Election - 2009.

2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs


     a) General Notice No 313 published in Government Gazette No 33116
        dated 16 April 2010: Regulations:  Proper administration of the
        Vredefort Dome World Heritage Site:  Invitation to submit written
        representations on or objections to the draft regulations, in terms
        of the World Heritage Convention  Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).

     b) Government Notice No R.259 published in Government Gazette No 33072
        dated 31 March 2010: Regulations:  Fees for the provision of
        aviation meteorological services, in terms of the South African
        Weather Service Act, 2001 (Act No 8 of  2001).
     c) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
        Regulations: Listing Notice 1:  List of activities and competent
        authorities identified in terms of sections 24(2) and 24D of the
        National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of  1998).

     d) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
        Regulations: Listing Notice 2:  List of activities and competent
        authorities identified in terms of sections 24(2) and 24D of the
        National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of  1998).

     e) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
        Regulations: Listing Notice 3:  List of activities and competent
        authorities identified in terms of sections 24(2) and 24D of the
        National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of  1998).

     f) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
        Regulations: Environmental Management Framework Regulations of the
        National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

     g) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
        Regulations: Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations under
        sections 24(5), 24M and 44 of the National Environmental Management
        Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of  998).
                             MONDAY, 17 MAY 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     1) Report of the South African delegation to the 26th session of the
        SADC Parliamentary Forum held in Zimbabwe from 18 to 27 November
        2009.  Report available on the parliamentary website:
        www.parliament.gov.za .

Referred to the Parliamentary Group on International Relations for
        consideration.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT - T100517e-insert1 – PAGES 1481 - 1489

CREDA INSERT - T100517e-insert2 – PAGES 1490 - 1506

                            TUESDAY, 18 MAY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159


    (1)    Legal Practice Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of Justice
         and Constitutional Development.

    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
    Development and the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
    Development.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) General Report of the Auditor-General on the National Audit
        Outcomes for 2008-09 [RP 173-2009].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT - T100518e-insert1 – PAGES -1513 - 1536

CREDA INSERT - T100518e-insert2 – PAGES - 1537

CREDA INSERT - T100518e-insert3 – PAGES - 1538

                           WEDNESDAY, 19 MAY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker
 1. Replacement of board members of Human Sciences Research Council

    A letter dated 4 May 2010 has been received from the Minister of
    Science and Technology, informing the House that she has appointed,
    from the shortlist approved by the National Assembly on 20 August 2009
    and in accordance with section 5 of the Human Sciences Research Council
    Act (No 17 of 2008), Dr B O Tema to replace Prof S Zinn and Prof T
    Pillay to replace Prof P Naidoo as board members of the Human Sciences
    Research Council.

    Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Science and Technology.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Government Notice No R. 293 published in Government Gazette No
         33112 dated 13 April 2010: Appointment of an Authorised Dealer in
         Foreign Exchange with Limited Authority, in terms of the South
         African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).

    (b)     Government Notice No R. 283 published in Government Gazette No
         33103 dated 16 April 2010: Amendment of Rules (DAR/69), in terms of
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (c)     Government Notice No R. 340 published in Government Gazette No
         33140 dated 30 April 2010: Amendment of Rules (DAR/70), in terms of
         the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

2.    The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

      a) Government Notice No 52 published in Government Gazette No 32898
         dated 29 January 2010:Levies on Fish and Fish Products, in terms of
         the Sea Fishery Act, 1988 (Act No 12 of 1988).

      b) Government Notice No 53 published in Government Gazette No 32898
         dated 29 January 2010: Fishing Harbour Fees, in terms of the Marine
         Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18 of 1998).
                            THURSDAY, 20 MAY 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1. The Minister of Communications

      a) Framework for performance management system for Icasa chairperson
         and councillors, submitted for consultation in terms of section 6A
         of the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa Act (No
         13 of 2000).

                             FRIDAY, 21 MAY 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Submission of the Financial and Fiscal Commission on the
        Division of Revenue Bill for 2011-2012, tabled in terms of section
        9(1) of the Intergovernmental Fiscal Relations Act, 1997 (Act No 97
        of 1997).

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Assembly

CREDA INSERT PAGES 1615 - 1627

                            TUESDAY, 25 MAY 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on an Assessment
        of the State of Human Resource Management in the Public Service –
        November 2009 [RP 33-2010].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

   1. Progress report of the Portfolio Committee on  Communications  on  the
      Petition regarding the situation at Unitra Community Radio,  dated  11
      May 2010.
   2.
The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having  considered  the  Petition
regarding the situation at Unitra Community Radio, reports as follows:

A petition regarding the situation at Unitra Community Radio,  submitted  in
terms of Rule 312 by Dr Z Luyenge, was referred to the  Portfolio  Committee
on Communications on Wednesday, 10 March 2010.

Complaints of the Petitioners
The Petitioners who are members  of  OR  Tambo  community  working  for  the
Unitra Community Radio Station, which  is  situated  at  the  Walter  Sisulu
University (WSU), Nelson Mandela Drive raised  a  dissatisfaction  with  the
way in which the radio station  is  managed  by  Mr  Mbulelo  Mneno  and  Mr
Xabendlini, who claims to be the  Acting  Station  Manager  as  well  as  Mr
Yolelo who said he is a Member of the Management Board of the Station.

Messrs Mneno and Yolelo were elected in absentia and were not known  by  the
community of Mthatha.  Their election was influenced by a  group  of  people
who conspired with Mr Xabendlini and now no longer support  him  because  of
his dishonesty and fraudulence.

The community is not happy about the following:

    • Disregard and lack of interest in workers’ rights
    • The misuse of the  community  radio  station  to  sabotage  government
      programmes
    • Breaching the conditions of the licence
    • Corruption and nepotism
    • Giving the station a bad image
    • Managing the station through the courts of law
    • Defying government’s structures
    • Changing the aims of the stations for their own protection
    • Disregarding the voice of the community
    • Independent Communications Authority of South Africa’s (ICASA) Role

Update from the ICASA

Through interaction with ICASA, the Portfolio  Committee  on  Communications
received the following update:

A charge sheet has been drafted by the Compliance Unit  for  the  Complaints
and Compliance Committee (CCC) to consider convening a  hearing  in  respect
of the contraventions on matters of statutory obligations.

A letter has been written to the  Unitra  Community  Radio  Station  Manager
requesting a register and minutes of the  meeting  where  a  resolution  was
taken to adopt a revised Constitution.

Progress to date

The due process is still taking its course in line with the procedures.

The Committee will be informed of any further developments.

Hon. I Vadi
Chairperson: Portfolio Committee on Communications

                           WEDNESDAY, 26 MAY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)    The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
      Finance:

         (a)      Government Notice No R. 269 published in Government
             Gazette No 33087, dated 9 April 2010: Amendment of Schedule No
             3 (No 3/658) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise
             Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

         (b)      Government Notice No R. 289 published in Government
             Gazette No 33109, dated 13 April 2010: Correction to Notice No
             R. 269 in respect of an amendment to Schedule No 3 (No 3/659)
             in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964
             (Act No 91 of 1964).

         (c)      Government Notice No R. 341 published in Government
             Gazette No 33140, dated 30 April 2010: Amendment to Schedule
             No 1 (No 1/1/1403) in terms of section 48 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

         (d)      Government Notice No R. 342 published in Government
             Gazette No 33140, dated 30 April 2010: Amendment to Schedule
             No 4 (No 4/330) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and
             Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

         (e)      Government Notice No R. 357 published in Government
             Gazette No 33165, dated 7 May 2010: Correction to Notice No
             1256 in respect of an amendment to Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1404)
             in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of
             1964).

         (f)      Government Notice No R. 358 published in Government
             Gazette No 33165, dated 7 May 2010: Amendment to Schedule No 4
             (No 4/331) in terms of section 75 of the Customs and Excise
             Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

          g) Government Notice No R. 293 published in Government Gazette No
             33112, dated 13 April 2010: Appointment of authorised dealer
             in foreign exchange with limited authority in terms of the
             South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No 90 of 1989).


          h) Government Notice No R. 283 published in Government Gazette No
             33103, dated 16 April 2010: Amendment of Rules (DAR/69) in
             terms of section 49 and section 120 of the Customs and Excise
             Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


          i) Government Notice No R. 340 published in Government Gazette No
             33140, dated 30 April 2010: Amendment of Rules (DAR/70) in
             terms of section 6 and section 120 of the Customs and Excise
             Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (2)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Women, Youth, Children and People with Disabilities and to the
         Portfolio Committee on Basic Education:

         (a)      Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) on
             Gender in the Curriculum – 2007.
    (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Women, Youth, Children and People with Disabilities and to the
         Portfolio Committee on Labour:

         (a)      Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) in the
             Private Sector – December 2008.

    (4)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Women, Youth, Children and People with Disabilities and to the
         Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs:

         (a)      Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE): The
             National Dialogue on Elections 2009 & Gender Equality Report.

         (b)      Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE):
             National Monitoring Election Report – 2009.

    (5)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Women, Youth, Children and People with Disabilities:

         (a)      Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE): South
             African Gender Barometer Project – The State of Women
             Empowerment and Gender Equality.

         (b)      Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE):
             Threads of Pain and Resilience – 2008.

    (6)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Women, Youth, Children and People with Disabilities and to the
         Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development:

         (a)      Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE):
             Widowhood: Rites and Rights – 2008.

         (b)      Research Report of the Commission for Gender Equality
             (CGE) on the Victims’ Charter – February 2009.


    (7)    The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
         Water and Environmental Affairs:

         (a)      General Notice No 313 published in Government Gazette No
             33116, dated 16 April 2010: Regulations for the proper
             administration of the Vredefort Dome World Heritage Site:
             Invitation to submit written representations on, or objections
             to, the draft regulations made in terms of section 44(1) of
             the World Heritage Convention Act, 1999 (Act No 49 of 1999).

         (b)      Government Notice No R.259 published in Government Gazette
             No 33072, dated 31 March 2010: Regulations made in terms of
             section 28 of the South African Weather Service Act, 2001 (Act
             No 8 of  2001) regarding fees for the provision of aviation
             meteorological services.

          c) Government Notice No 52 published in Government Gazette No
             32898, dated 29 January 2010: Levies on fish and fish products
             in terms of the Sea Fishery Act, 1988 (Act No 12 of 1988).

          d) Government Notice No 53 published in Government Gazette No
             32898, dated 29 January 2010: Fishing harbour fees determined
             in terms of the Marine Living Resources Act, 1998 (Act No 18
             of 1998).

          e) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
             Regulations: Listing Notice 1:  List of activities and
             competent authorities identified in terms of sections 24(2)
             and 24D of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998
             (Act No 107 of  1998).

          f) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
             Regulations: Listing Notice 2:  List of activities and
             competent authorities identified in terms of sections 24(2)
             and 24D of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998
             (Act No 107 of  1998).


         (g)      Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
             Regulations: Listing Notice 3:  List of activities and
             competent authorities identified in terms of sections 24(2)
             and 24D of the National Environmental Management Act, 1998
             (Act No 107 of  1998).

          h) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
             Regulations: Environmental Management Framework Regulations of
             the National Environmental Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of
             1998).

          i) Draft amendments to the Environmental Impact Assessment
             Regulations: Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations made
             under sections 24(5), 24M and 44 of the National Environmental
             Management Act, 1998 (Act No 107 of 1998).

    (8)    The following paper is referred to the Committee on Public
    Accounts:

          a) General Report of the Auditor-General on the National Audit
             Outcomes for 2008-09 [RP173-2009].

    (9)    The following paper is referred to the Joint Committee on Ethics
         and Members’ Interests:

          a) Report of the Public Protector on an investigation conducted
             in terms of section 3(1) of the Executive Members’ Ethics Act,
             1998 (No 82 of 1998), the President’s comments thereon and
             action taken in regard to the report’s recommendations.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance
    (a)     2009 Tax Statistics - Joint publication of the National
         Treasury and the South African Revenue Service.

2.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

CREDA INSERT - T100526e-insert1 – PAGES 1668 - 1712

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT - T100526e-insert2 – PAGES 1712 - 1716

2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Social  Development  on  the  Social
   Assistance Amendment Bill [B5-2010] (National  Assembly  –  Section  76),
   dated 18 May 2010

The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Social  Development,  having  considered  the
subject  of  the  Social  Assistance  Amendment  Bill  [B5-2010]   (National
Assembly – Section 76), referred to it and classified by the  Joint  Tagging
Mechanism as a section 76 Bill, reports the  Bill  with  amendments  [B5A  –
2010].

The Committee further wishes to report that:

The Department of Health made a presentation before  the  Committee  on  the
state of readiness to implement the Harmonised  Assessment  Tool  (HAT)  and
related matters. The department reported that it is not ready  to  implement
the HAT to  assess  patients’  eligibility  for  disability  grants  due  to
shortage of trained health professionals to  use  the  HAT.  The  department
will need to diagnose and treat patients  with  disabilities  (as  a  matter
course) and ensure  easy  access  for  patients  to  treatment  for  chronic
illnesses. In order to provide the best care possible, there is  a  need  to
strengthen the Primary Health System in various ways.  The  department  also
reported that the key to  strengthening  the  Primary  Health  Care  is  the
provision of the primary  care  in  an  integrated  manner.   More  time  is
required to improve services at Primary Health Care  level  and  to  improve
access to such services.

Given the above-mentioned concerns, the Committee therefore  agreed  to  not
approve the clauses defining disability and the related  clauses  therewith.
The Committee therefore recommends that those clauses be  referred  back  to
Cabinet for its reconsideration.

Report to be considered.


