---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 23 November 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-11-23
---

TUESDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 10:00.

The Deputy Chairperson (Ms T C Memela) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Hon Deputy Chairperson, I give notice that I
shall move at the next sitting of the Council:

     That the Council —


      1) notes with profound sadness and deep sorrow the passing away of
         the hon Mrs Bertha Nonkumbi Gxowa who passed away on Friday, 19
         November, only a few days before her 77th birthday;


      2) further notes that the hon Mrs Gxowa or Ma Bertha, as she was
         affectionately known, was born on 28 November 1934 in Germiston
         and will be laid to rest at the Thomas Nkobi, South Park, cemetery
         in Ekurhuleni, Johannesburg.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, may I
propose that you hold that and pass it as a motion without notice. I think
it will carry more weight. Thank you.

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Hon Deputy Chairperson, I give notice that I shall move
at the next sitting of the Council:

    That the Council –


      1) notes that Thursday, 25 November, marks the beginning of the 16
         Days of Activism for No Violence against Women and Children
         Campaign, which is an international campaign to raise awareness
         about the persistence of violence against women and children in
         many societies across the globe;


      2) further notes that the theme for this year is “Don't look away, act
         against abuse”, which focuses on the unfinished agenda of uniting
         the global community to speak out against gender-based violence and
         the abuse of women and children in their homes and communities; and

      3) reaffirms its support for the 16 Days of Activism for No Violence
         against Women and Children Campaign and commits to brazenly speak
         out against the abuse of women and children in our society.


Mr K A SINCLAIR: Hon Deputy Chairperson, on a point of order: I just want
to take you back to the decision that you have made regarding the notice of
motion that was moved by the hon Chief Whip. In my understanding it is the
prerogative of the member to decide how to present the motion.
Procedurally, I don’t think it was right that you made that ruling.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, I think I
have made a correct proposal to the respective Chief Whip and that is why
she did not even query it, but I will call her when it is motions without
notice. Thus far, I think I was correct.

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Hon Deputy Chairperson, I give notice that at the next
sitting of the Council I shall move on behalf of the DA:

    That the Council –


     1) notes that the National Youth Development Agency, NYDA, is using
        the World Festival of Youth and Students to partner with radical
        groups such as the Workers’ Party of North Korea and Zanu-PF of
        Zimbabwe;
     2) further notes that a budget adjustment of R29 million was approved
        for the nine-day extravaganza with 30 000 delegates, ill-afforded
        by the mandate of the NYDA;


     3) recognises that the NYDA approached all nine provinces for a R4
        million contribution to the festival;


     4) requests that a financial report be submitted to this House that
        clearly indicates the expenses of this delusional grandeur, as well
        as a report by each of the nine provinces as to what provincial
        contributions were made for which expenses; and


     5) calls on the President, members of Cabinet, Parliament, state
        departments and the private sector not to attend the festival as
        such attendance would legitimise the undemocratic, oppressive and
        totalitarian regimes associated with the festival.


Mr D A WORTH: Hon Deputy Chairperson, I give notice that at the next
sitting of the Council I shall move on behalf of the DA:

    That the Council, on behalf of the Democratic Alliance and all members
    of the National Council of Provinces –


      1) wishes to thank the support staff of Parliament for the
         organisation and arrangements for “Taking Parliament to the
         People” in Qwaqwa, Free State province;


      2) recognises that the facilities such as clean toilets, a huge
         marquee tent, accommodation and the food was a big improvement on
         the previous “Taking Parliament to the People” programme; and

      3) is wholeheartedly and truly thankful for the assistance provided
         to members by the support staff.

Mrs B L ABRAHAMS: Hon Deputy Chairperson, I give notice that at the next
sitting of the Council I shall move on behalf of the DA:

    That the Council –


      1) notes that the acid mine water crisis will reach disastrous and
         irreversible proportions at the Witwatersrand by February 2012;


      2) further notes that the critical level will be when the acid mine
         water reaches a level of 150 m below the surface at the South
         Western vertical shaft at ERPM just south of Germiston;


      3) recognises that it is predicted that a few weeks after February
         2012, when the ground water will be contaminated, it will flow
         into the central business district in Boksburg from the Cinderella
         East Shaft at an average flow rate of 57 megalitres per day;


      4) requests that the task team, Cabinet, and Parliament take this
         matter and their responsibility seriously in respect of disaster
         management and prevention, and take immediate necessary action to
         resolve as much of the disaster as possible with timeous
         preventative measures within the next few weeks; and


      5) calls on the relevant stakeholders to inform this House of the
         financial management and progress of the process.

Mr D B FELDMAN: Hon Deputy Chairperson, I give notice that at the next
sitting of the Council I shall move on behalf of Cope:

    That the Council –


      1) notes the failure of government to act decisively against those
         drug dealers who are robbing Aids patients of their life-
         supporting drugs to create a concoction, with dagga, called
         “Whoonga”;


      2) further notes failure of government to go on the offensive to win
         public support in order to stamp out this practice successfully;
         and

      3) recognises the urgent necessity for government to not only be
         highly proactive in this regard, but to be seen by the public to
         be proactive.

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Hon Deputy Chairperson, I give notice that at the next
sitting of the Council I shall move on behalf of Cope:

    That the Council –


      1) notes the unacceptable lack of adequate security in our courts to
         allow for safe and incident-free hearing of cases against those
         suspects who are brought before these courts;


      2) further notes the frequency with which those in detention escape
         from court cells, as happened once again in the Somerset West
         regional court on Friday, 19 November 2010, when six detainees
         escaped from their cells; and


      3) recognises the need for government to ensure that security within
         the court precincts is thoroughly reviewed as a matter of utmost
         urgency.
Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chairperson, on a point of order: I also have one on
Ma Bertha. Can I also read it? [Interjections.] I am going to read it now.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I actually appealed to
hon Ntwanambi to hold back the motion. We can’t have two motions on one
thing.

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chairperson, I don’t think it will be proper to
suppress what Cope wants to say about Ma Bertha’s funeral.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: I don’t think there should be an argument. Hon
Bloem is out of order. He is now speaking as hon Bloem and not as an
organisation or a party. I think we should not even engage in dialogues
here.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, let me
consult. Can you take your seat?

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chairperson, please consult.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, actually
there was no need for even discussing the issue. The mistake you have made
is that you say you are no longer talking as an hon member in this Chamber
but that you are now promoting your party. I actually explained to you that
I had asked the hon Chief Whip to hold back. So, let’s not argue about it.
Take your seat. Thank you.

Mr D V BLOEM: Thank you, I will give it to the newspapers.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, are you
saying that I must take it as a threat?

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chairperson, no, not at all.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Can you then withdraw
what you have just said?

Mr D V BLOEM: In what way, Deputy Chairperson?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, can you
withdraw it?

Mr D V BLOEM: In doing what, Deputy Chair? I am going to give it. Even if I
do read it, I will give it to the newspaper.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, I will not
argue with you. Take your seat. I want an apology in writing around that
threat.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Deputy Chairperson, you have ruled. You have
moved and there is time set for motions and you can’t go beyond that.
Members must understand that.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I am sorry about it.
I’ll try next time.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Deputy Chairperson, I move ... [Interjections.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chairperson, on a point of order: The member there has
raised his hand and now the Chief Whip is making a ruling by telling you
that you ... [Interjections.] It is not correct.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, I looked
around and the last person ... [Interjections.] Unfortunately, the time is
up.

Mr O DE BEER: Deputy Chairperson, on a point of order: This Council started
at 10:00. It is now 10:15. In terms of the 20 minutes allocated for
motions, I am still in the timeframe of this Council.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): When did you have your
hand up?

Mr O DE BEER: Deputy Chairperson, at the beginning.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): She also noted the
people and I verified my list against this list. May I explain to the hon
members that 20 minutes are allocated for both notices of motions and
motions without notice. Is that understood? Thank you.

                   PASSING ON OF MRS BERTHA NONKUMBI GXOWA

                             (Draft Resolution)


                            Motion of condolence

                    (The late Mrs Bertha Nonkumbi Gxowa)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

     That the Council -

        1) notes with profound sadness and deep sorrow the passing away of
           the hon Mrs Bertha Nonkumbi Gxowa on Friday, 19 November, only a
           few days before her 77th birthday;


        2) further notes that the hon Mrs Gxowa or Ma Bertha, as she was
           affectionately known, was born on 28 November 1934 in Germiston
           and will be laid to rest at the Thomas Nkobi, South Park
           cemetery in Ekurhuleni, Johannesburg;


        3) acknowledges that Ma Bertha dedicated her life to serving the
           people of South Africa, and was a Member of Parliament for the
           past 16 years, and played a pivotal role in the fight against
           apartheid, and served the national democratic revolution as a
           trade unionist, treason trialist, and as one of the organisers
           of the 1956 women’s march to the Union Buildings;


        4) further acknowledges that Ma Bertha was an embodiment of the
           principles, values and character of the African National
           Congress, and the African National Congress Women’s League, and
           that her untimely death has robbed us of a distinguished cadre
           of the ANC who dedicated her life to changing the lives of the
           people of South Africa;


        5) takes this opportunity to dip its head for comfort on the
           shoulders of a nation in mourning and on the chests of so many
           of our people who are mourning with the Gxowa family, friends,
           and comrades;


        6) hopes that they will find comfort in knowing that Ma Bertha’s
           dedication, commitment, words and deeds will serve as a living
           memorial and a living heritage for many of us who know that she
           shared her life with our nation; and


        7) calls on the House to observe a moment of silence.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

      condolences to family of MURDERed British tourist, Ms Anni Dewani

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council –

      1) notes with utter dismay the shocking developments that seem to
         suggest that the slaying of Ms Anni Dewani, the British tourist
         who was hijacked with her new husband Mr Shrien Dewani in
         Gugulethu last week and later found dead in Khayelitsha, might
         have been a planned hit;


      2) further notes that as the British tabloid The Sun raised serious
         allegations about the financial position of Mr Dewani and that Mr
         Dewani refuted the claims and allegations as untrue, the chauffeur
         Mr Zola Robert Tongo has since been charged with murder and
         intends to turn state witness and enter into a plea bargain with
         the state;


      3) takes this opportunity to convey its profound condolences to the
         family of Ms Dewani who was cremated in London last Saturday; and


       4) extends its congratulations and profound appreciation to the
          police for their relentless effort to solve the case, and to the
          people of Khayelitsha and Gugulethu for assisting the police with
          solving this repulsive and senseless murder.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

    Call for investigation into escape of six detainees at Somerset west
                             magistrate’s court

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council –

      1) notes that six detainees escaped from the Somerset West
         Magistrate’s Court on Friday, 19 November 2010;
      2) further notes that the detainees overpowered a police officer and
         took his firearm and keys to the holding facility before they
         managed to escape through the main door leading to the cells; and

      3) takes this opportunity to call on the Ministers of Justice and
         Constitutional Development, Correctional Services, and Police to
         investigate the incident and to strengthen security in courts.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

  Around-the-world journey IN A TRACTOR TO RAISE AWARENESS OF VIOLENCE AND
               CRIME, PARTICULARLY AGAINST WOMEN AND CHILDREN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr R A LEES: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council –

      1) notes the incredible mission of Tony Tractor, real name Tony
         Psaila, who will embark — from Cape Town today, 23 November 2010 —
         on the next leg of his around-the-world journey driving a 1948
         Vaaljaapie Ferguson tractor at a speed of just 22 km/h;
      2) further notes that Tony has undertaken this journey to raise funds
         and build awareness for victims of violence and rape, and
         particularly with regard to abuse against women and children;


       3) acknowledges that Tony embarked upon his epic journey from Howick
          in KwaZulu-Natal on Women’s Day, 9 August 2010;


       4) recognises that he has set himself a target to raise R1 billion
          whilst travelling through countries such as Australia, New
          Zealand, the United States of America, Canada, Russia, Europe and
          the United Kingdom; and

       5) wishes Psaila well on his journey, and urges all citizens of the
          world to support this worthy project.


Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

 Refusal of WESTERN CAPE MEC to meet with backyard dwellers AND RESIDENTS OF
                                 KHAYELITSHA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M P SIBANDE: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

     That the Council –
       1) notes that Western Cape member of the executive committee, MEC Mr
          Bonginkosi Madikizela, is refusing to meet a group of backyard
          dwellers in Khayelitsha to resolve a long-standing dispute over
          the allocation of housing in the area and the allocation of
          houses in a new housing project;


       2) further notes that the Khayelitsha backyard dwellers are
          insisting that the more than 100 houses be allocated evenly
          between those from the area living in backyard shacks and
          families from other townships;


       3) takes this opportunity to condemn MEC Madikizela’s refusal to
          meet the backyard dwellers and for labelling them silly; and

       4) calls on the MEC to meet the residents to resolve the situation.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Are there any
objections to the motion? [Interjections.] In the light of the objection,
the motion cannot be proceeded with. The motion without notice will now
become a notice of motion.

                    Disregard FOR parliament by ministers

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council –


      1) notes the increasing disregard that many Ministers have for
         Parliament and in particular their unwillingness to account to
         Parliament as envisaged in the Constitution;


      2) further notes the continued extent to which the executive is
         denuding Parliament of its real status and power in its daily
         interaction with the two Houses of Parliament; and

      3) recognises the urgent necessity for restoring to the legislature
         its full authority so that Parliament can indeed remain a true
         watchdog over the activities of the executive and not become its
         tame lapdog.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Are there any
objections. [Interjections.] In the light of the objection the motion
cannot be proceeded with. The motion without notice will now become a
notice of motion.

         Congratulations to newly appointed premier ms Thandi Modise

                             (Draft Resolution)
Ms R N RASMENI: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council –

      1) notes that the Deputy Secretary-General of the African National
         Congress, Comrade Thandi Modise, was sworn in as the Premier of
         the North West Province on Friday, 19 November 2010;


      2) further notes that Premier Modise’s political activity began in
         1976 when, as a student, she was jailed for 10 years for fighting
         the apartheid regime, and she has served the ANC in various
         capacities, including as a member of the African National Congress
         Women’s Executive Committee since 1994, and as deputy president
         from 1994 until 2004, Speaker of the North West province in the
         last term of Parliament, and she was elected Deputy Secretary-
         General of the ANC in Polokwane in 2007, and chaired the Portfolio
         Committee on Defence, the Joint Standing Committee on Defence, and
         the Ad Hoc Committee for the Ratification of the Convention to
         Eliminate All Forms of Discrimination against Women in the
         National Assembly; and

      3) takes this opportunity to congratulate Premier Modise on her new
         deployment and wishes her well in our national quest to build a
         better South Africa and advance the lives of our people.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
Mr A WATSON: Deputy Chair, I just made an interjection to say that we
should give it a try but I don’t think she will succeed. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson and the rest
of the people in this House, can we keep to ourselves our personal
objections to whatever is said. [Interjections.]

Mr A WATSON: [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): No, that is fine, keep
it to yourself.

An HON MEMBER: Deputy Chairperson, I think hon Watson has not learnt from
what the President said to him on Friday. [Interjections.] He must take the
lesson from that.

Mr A WATSON: [Inaudible.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Can you allow us to
proceed? Thank you.

             five-year-old boy mauled to death by Rottweiler dog

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M W MAKGATE: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council –

      1) notes a tragic incident in which a five-year-old boy was mauled to
         death by a Rottweiler dog in Durbanville in Cape Town on Saturday,
         20 November 2010;


       2) further notes that the dog was released from the back section of
          the house in order to guard the home owners’ wedding gifts;


       3) takes this opportunity to convey its profound condolences to the
          families of the deceased boy, especially the mother of the boy,
          Ms Shannon Saunders, and the boy’s friend Clint who helplessly
          witnessed the tragic incident; and


         4) calls on families with aggressive dogs to ensure that they are
            secured all the time, especially where there are children.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

            WASTEFUL EXPENDITURE BY MINISTERS OR DEPUTY MINISTERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D V BLOEM: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

    That the Council –


      1) notes the ongoing saga of yet another Minister or Deputy Minister
         in the government incurring expenditure running into the millions
         by regularly booking into a five-star hotel, several days a week,
         for a stretch of four years, at a cost to the taxpayer of around R5
         000 a night, in spite of having his official residence only a few
         hundred metres away;


      2) further notes the failure of the government to curb such
         unnecessary expenditure considering that it is now having to deal
         with a growing deficit; and

      3) recognises the dismal failure of government to inculcate a higher
         moral conscience in public representatives and government
         Ministers, seeing how morally bankrupt many of them are.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Is there an objection
to the motion without notice?

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): In the light of the
objections, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice
will now become a notice of motion.


              INDEPENDENT POLICE INVESTIGATIVE DIRECTORATE BILL



                CIVILIAN SECRETARIAT FOR POLICE SERVICE BILL


               (Consideration of Bills and of Reports thereon)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Deputy Chair, members of the National
Council of Provinces, the Independent Police Investigative Directorate
Bill, together with the Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill placed
before this House, form an important part of our approach to policing and
the type of force we envisage and wish to move towards.

We once again wish to re-emphasise that as the ANC government and current
police administration, we have committed ourselves to actively combating
crime, including serious and violent crime, by being tougher on criminals
and organised syndicates.
However, we have always emphasised that this tough stance on crime must be
balanced by our philosophy that policing must also be oriented towards
having respect for human rights, being community centred, and being biased
in favour of the weak and the safety needs of society.

These two pieces of legislation seek to establish and put in place
mechanisms that will ensure that the rule of law is upheld at all material
times, even by the law enforcement agencies themselves. Therefore, this
approach is a far cry from the alleged militarisation approach that had
been bandied about by some in our society.

The Bills were concurrently introduced in Parliament. These two Bills speak
to our commitment to civilian oversight of the police. The issue of
civilian oversight of the police is not just a mere rhetorical slogan on
our part, but is fundamental to our policing approach.

The fact that we have introduced these Bills before introducing other
pieces of legislation further confirms the seriousness with which we value
this function. This seriousness affirms our view that this government and
Ministry of Police do not have the desire for a police state, neither is
there the likelihood of this country moving towards a such state at any
point.

In changing the focus and the name of the Independent Complaints
Directorate, ICD, to the Independent Police Investigative Directorate,
Ipid, we are sending out a clear message that the new body will not just
focus on processing complaints but will also emphasise developing a strong
investigative capacity. We also seek to investigate and substantiate
systemic defects in policing as well as general corruption.

This draft policy drew on the comprehensive guidance given by the White
Paper as well as on past ICD experiences and reports emanating from
Parliament regarding ICD functions. The Independent Police Investigative
Directorate Bill before you not only changes the name of the ICD to the
Independent Police Investigative Directorate, Ipid, but also creates a
separate piece of legislation for the Ipid and removes it from being
governed under the South African Police Service Act, as was the case
previously.

Historically, there have been several problems that have plagued the smooth
operation of the ICD. While it had investigative powers over the police, it
still had to submit its recommendations to the national Commissioner of
Police. The ICD has had no powers to ensure the implementation of its
recommendations. There have also been concerns raised in Parliament
regarding the broad focus of the ICD’s mandate and its inability to
implement this mandate effectively.

Equally, there have been concerns raised in relation to the ICD’s lack of
powers when investigating cases of corruption, especially within the
police.

It is important to note that the monitoring by the ICD of compliance with
the Domestic Violence Act by members of the police and general complaints
by members of the public have been removed from the mandate of the Ipid.
The Ipid will locate some of the oversight functions, such as those
relating to the Domestic Violence Act, within the secretariat. The Bill
further recognises that the police themselves must ultimately be
responsible for investigating, irrespective of whether or not the
perpetrator is a police officer.

The one area we have specifically located under the new Ipid is the
investigation of any police officer involved in rape. We adopted this
stance primarily because crimes against women and girls remain one of the
government’s key priorities. We want to ensure that in cases where a police
officer is suspected of committing such a crime, the case should be
investigated by an independent body.

This approach will go a long way towards building public confidence in the
force while at the same time reinforcing government’s commitment to
ensuring that the most vulnerable in society are not abused by the very
same people who should be protecting them.

For the Ipid to achieve its objectives and strategic goals it is imperative
that its operational framework is properly aligned. To this end, the
structure of the new Ipid must speak to its core functions. Past
experiences indicated that there have been structural challenges that
impacted on the directorate’s successes.
Therefore, the Bill speaks to the fact that the national office should be a
lean, administrative office providing strategic leadership and direction,
but with the capacity to execute the mandate located in the various
provinces. Members who have previously been in the National Assembly know
this. Currently that is not happening. We hope that this legislation will
make a change.

As we indicated earlier, there can be no question that the historical,
dysfunctional nature of the secretariat created a vacuum that the ICD
unsuccessfully tried to fill. Section 208 of our Constitution gives effect
to the establishment of the civilian secretariat under the direction of the
Minister of Police.

The 1998 White Paper on Safety and Security provides for the SA Police
Service to be the vehicle for law enforcement for the Republic. The White
Paper further required and mandated a need to reform the system in which
policy planning and monitoring occurred within the former Department of
Safety and Security.

The Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill has been brought to this
Parliament with very clear intentions on the part of the Ministry of
Police. We have been forthright in our assertion that the current policing
environment in our country requires us to fight crime smartly, toughly and
with no mercy for those heartless criminals.

It also became apparent that as part of our legislative framework we
required strong policing oversight bodies that would make sure that the
policies of policing are determined by the executive. We adopted this
framework precisely because, as we have said before in this House, we have
no intention of sliding our policing approach towards a police state. We
are of the firm view that there needs to be transparency and a separation
of powers when determining policy and the implementation thereof. The
Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill gives effect to that
separation of powers and functions.

It requires the secretariat to provide sound civilian oversight over the
SAPS, drive partnerships, provide policy advice to the Minister and to
provide for the organisation of the civilian secretariat into a designated
department. It further provides for the co-operation between the
Independent Police Investigative Directorate and the secretariat, as well
as enhancing co-operation between the SAPS and the civilian secretariat.

Importantly, the Bill uncouples the budget of the secretariat as a core
centre of the SAPS so that it can maintain its independence from the SAPS.
We have every confidence that a revamped, efficient and effective
secretariat will enable us to develop policy that is sound and on par with
international best practices, hon Makhubela, unlike previously when the
secretariat had to beg to get funding from the Police.

It should also be remembered that by accepting this legislation we are in
no way second-guessing the work of the police. On the contrary ...
[Interjections.]

Mr R A LEES: Deputy Chair, on a point of order: Would you please request
the hon Deputy Minister to desist from directing her remarks at hon members
of this House and to direct them through you, please.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Thank you, Deputy Chair, I didn’t think that
hon Makhubela would be offended. He knows what I’m talking about; he’s my
friend.

It should also be remembered that by accepting this legislation we are in
no way second-guessing the work of the police. On the contrary, we are
making sure that the police render their duties with excellence across all
facets of their interaction with society. We expect the Civilian
Secretariat for Police Service to take responsibility for strategic and
indicative planning, research and the formulation of departmental policy
proposals, which, when approved by the Ministry, would guide the activities
of the SA Police Service.

We expect the Bill to monitor the department to ensure alignment with
policies approved by the Minister and to develop and implement performance
controls of the performance agreements, which direct functions of members
of the South African Police. It is also expected that the Bill will provide
ministerial support services, including the management and control of
departmental and international media and stakeholder liaison as well as
legal services.

Therefore, we envisage that the Bill will implement a communication
strategy aimed at informing and mobilising role-players and partners
outside the department regarding policing matters.

Ultimately, the Bill must strengthen the partnerships on social
mobilisation to deepen the national dialogue on safety. The Civilian
Secretariat for Police Service will be accountable to the Minister and to
Parliament for its functions and activities.

Another key aspect of the Bill relates to the establishment of provincial
secretariats. We expect better alignment between the civilian secretariat
and the provinces with the establishment of provincial secretariats. It is
here in the engine room of the provinces that we will expect to see strong
and functioning monitoring and evaluation units in the provinces.

We also intend to deepen the national dialogue on safety by establishing
partnership units as part of the provincial secretariats. We are certain
that the Bill before this House provides us with a sterling opportunity to
put into practice the policies, methodologies and strategies to refine our
policing for all South Africans.

We remain committed to seeing through our vision of a transformed,
accountable and effective police service. With these two pieces of
legislation, we are committing ourselves to continue working for the
entrenchment of a human rights culture. We have now provided the new
Independent Police Investigative Directorate and the Civilian Secretariat
for Police Service with the necessary tools, and it will be up to the
leadership of these bodies to implement this mandate. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mong T M H MOFOKENG: Motlatsa Modulasetulo, matona a kgabane a Lekgotla la
Diprofinsi, Motlatsa Letona Sepolesa Mme Maggy Sotyu. E re pele ke nke
monyetla ona ho o lebohisa boikarabelong ba hao bo botjha jwalo ka Motlatsa
Letona la Sepolesa.

Ke lakatsa ho qala morao selemong sa 1992 ka tokomane ya ANC, “Re malala a
laotswe ho ka busa”, e ileng ya sisinya hore ho Afrika Borwa e ntjha ya
demokrasi, dipelaelo tsa boitshwaro bo bobe ba sepolesa, di tla sebetswa ka
mokgwa wa botletlebi bo ikemetseng le dipatlisiso. Ntlha ena e ne e habile
hore sepolesa se be le boikarabelo setjhabeng seo se se lebeletseng ka
mokgwa o ikemetseng ebile o se na leeme. Ena ke tjhebelopele ya ANC
sepoleseng sa Afrika Borwa kamora kgethollo. Modulasetulo ya kgabane,
tjhebelopele ena, ke yona motheo wa ho tshepahala le maikemisetso a
dikamolao ka tatelano.

Mothating wa jwale karolwana 53 ya Tshebeletso ya Sepolesa sa Afrika Borwa,
e fana ka matlataelo a molao ho Lekgotla le Ikemetseng mme e lebisitse ho
Karolwana 18 ya Molao wa Merusu Malapeng, 116 e reng ke boitshwaro bo bobe
hore setho sa sepolesa se hlolehe ho ikamahanya le molao oo se o nehilweng
ho ya ka mokgwa oo.

Matlataelo ana a ananela hore diketso tsa sepolesa di tlameha ho ba kahare
ho meedi ya molao esita le leano la boikarabelo. Matlataelo ana a sireletsa
seabo sa tekolo ya ICD ho sepolesa e le hore ho lwantshwe ditlolo tsa
molao. Re a ananela hore ka tlasa demokrasi ya molaotheo sepolesa se ke ke
sa e ba molao ka bosona.

Mohoo wa ANC wa Dikgetho tsa 2009 o boela o paka ntlha ena ya kgale ya ho
lwantsha ditlolo tsa molao kgahlanong le basadi le bana ka ho eketsa
bokgoni ba sepolesa ba ho sebetsana le dinyewe tse jwalo. Ho ja setsi ha
ditlolo tsa molao tse nang le dikgoka ho entse tlhokeho ya hore ho
matlafatswe Tshebeletso ya Sepolesa ya Afrika Borwa. Ka lebaka leo, ditlolo
tsa molao tsa mofuta ona di hlaloswa e le ditlolo tsa molao tse ka
sehloohong ke mmuso wa rona.

Ka dilemolemo diphumano tse fapafapaneng tsa diphuputso le ditlaleho tsa
palamente di pepesitse diqholotso tse ngata mabapi le ho ikamahanya ha
sepolesa le ditshitsinyo tsa Lekgotla le Ikemetseng la Ditletlebo.

Diqholotso tsena esita le boiphehiso di utollotse kgaello ya ho kenngwa
tshebetsong ha Molao wa Merusu Malapeng, DVA, oo e leng matlataelo a
sepolesa le ICD. Diphuputso le ditlaleho di utollotse kgaellonyana ya
bokgoni ho nnetefatsa bofuputsi bo matla ba ICD kgahlanong le boitshwaro bo
bobe kapa bonyofonyofo ba sepolesa bo kenyeletsang ho se ikamahanye le
tlhekefetso ya malapeng. Ka sebele hona le kgaello ya ICD ya ho sala morao
e le ho nnetefatsa hore e ikamahanya le ditshitshinyo tsa yona. Ka lebaka
leo sekamolao sa Lekgotla le Ikemetseng la Bofuputsi ba Sepolesa se
lohothwa ho kwala sekgeo seo.

Modulasetulo ya kgabane, Lekgotla le Ikemetseng la Bofuputsi ba Sepolesa,
le tla sebetsa ka boikemelo, le sa itshetleha ho Tshebeletso ya Sepolesa sa
Afrika Borwa. Ho ya ka sekamolao ya boikemelo ba lekgotla la bofuputsi bo
bohlokwa tshebetsong e ntle le ho ba molaong.

Ho ya ka maikemisetso a sekamolao se akaretsang Hlooho ya Mokgatlo e tla ba
boemong ba Molaodi wa Phethahatso ho nnetefatsa boikemelo le ho se be le
leeme ha IPID. Ho ya ka leano la boikemelo le puso e ntle, ke tshwanelo
hore setlamo se thonyang se kenyeletse ditho tsa palamente le batho bohle
ba nkang karolo ba sisintsweng le ba bang ba amehang ba kgethilweng.
Molaodi wa Phethahatso a ka nna a fetisetsa dinyewe ho NPA bakeng sa ho
tjhutjhisetswa ditlolo tsa molao.

Hona ke mokgwa o hlokolosi wa sepolesa, le mofuta wa lebotho leo re le
labalabelang re bile re lakatsa ho le bona ha re ntse re tswelapele.

Sekamolao sena se beha ka sehlohlolong ntwa kgahlanong le ditlolo tsa
molao. Re ikitlaeditse ho lwantsha ditlolo tsa molao tse mpefetseng haholo,
haholoholo ditlolo tsa molao tse nang le dikgoka kgahlanong le bana le
basadi. Ntwa ya rona kgahlanong le ditlolo tsa molao ha se ya matsoho empa
e molaong, ka mekgwa e kenyeletsang sepolesa sa setjhaba, ho phethisa molao
le tlhompho ya hore motho o nkuwa a se na molato. Sepolesa sa rona se
tshwanela ho hlompha taba ya hore mmelaellwa o nkuwa a se na molato ho
fihlela a fumanwa a e na le molato lekgotleng la dinyewe.

Molao o tla nnetefatsa hore puso ya molao e a latelwa ka nako tsohle, le ke
baphethisang molao. Sekamolao sena se ananela haholoholo kamano pakeng tsa
meralo le tshebetso ya molao. Mapolesa a rona a phethahatsa molao o hlokang
ho tataiswa ke sekamolao sena kamehla. Komiti ya Tshireletso le
Ntshetsopele ya Molaotheo e hlahisitse dihlomathiso tsa setegeniki ho
amahanya sekamolao le Mohopolo wa Thibelo ya tlolo ya molao le boikarabelo
le boikemelo jwalokaha e hlaha ho Molaotheo wa rona. Sekamolao sena se
sebetsana le boikemisetso ba seabo seo baahi ba tlamehang ho ba le sona
tekolong ya sepolesa. Ntshetsopele ya melao ena e tla nnetefatsa hore
dikgoka tsa malapeng di tloswa ho ICD mme di behwe tlasa Secretariat.

Ntlhakemo ya rona e hatella hore ditlolo tsa molao kgahlanong le basadi le
bana di dula di le sehloohong mmusong. Dinyewe tsa peto le teteko ya basadi
le bana di tshwanetse ho behellwa ka sehloohong.

Sekamolao sena se hlahella e le mokgwa wa ho matlafatsa kamano pakeng tsa
ICD le Civilian Secretariat ya Sepolesa. E tla ntlafatsa botebo ba kamano e
be e matlafatse tshebedisano pakeng tsa mekgatlo ena e mmedi. Ka tsela ena
re lebile tebisong ya demokrasi ya sepolesa.

Re sisintse dihlomathiso tse ding ho matlafatsa bokgoni ba Civilian
Secretariat ho nnetefatsa hore mokgwa wa ho tlatsa dikgeo o etswa ka
bokgabane nakong e sa fediseng pelo. [Mahofi.] Re hlokomela hore ho ya ka
nalane, Secretariat ya Naha e nka thomo ya yona ho Molaotheo le Molao wa
Sepolesa. Karolo ya 208 ya Molaotheo e batla Letona la Sepolesa ho thea
Civilian Secretariat e sebetsang ka kotlolloho tlasa bolaodi ba taelo ya
Letona.

Karolo ya bohlokwa ya Secretariat ke ho tla fana ka ketapele ho kenyeng
tshebetsong ha maano tshebedisanong mmoho la banka karolo. Sekamolao sena
se matlafatsa ho ikemela ha lekala lena mme se hlakisa ka ho otlolloha
boikarabelo ba Letona le Matona a ikarabelang ka tlasa sepolesa sa
diprofinsing le ho amahanngwa ha ditshebeletso tsa sepolesa naheng ka
bophara. Sekamolao sena se tiseletsa le tshebedisano mmoho dintlheng tse
amanang le tsa sepolesa hore ho se ke ha ba le dikgohlano.

Dikamolao tsena tse pedi di bohlokwa ntweng kgahlanong le bosenyi
haholoholo tlhekefetso ya bomme le bana.

Re le ANC re tshehetsa dikamolao tsena ho thusa ho lwantsha bosenyi le ho
aha setjhaba se senang botlokotsebe ho batho bohle. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.]
(Translation of Sesotho speech follows.)

[Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Deputy Chairperson, hon members of the National Council
of Provinces, Deputy Minister of Police Maggie Sotyu, let me first take
this opportunity to congratulate you on your appointment as Deputy Minister
of Police.

I would like to start right at the back, in the year 1992, with the ANC’s
document “We are ready to govern”, which suggested that in the new
democratic dispensation in South Africa, allegations of police corruption
would be dealt with through an independent process of investigation. The
goal was to establish a police force which is accountable to the community
it serves, in an independent manner and free from bias. This is the ANC’s
vision for the police in postapartheid South Africa. Hon Chairperson, this
vision is the foundation for building trust as well as introducing relevant
Bills to that effect.

Currently, section 53 of the South African Police Service Act gives a legal
mandate to the Independent Complaints Directorate, ICD, and it leads to
section 18 of the Domestic Violence Act, Act 116 of 1998. This Act
prescribes that it is bad conduct for a member of the police not to obey
instructions accordingly.

This mandate stipulates that the actions of the police should be within the
bounds of the law as well as the principles of accountability. This mandate
protects the ICD’s investigations into the police in order to combat crime.
We are grateful that under constitutional democracy the police won’t be a
law unto themselves.

The ANC’s 2009 election manifesto is further proof of a long-held view of
combating crimes against women and children by increasing the police’s
capacity to deal with cases of such a nature. The increase in violent
crimes has necessitated the bolstering of the SA Police Service. As a
result, these kinds of crimes have been regarded as priority crimes by our
government.

For many years different research findings and reports of Parliament
highlighted many challenges that the police and the Independent Complaints
Directorate agreed upon.

These challenges exposed the difficulty of implementing the Domestic
Violence Act, which happens to be part of the mandate of the ICD. The
research as well as the reports also exposed the lack of capacity in
ensuring proper investigative skill on the part of the ICD in dealing with
bad conduct or corruption in the police, which also involves failure to
adhere to the Domestic Violence Act. In fact, there is a lack of follow-up
on cases by the ICD, as well as ensuring that it adheres to its own
principles. As a result the Independent Police Investigative Directorate
Bill is intended to close that gap.

Hon Chairperson, the Independent Police Investigative Directorate, Ipid,
will function independently without relying on the SA Police Service.
According to the Bill, the independence of the Ipid is important in respect
of its functioning as well as compliance with legislation.

According to the objects of the Bill, the head of the organisation will be
at the level of executive management in order to ensure independence as
well as fairness of the Ipid. According to the principles of independence
and good governance, it is appropriate that the oath must include Members
of Parliament as well as all the other relevant people who have been
nominated. Furthermore, the presiding officer should be able to forward
cases to the NPA for criminal prosecution.

This is an important policing method, as well as the type of police force
that we wish to see as we move on.

This Bill regards as its priority the fight against crime. We are
determined to fight heinous crimes, especially violent crimes against women
and children. Our fight against crime is not personal but it is legal,
which also involves the national police force, and honouring and respecting
the principle that a person is considered innocent until proven guilty. Our
police must respect the principle that a suspect is considered innocent
until proven guilty by a court of law.

The Bill will ensure that the rule of law is followed at all times, even by
those who implement legislation. The Bill welcomes the relationship between
the draft and implementation of the legislation. Our police should perform
their duties in a lawful manner and be guided by this Bill at all times.
The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development introduced
technical additions to link the Bill with crime prevention methods as well
as responsibility and independence just as it appears in our Constitution.
This Bill deals with the role citizens should play in the evaluation of the
police. The implementation of this Bill will ensure that domestic crimes
are removed from the ICD and become the responsibility of the secretariat.

Our standpoint emphasises the fact that crimes against women and children
will always be a priority for our government. Crimes involving rape and
women and child abuse should be the main priority.

This Bill comes about as a way of strengthening the relationship between
the IPID and the Civilian Secretariat for Police Service. It strengthens
the bonds of the relationship and improves co-operation between these two
organisations. In this way we are heading towards the deepening of
democracy within the police.

We have suggested some additions to strengthen the capacity of the civilian
secretariat to ensure that the strategy of filling vacancies is done
properly and in good time. [Applause.] We are aware that, according to
history, the national secretariat gets it directive from the Constitution
and the South African Police Service Act. Section 208 of the Constitution
requires the Minister of Police to establish a civilian secretariat that
works directly under the management of the Minister.

The most important role of the secretariat is to provide leadership in
respect of implementing policies as well as participation of stakeholders.
This Bill is strengthening the independence of this division, and it
specifies the responsibilities of the national Minister and Ministers who
are accountable for provincial police services as well as the linkage of
police services nationally. This Bill ensures close co-operation on issues
that pertain to police matters so that there is no conflict.

These two Bills are very important in the fight against crime, especially
women and child abuse.

As the ANC we support this Bill in order to contribute to the fight against
crime and to build a society free of criminality for everyone. [Applause.]]

Mr T B BEYLEVELDT: Madam Deputy Chair, hon members, hon Deputy Minister of
Police, I prepared my speech in English for today, but as I moved forward,
I was so encouraged that perhaps I should go and change it into Afrikaans.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Sorry, hon Beyleveldt,
can you just hold on? Members, the air conditioning has been turned down,
but because it is an old piece of equipment, it takes time to actually take
effect. So, veteran, just keep your jacket fastened up. [Laughter.] Thank
you. Continue, please.
Mr T B BEYLEVELDT: Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair. Today, we are debating
two very important Bills: the Independent Police Investigative Directorate
Bill, Ipid, and the Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill.

The Independent Police Investigative Directorate aims to ensure independent
oversight of the SAPS and municipal police services. Furthermore, it must
provide for the independent and impartial investigation of identified
criminal offences allegedly committed by members of the SAPS and municipal
police services. The directorate functions independently from the SAPS, but
reports to the Minister of Police.

The civilian secretariat, however, must monitor the performance of the
police and its policies. The secretariat will also be responsible for
monitoring the implementation of the budget. According to both these Bills,
the Minister must appoint the executive directors. The success of the Bills
will depend on how independently the organisations will operate.

During a public hearing in Qwaqwa last week, members of the public
complained bitterly about the behaviour of members of the SAPS. They
alleged that after they had laid their complaints, their allegations were
investigated by local friends of the police.

I do not say that it was the truth, but we need to protect the independence
of the investigators at all costs, so that they can do their job without
fear or favour. The manner in which the results of investigations will be
handled will determine the legitimacy of the organisations.

Chapter 6 of the Bill makes provision for the appointment of fit and proper
persons as investigators, according to certain laid-down guidelines. We
trust that those appointments will be done in an open and transparent
manner. Under no circumstances should political affiliation play a role in
the appointments.

We, as citizens, want personnel with a strong set of values. They should be
characterised by trustworthiness, show respect by honouring others, be
responsible by being accountable, and be fair by being impartial regarding
the needs of those they must serve and protect.

We want an environment where we have an open society with equal
opportunities for all. We want to see to it that only the best men and
women are entrusted with positions where they can ensure that only people
with the highest quality of leadership are appointed to manage these two
independent organisations that must give effect to our Constitution.

The question of sufficient funding will also be a fundamental imperative in
determining the success of the operations. If there are only sufficient
funds to appoint the top structures and not enough investigators to perform
their duties, then we should reconsider our endeavours to serve the people
of our country.

I conclude by asking: In South Africa, who is guarding the guardians? I
thank you, hon Deputy Chair. [Applause.]

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Deputy Chairperson, Deputy Minister and hon members, I rise
on behalf of the ANC, which adopted the Freedom Charter in 1955. This
Freedom Charter was conceived by the ANC at its 1953 congress, and later
the Congress Alliance led the processes, through volunteers, that resulted
in the adoption of the Freedom Charter. Amongst the aspirations of the
people in that process ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, could you
please hold on. Hon Mlenzana!

Mr Z MLENZANA: Just to check, Deputy Chairperson ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): He is standing,
unfortunately, he will ... [Laughter.] Order, members! Order! [Laughter.]

Mr Z MLENZANA: Deputy Chairperson, I am just standing to check if the hon
member is ready to take my question.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I beg your pardon. Can
you repeat that?

Mr Z MLENZANA: I am rising, Deputy Chairperson, to check if the hon member
is ready to take my question.

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Yes, I am ready.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Your question?

Mr Z MLENZANA: Deputy Chairperson, is it correct for the hon member to
stand at the podium and pronounce or announce on wrong history in terms of
years?

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Can I respond, Madam?

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chairperson, if the member does not have listening
skills, he should not ask questions. He was not listening because there was
nothing wrong with what was said by the hon member.

Mr Z MLENZANA: There was!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Mokgobi, are you
prepared to answer hon Mlenzana?

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Yes.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Can you do so, please?

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Deputy Chairperson, in 1953, in case people are not aware,
the ANC went to its conference. At that conference the need for a gathering
where the vision of the people would be set out was deliberated upon. That
was in 1953. In 1955, the Freedom Charter was adopted as a result of that.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Mlenzana, I am not
going to give you a chance to start a dialogue. That is history. Please,
sit down. [Laughter.]

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Thank you very much, Deputy Chairperson. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Veteran, may I plead
with you to save our time as we don’t have much. If there is a query, would
you please put it in black and white and then I will process it? Could you
please allow the hon member to proceed.

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Thank you very much. To those who want political education,
I am free after delivering this speech. I have documents with me and we
will share them. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Mokgobi!
Mr M H MOKGOBI: From there, clause 5 states that everyone shall be free and
equal before the law. In that instance, during the April 1994 breakthrough,
a serious fundamental process began to ensure that what was an injustice
and declared as a crime against humanity by the United Nations was
corrected.

The ruling party, which is the ANC, started the process, as from 2004, to
undo what was a serious injustice against the people of South Africa. As we
debate this Bill, we see a reflection of what people said during the
gathering in 1955.

The two Bills seek to ensure that the people of South Africa are building a
nation that will thrive under peace and harmony, precisely because we came
from a nation that was defined differently before 1994. The other nation is
the nation that was racially secured by law, and appointments and many
other things were done on the basis of racial discrimination.

Now we are building a nonracial nation through our strategic objective.
Firstly, the Bills that we are debating today are aimed at ensuring that
the police force in this country responds to the issues of injustice
irrespective of skin colour.

Secondly, we want to see the country being serviced by the type of police
and justice system that would apply to each and everyone, regardless of
colour. This is a fundamental objective of the ANC.
When we, as the ANC, went to Polokwane in 2007 — Polokwane was a conference
for the ANC and the country — and when we went to Durban again to reassess
how far we were, we emphasised the point that indeed issues of police
services must be looked into. We gave a mandate to our deployees in
Parliament to ensure that they come up with the type of law that will
ensure that South Africans are safe.

We believe that these two Bills, particularly the Independent Police
Investigative Directorate Bill, which tries to transform the ICD, will now
ensure that the police are no longer doing as they wish; precisely because
previously the police were doing as they wished, especially from a racial
point of view. Now we want to see to it that they don’t do as they wish,
and that they don’t for example investigate a murder without it being
overseen. As we do so, the question of “shoot-to-kill” will be debated
later and not now.

We have inherited certain police elements through our sunset clause,
ensuring job security. We believe that there will be training to change the
mind-sets and attitudes of members of the former police force, and to make
them more oriented towards a democratic order through this Bill. This is
because some of them are hard nuts; they don’t want to change and they
still pursue a certain element within the system.

Through the Independent Police Investigative Directorate Bill, we will know
that, indeed, the police will be monitored, and if there is any wrongdoing,
the police will be brought to account. Previously, the Independent
Complaints Directorate, ICD, as we looked at it, was there but did not have
the teeth to bite.

We want a system that has the teeth to bite because the public wants a safe
environment. If the system of safety is corrupt, then our people won’t be
safe precisely because the police are not punishable. We do not have the
power to return to them and punish the perpetrators within the police
services.

Therefore, that is the essence of the importance of the Independent Police
Investigative Directorate Bill, as created by the resolutions of the ANC in
2007, and in Durban 2010.

In terms of the Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill, we see the
strengthening of the relationship, particularly between the management
component and the Minister, and it also provides for overseeing the police.

The Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill and Independent Police
Investigative Directorate Bill will work together to ensure safety and
security, and ensure that, within the context of co-operative and
intergovernmental relations, any element of corruption or crime does not go
undetected in any unit within the departmental system. If we leave it too
independent, some elements might end up in other units.

Therefore, we will have to ensure that the security force units work
together within this context, precisely because what we call “collective
work” will be reflected in reality within the departmental system. This is
part of the national democratic programme of the movement. At the end of
the day, we would want to see all people living together as equals, in
harmony, free from fear and from war.

We had been living in fear for most of our lives before 1994, but we want
everybody - even those who tortured us - to live with us in harmony,
without any fear. They must not have any fear of the democratic order,
because the Constitution explains clearly that everyone is equal. Therefore
it is important that these two Bills be passed.

These Bills will also strengthen the work of the police in order for them
to be able to prevent, combat, and investigate crime, and to protect and
secure the inhabitants of this country. They must also be able to enforce a
law that is guided by the procedures in the system that we put in place
through these Bills.

After these Bills, obviously, there would be a particular regulation that
would direct specifications on the behaviour of the police. As the ANC, we
are en route and we are happy about what Parliament is doing. When we took
over in 1994, we had to be fundamentally persistent in respect of
transformation to put in place new laws that are in line with the
Constitution.

That was a task carried out until 1999. From 1999 to 2004, we knew that our
Parliament was seized with certain oversight, and had to ensure that after
the oversight there was implementation.

We then moved from 2004 to 2009. During this time implementation was a core
event in the Department of Police and Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development; implementation was an issue.

These things inform us, precisely because when we check prior to where we
are today, there was an outcry from the public that crime levels are too
high. Now we are putting the system in place to ensure that crime is
reduced. When crime is reduced, economic growth and development in this
country indeed will be high.

In this way we will create a stable society where everyone in our
nonracial, nonsexist, democratic country will enjoy the fruit of freedom.
We are doing this because we are creating a country that is going to be
much better. [Interjections.]

Yes, let us pass this Bill, to correct apartheid’s legacies. [Applause.]
[Time expired.]

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Deputy Chairperson, on a point of order: I didn’t want to
interrupt while the member was speaking, but it’s important that the
Chairperson must also adhere to the decorum of the House. You referred to
the hon Mokgoro as “Veteran”. I think it’s unparliamentarily to do that and
I want to request you to call him by his name. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Unfortunately, dear hon
Sinclair, you are out of order.

Mr A FRITZ (Western Cape): Madam Deputy Chair, members of the NCOP, the
Deputy Minister of Police – I acknowledge you – ladies and gentlemen; allow
me at the outset to say that although the Western Cape government opposes
the Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill, we fully subscribe to the
need for the secretariat to be empowered.

Viewed through a national lens, the Bill makes provision for proper
policing, oversight and monitoring, which is most welcome. However, from a
provincial basis, the Bill got its wires crossed and confused the powers
and functions of a secretariat with those powers exclusively conferred on
the provinces by the Constitution of South Africa.

This is why, as a province, we do not support the Civilian Secretariat for
Police Service Bill. This is the primary reason for opposing the Bill. All
South Africans must jealously protect our Constitution, and it is our
opinion that this Bill is inconsistent with certain provisions of the
Constitution. I will highlight only a few examples.

The Constitution confers powers on the provincial executives to monitor
police conduct, oversee the effectiveness and efficiency of the SA Police
Service and to promote the relationships between communities and the SAPS.
The provinces also have legislative competence to regulate these functions.

However, Chapter 4 of the secretariat Bill provides for the very same
monitoring and overseeing of the police service by a provincial
secretariat. We believe that this is inconsistent with section 206(4) of
the Constitution, which provides that the provincial executive is the
reasonable body for these policing functions, which include monitoring,
assessing and overseeing the police services.

These policing functions are reserved for the provincial executive and may
not be assigned by national legislation, even to a provincial organ of
state such as the provincial secretariat.
From a legal perspective, the Western Cape is of the opinion that the
provision regulating the status of the provincial secretariats is ambiguous
and that interpretational difficulties may arise. If the intention is for
the regionalisation of the secretariat described in section 208 of the
Constitution, it must clearly say so; and again it must be stressed that
the secretariat cannot encroach on the functions of the provincial
executive.

Chapter 3 of the Constitution determines that each sphere of government,
and all organs of state within each sphere, must respect the constitutional
status, institutions, powers and functions of government in the three
spheres; not assume any power or function except those conferred on them in
terms of the Constitution; and must exercise their powers and perform their
functions in a manner that does not encroach on the geographical,
functional or institutional integrity of government in another sphere.

The Bill, therefore, is in disharmony with section 41 of the Constitution
as it attempts to assume functions conferred on provinces and thus does not
respect the constitutional stature of the provincial government.

I urge the drafters of the Bill to study section 100 of our Constitution. I
sometimes think that we don’t read the Constitution! This clearly spells
out when and how the national executive may intervene in provinces.

The Bill addresses this very important issue in a very cavalier manner. The
Constitution clearly states that where the national executive intervenes in
a province, a notice of intervention must be tabled in this Council and
then it must end unless the NCOP approves it within 30 days of its first
sitting.

I want to say that this is an important House and the Constitution confers
important powers to this House; and I think sometimes you make a joke of
this House.  The Bill, however, ignores these constitutional imperatives
and refers to interventions for 90 days at a time.

It is important to understand that a civilian secretariat really is a
civilian secretariat. The drafters of the Bill erroneously argued for the
independence of the secretariat - as if that will solve the problem of a
weak and dysfunctional secretariat. And why should the Civilian Secretariat
for police Service be any different from that of defence?

I urge members to read sections 204 and 206 of our Constitution. Section
204 reads:
  A civilian secretariat for defence must be established by national
  legislation to function under the direction of the Cabinet member
  responsible for defence.


Section 208 is an exact duplication bar the words “police service” for
“defence”.

I want to conclude by reiterating that the Western Cape supports the idea
of empowering the secretariat. We fully acknowledge that, at present, the
SAPS, which should receive its budget and policy directives from the
secretariat, treats the secretariat as a nuisance. But the solution is not
to create a separate department; the answer is in the White Paper.

The Department of Defence is structured along similar lines. Please let us
look at this important piece of legislation again. I thank you, Madam
Deputy Chair. [Applause.]

Mr P C MCKENZIE (Western Cape): Hon Deputy Chairperson, it’s an honour to
be here in this House, and thank you for the invitation, and my
congratulations also to the Deputy Minister in this portfolio.

What we are looking for in South Africa is a credible, honest, dependable
and true service. Whatever political party we belong to, what we really
want to see and know is that the men and women in blue have our interests
and safety at heart.

For that reason, I want say thank you to this Parliament for coming up, as
one of the first stages, with these two Bills. This is because what these
Bills really do is that they are trying to show the seriousness of this
government in combating crime, even if that crime is committed by the SA
Police Service.

I believe that we are really serious, and what the public out there wants
to see is that we don’t really waste time on certain technicalities. But if
these Bills are passed, are our citizens going to be safer out there: Yes
or no?

Crime must be fought and the public must see that crime does not pay,
especially when hon members here and I would get phone calls, sometimes in
the middle of the night, to say a policeman had just raped a girl.

The worst thing is that when that happens, the Independent Complaints
Directorate, ICD, would not be available; their telephone would not be
available in the middle of the night. What happens is that the same
policeman who has raped the girl must take the complaint.

I believe that those people will now realise that this is not a police
state. The police will be responsible for their actions, whatever they may
be. These Bills will help us to have a credible police service and the
citizens will respect our men and women in blue.

Let me say that the scenes and sights that we saw on television the other
day, which are happening in KwaZulu-Natal - I don’t know if it was staged
or not – where a policeman was sitting on someone and hitting him, must not
be tolerated in South Africa.

Minister, talking about the Western Cape in particular and looking at some
of the things our Metro Police are doing, I want to say that the police are
not a law unto themselves. We, as leaders and representatives of our
people, with the support of these Bills, entrust them with the power om
daardie mense vas te vat [to clamp down on those people].

I don’t know how to say that in English. I need to say this because not
only do I speak on behalf of the ANC here, but I’m also from the Western
Cape.

Do you know that these two Bills were discussed in our legislature, but I
promise you that it’s the first time that I have heard the sentiments in
this regard that I have heard from the MEC today. There is no record in any
document in the Western Cape that these were the sentiments that the MEC
has just shared.

In fact, I am actually surprised that these Bills are before this House
when the MEC did not discuss this in the Minmec. We must try to not play
politics. We must begin to be honest. These Bills do not take away any
power from the present Constitution; they do not.
Let me tell you that I know that the MEC is new at this, so I’m taking care
here; he needs some help. I know that, and won’t go against him because
every one of us must learn.

The power that the Constitution gives to all provinces, not only the
Western Cape, is that if there is anything wrong with these two Bills, the
Constitutional Court will never approve them. I would therefore challenge
them to take this to the Constitutional Court and let’s see who will be
right then. This province has borne the brunt of men and women in the
police who are not acting correctly.

Let me say how a mandate was arrived at in the Western Cape. These Bills
came before the Western Cape parliament twice. In fact, the first time they
came before the province, I actually got up in the House and said that it
was a mistake for these Bills to come before us then because we were told
that there was no deadline at that time. At that session, we even asked for
a division in the House. So, seriously, the Western Cape was divided on
this issue.

It was not a unanimous decision that they must vote against the Bills here.
All political parties, excluding, of course, the DA and ID who are in
agreement with them, voted for these Bills and also those who were not in
agreement with them voted that these Bills must be approved.
[Interjections.]

You just read the Hansard and you’ll get the answers.

Do you know that when they came before this House the second time, the
House was so wrong. In fact, the Leader of the Opposition talked about
democracy in the House; as a result all the opposition parties, including
the ANC, had to leave the House and walk out. The only remaining parties,
and not the full ... [Interjections.]

Mr A WATSON: Madam Deputy Chairperson, on a point of order: The proceedings
of a provincial legislature have absolutely nothing to do with these Bills.
I suggest that the member prepares a better speech next time.

Mr P C MCKENZIE (Western Cape): Deputy Chairperson, the proceedings of the
legislature are important so that members can know how a decision was
arrived at with regard to the amendments.

During the second time, everyone had to walk out of the House and the only
people who remained were the DA and ID. Do we know that then these Bills
were pushed through the House without knowing that, a week prior to that,
the opposition made a standpoint in the House to say that we support this
Bill?

I want to say that, firstly, this was not a unanimous decision. Secondly,
from the other members of the House, we support these Bills and we want to
see them implemented in the way that they are before this House. We also
want to see that these Bills will bring a better quality of life to all the
citizens of this country; whatever their colour, and that is what we stand
for. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M W MAKHUBELA: Deputy Chairperson and the Deputy Minister of Police,
what a fitting and correct appointment the President made with the Deputy
Minister because she knows everything! [Applause.]

As Cope, we note these two Bills. It is very interesting, however, when you
check these two Bills, that the Independent Police Investigative
Directorate Bill deals with the conduct of the police. At the same time
there was an amendment to the Criminal Procedure Act, which deals with the
conduct of section 49(2). Here the Minister has three pillars: the
secretariat, Ipid and the police. You tell a child to hit hard; you tell
another child to put - what do you call it - a disciplinary action on that
particular person.

Now the Minister also came back with the military ranks in order to give
fuel to the police to shoot. At the same time here is the Bill - you are
coming here with two very good Bills. What is the rationale for this? Will
the Minister sit down and try to relay that when the police use the force,
even though the Ipid is there, they should be sensitive when dealing with
that? This is a very good Bill on the Ipid, but is there any capacity? I
want to see the branch or unit at Jacobsdal helping people there on the
ground.

At present, there are 197 000 or 200 000 police members. How many
directorates are there to deal with the situation? How many secretariats
are there? Some of the monitoring mechanisms have been removed from the
Ipid, in order for them to come to the secretariat so that they can
strengthen them just to fill posts there.

We don’t want a federal state; we want a continuous chain of command from
the national commissioner to the national Minister and down. The MEC cannot
come with his or her own rules analysis and say, “Okay, he or she has done
this or that”. But I want to tell you this is a wonderful Bill.

Minister, what you can do is to line up the strategy about the budget –
yes, I used to control the secretariat and give them the budget. She is
right! But now, Deputy Chairperson, really, I am very moved by these two
Bills.

Just check, when you go on to the implementation of this; we must try to
sensitise or to have these things connected together so that we can move
with them. I support the Bill as Cope. Thank you.

Mr M G WILEY (Western Cape): Madam Deputy Chair, thank you very much. I too
would like to extend my congratulations to those who have made maiden
speeches here this morning, and also to the Deputy Minister on her
appointment. I noted with interest her remark about “he is my friend”, and
would like to remind her that some other person in this line of policing
said, “He is my friend, finish and klaar!”

One wonders if the new Ipid is going to have the ability or the spine, when
a National Commissioner of Police of steps out of line, to be prepared to
take the national police commissioner to task. That really is where the nub
of this matter lies.

Independence itself is not a matter of degree; either a body is independent
or it is not. The criteria determining independence are judged as set out
in the heads of argument filed by the Helen Suzman Foundation in the recent
appeal before the Constitutional Court in the Glenister litigation, in
which the reinstatement of the Directorate of Special Operations is sought.

The question, therefore, remains: Who will guard the guardians? For those
of you who know a bit of Latin: Quis custodiet ipsos custodes, which is
also the national motto of our intelligence agency.

The existing Independent Complaints Directorate in South Africa is not
functioning well. This has been admitted by the Deputy Minister, and I
think that we all agree that it has severe shortcomings. But any body
formed to investigate and adjudicate upon a criminal activity needs to
enjoy a measure of independence for it to function properly and in
accordance with those requirements of law.

Fairness is at the core of the rule of law. I listened with some interest
to some of the remarks made, especially by my colleague in the Western Cape
legislature, Mr Patrick “Promises” McKenzie, who said that we are arguing a
technicality; but we are arguing about constitutional law. The Constitution
of South Africa is not a technicality.

This House is here to protect the rights and responsibilities of the
provinces, both to hold it in judgement and, at the same time, to support
the powers of provinces. The argument made by the hon MEC for Community
safety did just that.

As far as the Western Cape is concerned - just to put your minds at ease
about whether we just took unilateral decisions or not - what we did was to
hold four public hearings. We had over 40 community police forum
chairpersons who attended the public hearings. We had inputs and evidence
from lawyers, from departments and the like. We gave that information.

We also had input from the two sponsors of the two Bills. We gave the
findings of those hearings to the various sponsors and, in the case of the
Independent Complaints Directorate, they declined to answer the arguments
as raised in the hearings by the public and simply said that the department
supports the adoption of the Ipid Bill.

In other words, they weren’t prepared to even discuss the technicalities or
arguments that had been raised. They are simply trying to force through a
Bill, despite the fact that there is a very credible legal argument -
specially as far as the Independent Police Investigative Directorate Bill
is concerned - that proper independence is not involved.

The Bill says that the directorate functions independently of the SA Police
Service. It is the opinion of the Western Cape Standing Committee on
Community Safety that the independence afforded by the IPID Bill is grossly
inadequate.

The directorate, although removed from the SAPS, continues to reside under
the Ministry of Police. The Minister is therefore the political head of
both the SA Police Service and the directorate. The Minister in question is
therefore the responsible Minister against whom complaints may be lodged in
terms of the Bill.

If one is concerned about whether the Minister may or may not involve
himself in the matters of policing, I refer you to an article of
10 November 2010 which reported that Minister Nathi Mthethwa issued an
instruction for the boys to be arrested, and that this was done. That was
in regard to that case of those youngsters who filmed each other having
sex, and it was a case of rape. They arrested the kids and then had to let
them go because due process had not been followed. I thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Phini kaSihlalo waleNdlu, namalungu  ahloniphekile,
Phini likaNgqongqoshe noma selingasekho, njengenhlangano ye-IFP
siyawemukela ngokupheleleyo loMthethosivivinywa Wophiko Lwamaphoyisa
Lophenyo Oluzimele ngoba uyinto enhle kakhulu ekusebenzeni.

Kwakungamele nakancane kuvunyelwe amaphoyisa abengonqeqe bezazi zomthetho,
bavele badubule abantu bakithi. Sebekhulumile abanye abafowethu
abangaphambili kwami kunomuntu oyedwa odlala imidlalo eminingi ngingeze
ngagxila kukho lokho ngoba akufuneki umuntu anikeza ukuba abantu benze
okuthile kwabanye bese etshela abanye ukuthi benze okuthile kwabanye. Into
edidayo-ke leyo.

Into esifuna ukuyiphakamisa eqenjini elibusayo uma behlongoza okuthile
okuhle kumele sikuxhase lokho, ukuze ezweni lethu kuzoba khona ukuchaza
nokuzibophezela kuzo zonke izinhlaka zikahulumeni. Ukungaziphathi kahle
kwamaphoyisa akuzukwamukeleka, uma ngingenza isibonelo esisodwa, kukhona
umfana esifundeni sakwaNongoma endaweni okuthiwa uSuthu, kwathiwa lomfana
wadlwengula intombazane encane.

Lo mfana wayengesona isigebengu wayeyisakhamuzi sendawo, eziphuzela
amambawa njengawo wonke umuntu. Ngalolo suku wathola lengane ishiywe
ngabazali bayo wase uyayithatha, uhamba nayo endlini. Emva kwalokho wase
eboshelwa ukuthi uyidlwengulile. Amaphoyisa amshaya waze wafa, lelo
kwakuyicala elikhulu.

Ngalawo magama Ngqongqoshe ohloniphekile ngifuna ukuthi osopolotiki
abangagxambukeli emsebenzini wamaphoyisa.

Ngoba uma singagxambukeli emsebenzini wamaphoyisa, amaphoyisa angenza
umsebenzi omuhle.

Loluphiko olusha lwamaphoyisa kumele lwethulwe kuNdunankulu ngamunye
wesifundazwe ngasinye ukuze sazi ukuthi kumele aziphathe kanjani. Uma
kumele sichaze kuMkhandlu kaZwelonke Wezifundazwe noma kuphi akusho lutho
ukuthi iPhalamende lihlezi kuphi.

Kumele sikhombise abantu bethu ukuthi iPhalamende akulona izulu. Sifuna
ukwazi ukuthi kwenzakalani kusifundazwe ngasinye futhi abantu kufanele
bazi.

NjengeIFP siyayesekela leMithethosivivinywa emibili ukuqapha ukuziphatha
kwamaphoyisa. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Deputy Chairperson of this House, hon members and the
Deputy Minister in absentia. The IFP fully accepts this Independent Police
Investigative Directorate Bill because it is good.

The police were not supposed to be allowed to be super experts in legal
matters, who just randomly shoot at our people. My fellow brothers who have
spoken before me, there is a person who plays a lot of games but I would
not concentrate on that because that person is sending mixed messages. This
is confusing.

What we want to say to the ruling party is that if they propose something
good, we must support it, so that there can be accountability and
commitment in all spheres of government. Inappropriate conduct by police
officers is not going to be tolerated. If I can give just one example,
there was a boy in the district of Nongoma in a place called uSuthu, who
was alleged to have raped a young girl.
This boy was not a criminal; he was a member of the community who used to
drink beer like anyone else. On that particular day, he found this child
abandoned by her parents and took her to his home. Thereafter he was
arrested because it was alleged that he raped her. The police fatally beat
him up, which was a serious crime.

With those words, hon Minister, I want to say that politicians should not
interfere with police work. If we don’t interfere, the police would do an
excellent job.

This new police unit must be presented to the premier of each province so
that we know what to expect from them. If we have to explain this to the
National Council of Provinces or anywhere else, it doesn’t matter where
Parliament will be sitting.

We must show the people that Parliament is not heaven. We want to know what
is happening in each province and people should be informed.

As the IFP we support the two Bills on monitoring the conduct of the
police. Thank you.]

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chair, firstly ke rata ho lokisa taba e le nngwe [I
would like to rectify one thing].

We have indicated, previously, that the Western Cape is not an island; it
is part of this country. The MEC who spoke in Bloemfontein, when the
President of this country and the premier were there, indicated to them
that anything that is black is unqualified, whilst they have in their own
midst people who are unqualified. If you go to the Western Cape now to
check how many unqualified white males are leading departments there, you
will be shocked.

Premier Ace Magashule had a document to show to them and they ran away.
Some of them, seated here, own a lot of farms that they never bought. Now,
the point I am raising here ...

Mr A WATSON: Madam Deputy Chair, I have a point of order.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson...

Mr A WATSON: The member said a lot of the ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson...

Mr A WATSON: Madam Deputy Chair?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I have given you the
floor.

Mr A WATSON: Thank you, Madam Deputy Chair.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, behave.

Mr A WATSON: The hon member at the podium said that a lot of the members
sitting here own farms that they never bought. That statement is out of
context and he must withdraw it.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson, may I say
to all members here that someone will be taking that statement and
analysing it, and if need be, steps will be taken. Continue, hon Matila.

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chair, I know the guilty will always rise.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Just hold on. Hon Lees?

Mr R A LEES: Deputy Chair, is it parliamentary for an hon member of the
House to accuse another member of being guilty?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Lees, I have made a
ruling on that utterance and steps are going to be taken.

Mr A WATSON: No, no, Madam Deputy Chair, sorry; this is a new matter. The
member said that those who have risen are guilty. I am the one who rose; he
then implies that I am guilty. He must withdraw. You cannot postpone
everything. We are raising points of order and you must rule on them,
please. That is your job, Madam Deputy Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): With due respect, hon
Watson, I made a ruling that the matter will be taken over. Now you are
actually ... [Interjections.] Listen, listen! I listened to you when you
rose in a huff, and right now I have made a ruling and I am going to pursue
that. Continue.

Mr D V BLOEM: Maybe to help, Mama, let us take a short ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, is it a new
matter?

Mr D V BLOEM: Yes, Mama. Maybe we must take a shortcut. Let the hon member
name and shame and then it’s closed. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem,
unfortunately, we are not the investigating team. I have made a ruling; can
you please abide by that?

Mr D V BLOEM: I withdraw, Mama. [Laughter.]

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chair, Premier Magashule...

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Madam Deputy Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it
parliamentary to call the Chairperson “Mama”? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon, Sinclair, let’s
not waste any more time. I am even more than a Mama. In isiZulu, it is not
an insult. [Applause.] Continue, hon member.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Deputy Chairperson, I am very serious on this point. It is
fine; we agree that you are a Mama, but there are certain procedures and
parliamentary protocol that we must adhere to. I have great respect for the
hon Bloem, but to call you “Mama”, I think, is unparliamentary.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Thank you, hon member,
but I am not going to entertain that; continue.
Mr A G MATILA: There is a problem with two Copes here.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): No, continue.

Mr A G MATILA: The one is trying to cope, the other one I’m not sure ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Both of them are Cope
members, and please do not waste time. Continue.

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chair, I think I am not going to read my speech, I’m
going to ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, this is
final!

Mr A G MATILA: You see, hon Bloem, I think it is important for you to
second some of your members to these committees.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Matila, can you
stick to the discussion? [Applause.]

Mr A G MATILA: No, Deputy Chair, I am on the discussion, because this
matter was raised earlier. I want to correct it, you see, because people
are calling themselves Cope, but they do not understand the history of the
organisation, because they quote different dates. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Is it a new thing?

Mr D B FELDMAN: Yes, it’s a new thing.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): All right.

Mr D B FELDMAN: I think the member’s time has expired. Thank you.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): You are very wrong.
Continue.

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chair, this House is not here to protect provinces.
This House is here to deal with the interests of provinces. It’s not to
protect; because you can’t protect wrong things. The MEC and the
chairperson from the Western Cape want to protect wrong things.

I am referring to that precisely because of what the President of this
country and Ace Magashule, the Premier of the Free State, indicated to them
in the Free State: that they are looking at black and white people
differently. I am saying this precisely because that is a racist approach,
and Ace Magashule said that it is a racist approach and that it is wrong.
[Interjections.]

The second thing that I wanted to bring to your attention is that these two
Bills are here to strengthen and make sure that the wrongs of apartheid are
dealt with properly, because they are strengthening the police. They are
assisting the police. We must be aware that the police force, during
apartheid, as the President has indicated, was highly corrupt. They were a
law unto themselves.

Ace Magashule indicated that some of you were sitting in the National
Party, making those particular laws and protecting the policemen while they
were doing all those wrong things. You know that you gave them a fund to
kill Africans, black people? I pity ...

Mr A WATSON: No, no, Madam Deputy Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson ...

Mr A WATSON: No, Madam Deputy Chair, the speaker cannot look at me and say:
“Do you know you gave them a fund?” [Laughter.] In any case, which
Bloemfontein meeting is he talking about?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson, and those
who were not in Bloemfontein, and even people who are seated here right
now, at no stage has the hon member said “Watson”. I then say, please, no
further interjections. Continue, hon Matila; keep to the point and go on.

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chair, maybe let ... But what is wrong?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Continue, hon Matila.

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chair, as the ANC we are saying ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Matila, continue
and go straight to the point.

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chair, as the ANC we say we support this particular
Bill ...

Mr A WATSON: Madam Deputy Chair, can I just get a point of clarity?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Just hold on.

Mr A WATSON: Just on a point of clarity, both you and the speaker referred
to Bloemfontein. When were we in Bloemfontein?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Is it a new matter, Mr
Watson?

Mr A WATSON: Yes, I want to know which meeting in Bloemfontein you are
referring to, Madam Deputy Chair.

Mr A G MATILA: The last sitting in Bloemfontein. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): That is the Free State.

Mr A WATSON: The Free State is not Bloemfontein, Madam Deputy Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Continue, hon Matila.

Mr A G MATILA: Thank you for your correction, Mr Watson; it is in Qwaqwa.
Deputy Chair ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Continue. Your time is
up.

Mr A G MATILA: I must indicate, Deputy Chair, I am sorry about this, I must
indicate that, as the ANC ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): You have five minutes.

Mr A G MATILA: We will continue and we will make sure that this Bill is
implemented, even in the Western Cape. Thank you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): No, no, you have time;
you have five minutes.

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chairperson, the purpose of this particular Bill ...
[Interjections.]

Mr R A LEES: Hon Deputy Chair, hon Watson is not as handsome as I am.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I don’t know about
that. [Laughter.]

Mr R A LEES: Hon Deputy Chair, is the member prepared to take a question?

Mr A G MATILA: Yes.

Mr R A LEES: Hon Deputy Chair, through you to the hon member: Does the hon
member know in which province eThekwini is situated? [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Continue, hon Matila.
You don’t have to answer that.

Mr A G MATILA: eThekwini is in KwaZulu-Natal. eThekwini was previously
Durban.

Deputy Chair, this Bill makes provision for establishing an Independent
Police Investigative Directorate and regulating the functions of the
directorate. The Bill provides for the establishment of a management
committee and a consultative forum, and their respective powers. It also
provides for reporting obligations and co-operation from members of the SA
Police Service and municipal police services.

The essential changes that the Bill seeks to effect are summarised as
follows. The directorate will be known as the Independent Police
Investigative Directorate. The directorate has a specific and clearly
defined mandate.

It is no longer complaints-orientated but investigation-focused. The Bill
compels the police to comply with the directorate’s disciplinary
recommendations. The responsibility to monitor police compliance with the
Domestic Violence Act was removed and transferred to the Civilian
Secretariat for Police Service.

The Bill creates clear lines of co-operation between the directorate and
the municipal police and the SAPS, as well as between the directorate and
the Civilian Secretariat for Police Service, and provides a mechanism for
referral of matters from the directorate and Civilian Secretariat for
Police Service.

The Bill provides for the establishment of a Civilian Secretariat for
Police Service in the Republic in accordance with section 208 of the
Constitution. The Civilian Secretariat for Police Service functions under
the direction of the Minister. Furthermore, the Bill defines the objects,
functions and powers of the Civilian Secretariat for Police Service, and,
for this purpose, aligns the operations of the secretariat in the national
and provincial spheres of government.

The Bill reorganises the secretariat into an effective and efficient organ
of state. It regulates the appointment, duties and functions, powers and
the removal from office of the secretary for the police and heads of
provincial secretariats. Let me conclude and the rest will be read later.

In conclusion, the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Development, having considered these particular Bills, moves that we adopt
these Bills. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, I’m
pleading with you. Can everybody in this Council be very attentive because
we are calling back the Deputy Minister. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Deputy Chairperson, Members of Parliament,
and all parties who supported the fight against crime, to support this
legislation is to support the fight against crime. If you don’t support it,
it means you are comfortable with the level of crime that is taking place.

I would like to apologise on behalf of my Ministry for raising the blood
pressure of some members in the House with these pieces of legislation.

As I have said, my time is very limited. I just want to thank hon
Beyleveldt from the DA, who is concerned about the independence of the two
structures. I have taken note of your concerns, and we are going to make
sure that they indeed remain independent.

Hon Mokgobi, thank you very much for the political induction that you gave
the House. Chairperson of the portfolio committee, and members of the ANC,
thank you very much for giving your guidance with regard to these two
pieces of legislation. To the Western Cape MEC, and the chairperson of the
committee in the Western Cape, unfortunately, when we legislate, we
legislate for the country and not for a certain province. We legislate for
everyone, as government.

This Bill is about fighting crime effectively and not about giving powers
to provinces to do whatever they want to do. It is about fighting crime in
this country. Secondly, I would like to say let’s concern ourselves with
fighting crime and not with fighting one another to keep our power. It is
not about that, but it is about fighting crime. That is the purpose of
these two pieces of legislation.

This piece of legislation deals with the police. It does not deal with
defence. Defence and the police are two different structures with two
different mandates. So, there is no way they can be the same. They can’t be
the same and they won’t be the same.

To my friend over there, I told you that you are my friend and, indeed, you
did attest to that. Hon Makhubela from Cope, I would like to thank Cope for
supporting that.

...abazi bona ukuthi mina nawe sivelaphi na? [... they do not know where we
are coming from.]

I have listened to two or three people who mentioned the issue of “shoot to
kill”. To shoot to kill was never a policy of the ANC, but we are saying
that if the police find themselves confronted by such a situation and an
accident happened in such a way that someone dies, that person shouldn’t be
the police member. That is what we are saying. Thank you very much, Deputy
Chair, and thanks for the support. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Independent Police Investigative Directorate Bill be
agreed to.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): That concludes the
debate. I shall now put the question in respect of the First Order. The
question is that the Bill be agreed to.

In accordance with Rule 71, I shall first allow provinces the opportunity
to make their declaration of vote, if they so wish.
Before I continue, are all your cards in, or where they are not working,
can the members be supplied with the voting papers?

I now call upon the provinces to vote: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng,
KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West and the
Western Cape. Have all the provinces voted? Voting will close. Could the
Table staff submit the results?

Hon members, as we all understand the ruling, the Northern Cape has not
sent in the relevant paper. So, in that case, it means then that the
Northern Cape vote will not be accepted. Can the Northern Cape make a
follow-up on that, that the mandate was not received?

Mr G G MOKGORO: Deputy Chair, I will definitely make a follow-up. It is the
first time I come across something like this.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I think it’s a delay on
the part of the provincial officers. But right now, in this case, I can’t
accept the Northern Cape vote.

This means that out of the nine, the Western Cape has not voted in favour.
They have abstained, which has left us with eight. Now we are cutting off
the Northern Cape and we are left with seven. The policy allows us then to
declare the Bill accepted. [Applause.]

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West.

AGAINST: Western Cape.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Deputy Chair, on a point of order ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Yes, sir!

Mr A WATSON: There is no way that this House can vote for two Bills at the
same time.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): No, no! I am correcting
that. We are now going to be voting for the second one. Thank you.

Mr A WATSON: Then we must start afresh if you are ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): We are now going to
vote for the second one! Thank you.

Mr A WATSON: But you didn’t announce that we are voting for the first one.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I am announcing it, Mr
Watson, thank you very much.


Now, can we vote for the second one. I shall now put the question in
respect of the Second Order. The question is that the Bill be agreed to.

Question put: That the Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill be
agreed to.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): In accordance with Rule
71, I shall first allow provinces an opportunity to make their declaration
of vote, if they so wish.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. I shall do this in
alphabetical order per province. Delegation heads must please insert their
cards.

Before I call the vote, please press button number one to confirm your
presence. There should be a light flashing. If not, the Chamber staff will
assist you.

We now come to the voting. When I call the name of the province, the
delegation heads will vote by pressing button number four for those who
vote in favour, button number two for those who vote against, and button
number three for those who abstain.

I now call the provinces to vote: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng,
KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape? [Interjections.]

Mr G G MOKGORO: I just want to know whether the second Bill’s mandate has
been received.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Has it? No, ok, so it
has not been received.

North West and Western Cape? Have all the provinces voted? In case there is
any member who has mistakenly pressed the incorrect button, he or she now
has an opportunity to press the correct button. Voting will close. Table
staff, could you submit the results?

IN FAVOUR:  Eastern  Cape,  Free  State,  Gauteng,  KwaZulu-Natal,  Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West.

AGAINST: Western Cape.

Bill accordingly agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

                           DEFENCE AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mong T M H MOFOKENG: Ke a leboha, Motlatsamodulasetulo.
Sekamolao sena maikemisetso a sona ke ho tla beha boikarabelo ho batho ba
ithaopang lebothong la sesole hore ba tlamehe ho fana ka ditshebeletso tsa
bona; le ho tla theha khomishene ya ditshebeletso tsa sesole; le ho tla
fana ka lohotho ya tlhaloso ho se bitswang “military command”.

Mafatsheng ka bophara lebotho la tshireletso le hlomamisitswe ka batho ba
banyane bao e kang ba fuwe kwetliso e boima. Mme ka mora mona ho na le bao
ba fanang ka ditshebeletso tsa bona feela ka ho ithaopa.

Maemong a naha ya rona mona, batho ba ithaopang sesoleng ba fana feela ka
ditshebeletso tsa ho ithaopa nakong eo ba hlokwang, mme ha ho na letho leo
le ba qobellang hore ba itlalehe kwetlisong, le hore ba fane ka
ditshebeletso tsa bona nakong eo ho tlamehang hore ba tlo thusa ka maemo a
polokeho dinaheng tseo ho nang le dintwa le ho hloka botsitso.

Ba qobelehile feela ho fana ka ditshebeletso tsa bona nakong ya ntwa le
maemong a qomatsi, le ha ba tlamehile ba fane ka tshebeletso tshireletsong
ya naha. Hona ho etsa hore ho be thata ho ba apesa morwalo wa tshireletso
hore ba fane ka mehlodi moo e tlamehileng hore e fanwe teng.

Sekamolao sena se etsa hore batho bao ba ithaopang sesoleng ba tlamehe ho
fana ka ditshebeletso tsa bona ha ho hlokahala hore ba fane ka
ditshebeletso tsa bohlokwa; ba tshehetse mafapha a mmuso; le moo ba
tlamehileng hore ba tshehetse teng ho sebetsanwe le ho nyollwa ha maemo a
moruo; le ho fana ka tshireletso meeding.

Ho a hlokahala hore maemong a tjena, ka ha ditekanyetso tsa lefapha di ntse
di fokotseha, sekamolao sena se kenngwe tshebetsong. Komiti, ka morao hore
e sekaseke sekamolao sena, e tshehetsa sekamolao sena. Ke a leboha.
(Translation of Sesotho speech follows.)

[Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Thank you, Chairperson. The objects of this Bill are to
make Reserve Force members accountable so that they can assist with their
services; to establish a Defence Force Service Commission; and also to
provide a definition for what is called “military command”.

In countries around the world, the defence force comprises few people who
have been trained very thoroughly. On the other hand, there are those who
provide their services voluntarily.

With the situation in our country, Reserve Force members provide their
services only when they are needed. There is nothing forcing them to report
for training, and also to provide their services when there is a need for
assistance with stability in other countries where there are wars and
unrest.

They are only obliged to provide their services when there is war and
during crisis situations, and also when their services are needed for
protecting the country. This makes it very difficult to make them
responsible for the country’s defence as well as provide resources where
they are needed.

This Bill will ensure that all Reserve Force members are obliged to provide
their services in the best possible manner, support governmental
departments, help wherever they can in developing the economy of the
country, and give protection at border gates.

It is important that, under conditions where the departmental budget is
being reduced, this Bill should be implemented. After a great lengthy
discussion around this Bill, the committee supports it. Thank you.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Before I actually
continue with procedures, may I now announce that the Northern Cape’s
permission is here. So we will include your voting, and you are going to
vote from now on. [Applause.] [Interjections.]
I shall now put the question in respect of the Third Order.

Mr A WATSON: Madam Deputy Chair, on a point of order: Could you please
explain to this House, how you can, after receiving a piece of paper,
declare a vote that you have already declared, changed? You cannot declare
a vote and then change it again - your vote was declared!

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson, I explained
earlier that, though they have voted, because we hadn’t received the
mandate, that is why we said we were withholding their vote. Now the
mandate has come ... [Interjections.]

I beg your pardon! Can you repeat that, hon member, can you? Can you repeat
what you’ve said? Then may people behave, because I have a very sharp ear!
A very sharp ear! Sinclair, you are out of order!

The thing is now, Northern Cape, you may vote; your mandate is here.

May I continue now?

Mr K A SINCLAIR: May I have a point of order, Madam?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): If it’s a different
matter, I will listen to you, but if it’s connected to this, unfortunately,
hon member, I won’t entertain it.
They had voted, but I then had to withhold their votes, because the mandate
was not in yet. Now, the mandate has come in and they had voted; we accept
those votes and they are going to continue voting. [Interjections.]

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Madam Deputy Chairperson, can I just plead with you to
understand that the process that we are following is a very important
process. And nowhere in the Rules is there a position that allows the
Chairperson to withhold a vote, as you remarked now. It is not procedurally
proper. So, all we are trying to do is to assist in the process.

If the Northern Cape, which only received their mandate now, wants to
continue voting for specific votes, then I suppose they would be in a
position to do it, but the Northern Cape couldn’t partake in the process of
the previous two that were presented.

Mr M C MAINE: Thank you, Deputy Chair. I think now ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Is this a new matter?

Mr M C MAINE: I just wanted to give clarity to the House. Deputy Chair, I
think the vote of the Northern Cape is with regard to the two Bills that we
have passed. The following Bills that we are going to consider do not need
that particular document, and that would not in any way change the outcomes
because the House has already adopted the Bills. Thank you, Deputy Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Thank you for the
clarity. Hon Watson, is it a new matter?

  Mr A WATSON: Madam, I request that I may address the Chair. Can I please
  remind you, Madam Deputy Chair, that before we voted for the second Bill,
  hon Mokgobi stood up and asked if that applied also to this vote. Was
  there no mandate? Advocate Maine stood up and told you that there wasn’t
  one. He then said, in that case, “I will not vote”.

So, really, I do not understand how you now can declare that they have
voted in favour. Voting was closed. I ask you to please investigate.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Watson, I said they
had voted, and we withheld those votes. But now the mandate is here, they
can vote. May I continue?

I shall now put the question in respect of the Third Order. The question
put is that the Bill be agreed to.

In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow political parties to make
their declarations of vote, if they so wish. Is there any party that wants
to make a declaration? None.

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. Before I call the vote,
please press button number one to confirm your presence, all hon members,
not delegation heads only.

There should be lights flashing. If not, the service officers will assist
you. May I draw the attention of the service officers to please be on the
alert to assist members.

Could you please give everybody the voting papers, because the machines are
not working? Are they? But for those that are not working, the staff will
be moving around to take manual votes.

Have all members voted? In case there is any member who has mistakenly
pressed the incorrect button, he or she has an opportunity to press the
correct button.

Voting is closed. Could the Table staff submit the results? Have all
members submitted their votes?

Forty two members have voted in favour. [Applause.] I therefore declare the
Bill agreed to in terms of section 75 of the Constitution.
Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

                     MAGISTRATES’ COURTS AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mr A G MATILA: Deputy Chair, the Magistrates’ Courts Amendment Bill amends
the Magistrates’ Courts Act of 1944, and regulates the qualifications
required for the appointment of a person as a magistrate, additional
magistrate and  magistrate of a regional court. The Bill also seeks to
regulate the inclusion of magistrates of regional divisions on the list of
magistrates who may adjudicate on civil disputes, amongst other things.

The amendment that most concerned the select committee proposes that the
minimum requirement of an LLB qualification be deleted and be substituted
with the words:


  ... any appropriately qualified man or woman who is a fit and proper
  person may be appointed as a magistrate, an additional magistrate or a
  magistrate of a regional division.

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
considered the Magistrates’ Courts Amendment Bill [B 23B-2010] (National
Assembly-sec 75) referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the Bill
without amendments. Thank you. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

    REPEAL OF THE BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS
                               AMENDMENT BILL

                (Consideration of Bill and of Report thereon)

Mong T M H MOFOKENG: Modulasetulo wa komiti e kgethilweng ya ntshetsopele
ya molaotheo le tshireletso, ke a leboha. Motlatsi wa Modulasetulo, Molao
wa Tsamaiso ya Batho ba Batsho o ile wa hlakolwa ka selemo sa 2005, mme tse
ding tsa dikarolwana tsa teng di ile tsa tlohelwa hore makgotla a dinyewe a
setso a nne a tswele pele.

Ntho e etsahalang hajwale ke hore Bili ya Makgotla a Setso e tla hlakola
Molao wa Tsamaiso ya Batho ba Batsho, mme ho kopuwang feela hajwale ke
kekeletso ya nako hore ho tle ho sebetsanwe le dintlha tse salletseng morao
biling ena. Komiti e ile ya dula ho sekaseka tlaleho ena jwaleka ha e
tlisitswe ho yona mme e dumellana le kekeletso eno ya nako. Ke a leboha.
[Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho speech follows.)

[Mr T M H MOFOKENG: Chairperson of the Select Committee on Security and
Constitutional Development, thank you. Deputy Chairperson, the Black
Administration Act was abolished in 2005, and some parts of the Act were
amended so that traditional courts would continue.

What is happening at the present moment is that the Traditional Courts Bill
will replace the Black Administration Act, and what is required at this
moment is the extension of the deadline so that the outstanding matters
pertaining to the Bill can be dealt with thoroughly. The committee sat down
to discuss this requirement as it was submitted to it, and therefore the
time was extended. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): I shall now put the
question. The question is that the Bill subject to the proposed amendments
be agreed to. In accordance with Rule 63, I shall first allow political
parties to make their declarations of vote if they so wish

We shall now proceed to the voting on the question. Before I call the
voting, please press button number one to confirm your presence. There
should be lights flashing. Are your lights flashing? Those in favour,
please press button number four. Those against, press button number two and
those who are abstaining, press button number three. Have all members
voted?

If any of the members have mistakenly pressed the incorrect button, please
press the correct button now.

Mr D V BLOEM: Is it parliamentary for a member to intimidate another member
about how to vote, because there is a member of the ruling
party telling me that I must vote in favour.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Bloem, do me a
favour, stop playing. We are busy with our business here.

Bill agreed to in accordance with section 75 of the Constitution.

 CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON SECURITY AND CONSTITUTIONAL
  DEVELOPMENT - AMENDMENTS TO CONVENTION ON PROHIBITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS ON
  USE OF CERTAIN CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS WHICH MAY BE DEEMED TO BE EXCESSIVELY
              INJURIOUS OR TO HAVE INDISCRIMINATE EFFECTS (CCW)

Mr M H MOKGOBI: Chairperson, the significance of the Bill is that it is
legally binding, it enjoys wide acclaim, it contributes to the control of
measures, it stabilises Africa, it maintains international peace, and it
limits and alleviate, the suffering caused by excessively injurious
weapons.

It means that South Africa will also contribute to international peace and
security. It has no financial implications for South Africa other than the
meeting. We therefore recommend its adoption. [Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: Madam Chair, May I respectfully request the hon member who has
just spoken to withdraw the word “Bill,”. He said “the Bill” instead of
“convention”; we are not voting on a Bill, we are voting on a convention. I
thank you.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Okay, it has been done.
I shall now put the question that the report be agreed to. In accordance
with Rule 71, I shall first allow all provinces the opportunity to make
their declarations of vote.

Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo, Mpumalanga,
Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape? Have all the members voted?

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Voting will now close.
May I bring to the attention of the Western Cape that they have voted
twice; and we only have nine provinces. [Interjections.] Anyway, all nine
provinces have voted in favour.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

   CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INTERNATIONAL
  RELATIONS – ACCESSION TO THE AFRICAN CHARTER ON DEMOCRACY, ELECTIONS AND
                                 GOVERNANCE

Mr D D GAMEDE: Deputy Chairperson, even though I am being strongly lobbied,
I will stick to the main points. This is about the African Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Governance. [Interjections.] Well, if the hon
member must know, the African Charter is derived from the Freedom Charter.

Even in the postcolonial years, Africa remains a troubled continent due to
conflicts and skirmishes that occasionally erupt in some parts of the
continent. It is uncommon in most conflict-ridden African countries to
observe that those who are in positions of power tend to ascend to such
positions through conventional means. Subsequently, they use the state to
improve their individual economic position and that of their allies and
cronies at the expense of service to the electorate.

Dictatorship, repression and oppression cannot be conceptualised unless
there is exclusion of socioeconomic development. The instability caused by
skirmishes and corrupt practices has for many years had the effect of
perpetuating Africa’s underdevelopment and the deepening of poverty and
inequality.

It should also be noted that while individual countries have sovereign
powers and nonderogative rights to self-determination, the exercise of such
rights and powers cannot prejudice the fundamental human rights of citizens
of such countries.

It is against this background that the Eighth Ordinary Session of the
African Union held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on 30 January 2007, adopted
the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance as a means to
safeguard democracy. The state parties have assented to the provisions of
the Charter.

Democracy in Africa, in context, is anchored by three pillars:
representative democracy with a right to vote for and stand for election to
any legislature in a country; equality of rights for all citizens
regardless of race, colour or sex; and participatory democracy as a
struggle of collective self-emancipation by democratic organs of self-
government.
State parties reaffirmed their collective will to work for the deepening
and consolidations of the rule of law, peace, security, and development,
and committed themselves to the universal values and principles of
democracy, good governance, human rights, and the right to development.

State parties bound themselves to the fact that the use of, inter alia, the
following illegal means of assenting to or maintaining power constitutes an
unconstitutional change of government aforementioned: any coup d'état
against the democratically elected government; any intervention by
mercenaries to replace a democratically elected government; and any
replacement of a democratically elected government by armed dissidents or
rebels; any refusal by any incumbent government to relinquish power to the
winning party or candidate after free, fair and regular elections; any
amendment or revision of the constitution or legal instrument which is an
infringement of the principles of a democratic change of government.

The South African Constitution is regarded as one of the best in the world
as it entrenches the Bill of Rights. It is reasonable to conclude that this
charter attempts to extend these fundamental values to the rest of the
continent. If South Africa were to fail to live up to the articles of the
Charter, it would constitute a breach of her own Constitution, a wrongful
act worthy of impeachment and blame. I, therefore, urge that this House
adopts accession to this charter.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

    CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF SELECT COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT -
  AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLES VI AND XIV.A OF INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
                                   STATUTE

Mr M C MAINE: Thank you, Deputy Chair, the Select Committee on Economic
Development has considered and adopted amendments to the International
Atomic Energy Agency Statute Article VI, Board of Governors and Article
XIV.A, Finance. We therefore recommend to this House to adopt the report.
Thank you, Deputy Chairperson.

Debate concluded.

Question put: That the Report be adopted.
IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Report accordingly adopted in accordance with section 65 of the
Constitution.

The Council adjourned at 12:51.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          MONDAY, 22 NOVEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

   1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

 (1)  The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Finance
       for consideration and report:
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Revenue Service (Sars) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP173-2010].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Financial
             Intelligence Centre for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP240-2010].

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting
             Standards Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP206-2010].

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
             Regulatory Board for Auditors for 2009-10, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP207-2010].

        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 7 – National
             Treasury for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.

        (f)      Financial Statements of the Project Development Facility
             for Auditors for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.


         (g)     Financial Statements of the Office of the Technical
             Assistance Unit for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.

     2) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Human Sciences
             Research Council (HSRC) for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP164-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of
             South Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Council for Natural Scientific Professions for 2009-10,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory
             Council on Innovation for 2009-10.


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 17 – Sport and
             Recreation South Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP205-2010].
     3) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Social
        Services consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 16 – Department
             of Social Development for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP127-2010].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
             Development Agency for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP19-2010].

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
             Laboratory Service for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.

     4) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
             Justice and Constitutional Development for 2009-10, including
             the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP219-2010].

        (b)      Report on Monies in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on Monies
             in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2009-10 [RP237-2010].
        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
             Justice and Constitutional Development on the Criminal Assets
             Recovery Account for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP224-2010].

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 18 –
             Correctional Services for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP119-2010].

     5) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Land
        and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Trans-Caledon
             Tunnel Authority (TCTA) for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Water Research
             Commission for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2008-09 [RP188-2010].

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Agricultural
             Research Council for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP201-2010].

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Perishable Products
             Export Control Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.

        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the National
             Agricultural Marketing Council for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP199-2009].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
             Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP218-2010].

        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Onderstepoort
             Biological Products (Ltd) for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.

     6) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Public
        Services for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Air Traffic and
             Navigation Services Company Limited for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements
             and Performance Information for 2009- 10.

        (b)      Reports and Financial Statements of the Cross-Border Road
             Transport Agency for 2009-10, including the Reports of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2007-08 and 2008-09.

     7) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Education and Recreation for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Heritage Resources Agency for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Blind SA for 2009-
             10, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Afrikaans Language
             Museum and Language Monument for 2009-10, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP239-2010].

        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Artscape for 2009-
             10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10
             [RP200-2010].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of Business and Arts South
             Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP70-2010].

        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Ditsong Museums of
             South Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.

        (g)      Report and Financial Statements of the Freedom Park Trust
             for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10
             [RP213-2010].

        (h)      Report and Financial Statements of the Iziko Museums of
             Cape Town for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP166-2010].

        (i)      Report and Financial Statements of the Luthuli Museum for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10
             [RP187-2010].

        (j)      Report and Financial Statements of the Market Theatre
             Foundation for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP54-2010].

        (k)      Report and Financial Statements of the
             Msunduzi/Voortrekker Museum for 2009-10, including the Report
             of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.

        (l)      Report and Financial Statements of the Natal Museum for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10
             [RP203-2010].


        (m)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Arts
             Council for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP245-2010].

        (n)      Report and Financial Statements of the National English
             Literary Museum for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.

        (o)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Film and
             Video Foundation for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP186-2010].

        (p)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Heritage
             Council for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP221-2010].

        (q)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Library of
             South Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP209-2010].

        (r)      Report and Financial Statements of the Nelson Mandela
             Museum for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2009-10 [RP225-2010].

        (s)      Report and Financial Statements of the Pan South African
             Language Board for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.

        (t)      Report and Financial Statements of the KwaZulu-Natal
             Performing Arts Company (Trading as the Playhouse Company) for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.

        (u)      Report and Financial Statements of the Robben Island
             Museum for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2009-10 [RP180-2010].

        (v)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Library for the Blind for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP159-2010].

        (w)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African State
             Theatre for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP161-2010].

        (x)      Report and Financial Statements of the War Museum of the
             Boer Republics for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.

        (y)      Report and Financial Statements of the William Humphreys
             Art Gallery for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.


        (z)      Report and Financial Statements of the Windybrow Centre
             for the Arts for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.

     8) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Land and
        Environmental Affairs for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 27 – Department
             of Rural Development and Land Reform for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP241-2010].

     9) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on Trade
        and International Relations:
        (a)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Republic of Kenya on
             Cooperation in the Field of Tourism, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

        (b)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Republic of Kenya on Cooperation in the Field of
             Tourism.

        (c)      Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
             Africa and the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt on
             Cooperation in the Field of Tourism, tabled in terms of section
             231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

        (d)      Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the
             Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government
             of the Arab Republic of Egypt on Cooperation in the Field of
             Tourism.

    10) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Labour
        and Public Enterprises for consideration and report:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Sentech Limited for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
             10.

    11) The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on Public
        Services for consideration and report:
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 16 – Human
             Settlements for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP185-2010].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

 1. Report of  the  Select  Committee  on  Finance  on  the  Amendments  to
    Schedules 1 and 2 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act,  2001  (Act
    No. 38 of 2001), dated 17 November 2010.

      The Select Committee on Finance, having considered the  Amendments  to
      Schedule 1 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No.  38
      of 2001) and Amendments to Schedule 2 of  the  Financial  Intelligence
      Centre Act, 2001 (Act No. 38 of 2001),  reports  that  the  House,  in
      terms  of  section  73  (3)  and  section  75  (3)  of  the  Financial
      Intelligence Centre Act, approves the said Amendments.


    Report to be considered.

                          TUESDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

     1) Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 23 November 2010:


          a) Defence Amendment Bill [B 11B – 2010] (National Assembly – sec
             75).


          b) Magistrates’ Courts Amendment Bill [B 23B – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


          c) Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment of
             Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B 37 – 2010] (National Assembly –
             sec 75).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development
    (a)     Government Notice No R.880 published in Government Gazette No
        33601 dated 8 October 2010: Amendment of Schedule 1 in terms of the
        Drugs    and Drug Trafficking Act, 1992 (Act No 140 of 1992).


    (b)     Proclamation No R. 43 published in Government Gazette No 33506
        dated 27 August 2010:  Referral of matters to existing Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
        1997).


2.    The Minister of Police

    (a)     Proclamation No 4 published in the Government Gazette No 33000
        dated 5 March 2010: Notification by President in respect of
        entities involved in terrorist and related activities identified by
        the United Nations Security Council, made in terms of section 25 of
        the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and
        Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of
        section 26 of the Act.


    (b)     Proclamation No 5 published in the Government Gazette No 33000
        dated 5 March 2010: Notification by President in respect of
        entities involved in terrorist and related activities identified by
        the United Nations Security Council, made in terms of section 25 of
        the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and
        Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of
        section 26 of the Act.


    (c)     Proclamation No 18 published in the Government Gazette No 33180
        dated 14 May 2010: Notification by President in respect of entities
        involved in terrorist and related activities identified by the
        United Nations Security Council, made in terms of section 25 of the
        Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and
        Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of
        section 26 of the Act.


    (d)     Proclamation No 22 published in the Government Gazette No 33180
        dated 14 May 2010: Notification by President in respect of entities
        involved in terrorist and related activities identified by the
        United Nations Security Council, made in terms of section 25 of the
        Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and
        Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of
        section 26 of the Act.


    (e)     Proclamation No 28 published in the Government Gazette No 33281
        dated 14 June 2010: Notification by President in respect of
        entities involved in terrorist and related activities identified by
        the United Nations Security Council, made in terms of section 25 of
        the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and
        Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of
        section 26 of the Act.


    (f)     Proclamation No 29 published in the Government Gazette No 33281
        dated 14 June 2010: Notification by President in respect of
        entities involved in terrorist and related activities identified by
        the United Nations Security Council, made in terms of section 25 of
        the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and
        Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of
        section 26 of the Act.


    (g)     Proclamation No 30 published in the Government Gazette No 33281
        dated 14 June 2010: Notification by President in respect of
        entities involved in terrorist and related activities identified by
        the United Nations Security Council, made in terms of section 25 of
        the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and
        Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of
        section 26 of the Act.


    (h)     Proclamation No 32 published in the Government Gazette No 33392
        dated 28 July 2010: Notification by President in respect of
        entities involved in terrorist and related activities identified by
        the United Nations Security Council, made in terms of section 25 of
        the Protection of Constitutional Democracy Against Terrorist and
        Related Activities, 2004 (Act No 33 of 2004), tabled in terms of
        section 26 of the Act.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

   1.  REPORT  OF  THE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  ON  CO-OPERATIVE  GOVERNANCE  AND
      TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON CONSIDERATION OF THE PROGRESS  REPORTS  ON  THE
      INTERVENTIONS IN  ALFRED  NZO  DISTRICT,  SUNDAY’S  RIVER  VALLEY  AND
      KOUKAMMA LOCAL MUNICIPALITIES IN THE EASTERN CAPE, ISSUED IN TERMS  OF
      SECTION 139(1)(B) OF THE CONSTITUION, 1996 – DATED 23 NOVEMBER 2010

1.    Background and Overview

1.1   Intervention in local government  in  terms  of  section  139  of  the
      Constitution is an integral part of the  institutional  framework  for
      developmental local government. It is a necessary  corrective  when  a
      municipality fails to govern and thus jeopardises  the  enterprise  of
      development. It is also an aspect of intergovernmental relations  and,
      as such, it must  be  exercised  within  the  spirit  of  co-operative
      government as outlined in Chapter 3 of the Constitution.

1.2   Against this background, three  municipalities  in  the  Eastern  Cape
      Province received a considerable amount of section  139  interventions
      during the 2009/10 and 2010/11 financial years. These included, Alfred
      Nzo District, Koukamma and Sunday’s River Valley Local Municipalities.
      The observation, situation and gap analysis of the  current  situation
      revealed the following shortcomings:

         • Absence of co-operative governance amongst critical stakeholders
         • Poor institutional capacity and organisational systems impacting
           on service delivery
         • Problems with respect to municipal debt and  inadequate  billing
           systems
         • Problems with financial management and  control.  There  was  no
           adherence to regulations of the MFMA.
         • Public accountability has been one of the  worst  challenges  as
           the municipalities continue to obtain disclaimers and  qualified
           opinions from the Auditor-General.
         • Performance challenges of senior municipal officials.

2.    Introduction

2.1   On 19 October 2010, the Eastern Cape  MEC  for  Local  Government  and
      Traditional Affairs, Hon S Gqobana briefed the Select Committee on Co-
      operative Governance and Traditional Affairs on the progress  made  in
      respect of interventions at Alfred Nzo District, Koukamma and Sunday’s
      River Valley Local Municipalities.

3.     Progress  Report  on  the  Intervention  in   Alfred   Nzo   District
Municipality

3.1   It was reported that an  Administrator  had  been  appointed  from  20
      April 2009, and he assumed responsibilities  on  financial  management
      (financial  recovery  plan);  corporate  services,  including  general
      administration and human resource; infrastructure development and  MIG
      funding and public participation.

3.2   On financial management systems, progress made was with regard to  the
      activation of a financial system (SAMRAS) which had  been  bought  and
      abandoned by the Municipality. A reliable billing system on SAMRAS has
      been  developed.  It  was  reported  that  accurate  annual  financial
      statements were submitted on  31  August  2009.  Furthermore,  a  debt
      recovery plan was approved and implemented, and  all  creditors  whose
      payments had been outstanding for more than 120  days  were  paid.  In
      addition, an improved record-keeping system  and  a  fully  integrated
      payroll was now in place.

3.3   Significant achievements were also  registered  with  regards  to  the
      appointment of the Municipal Manager, as well as the  Chief  Financial
      Officer. Specific financial policies were now  in  place,  and  public
      participation was starting to yield the desired results. The Municipal
      Infrastructure Grant (MIG) projects were ring-fenced and thus used for
      their intended purpose only. Intervention has  since  been  terminated
      and the Administrator submitted a close-out report.

4.    Progress Report on the Intervention in Koukamma Local Municipality

4.1   The Department reported on good governance and  public  participation.
      The lax attitude towards corporate governance processes and  the  lack
      of organizational leadership has been addressed. Steps have been taken
      to improve communication with the community through the  establishment
      of the stakeholder forum. All of the recommendations  of  the  Special
      Investigations Unit (SIU) have been implemented.

4.2   On financial reporting and billing management, progress has been  made
      in terms of the new financial record-keeping systems which  have  been
      introduced using clean data. The annual financial reports for  2008/09
      were compiled and the Auditor-General has started the audit.

4.3   Significant achievements were reported on the revenue  management  and
      enhancement strategy that has been developed. A Debt Collection Policy
      has since been adopted and promulgated. A total of 4 730  debtors  who
      owed the Municipality a total amount  of  R47  416  683.14  have  been
      contacted.  An Asset Register has been developed  and  a  draft  fraud
      prevention plan is in place, with various cost-cutting measures having
      been approved and implemented.

4.4   The new draft organogram was approved by Council and  was  costed.  It
      is envisaged that the new positions will be advertised and  interviews
      completed. The appointments of  a  new  Municipal  Manager  and  other
      Section 57 Managers were finalized. A  Performance  Management  System
      (PMS) has since been initiated,  with  PMS  contracts  being  drafted.
      Lastly, the disciplinary matters for the Municipal Manager  and  other
      Managers have been finalized.

4.5   The remaining challenge is the lack of water  resources  in  the  area
      due to a long-term drought.  Government intervention is  required.  In
      addition, the culture of non-payment for services by the community has
      not been completely overcome and needs more attention.

5.    Progress Report on the Intervention in  Sunday’s  River  Valley  Local
      Municipality
5.1   In Sunday’s River  Valley  Local  Municipality  the  intervention  was
      effected from 18 February 2010, with the Administrator assuming duties
      on areas of  finance,  human  resources,  infrastructure  and  service
      delivery, and legal and public participation.

5.2   Progress reported on finance related to Credit Control  and  the  Debt
      Management Policy which has been reviewed and adopted by the  council.
      The staff complement at Finance has increased, with 13 new  positions,
      of which 10 have been filled. There are now cost-cutting  measures  in
      place, e.g. telephone and 3G cards, travelling and fleet management.


5.3   In terms of institutional development, an HR Plan was  now  in  place.
      The Local Labour Forum structure was reviewed and it has started  pro-
      active labour engagement (5 meetings to date). It  was  reported  that
      service delivery is at the core of  the  council’s  agenda,  and  five
      council meetings have taken place in the past three months.

5.4    On  good  governance,  it  was  reported   that   investigations   of
      allegations of corruption, maladministration and misconduct are  being
      dealt with administratively, but the council  has  been  awaiting  the
      outcome of SIU investigations since June 2010. Disciplinary  processes
      and possible criminal charges have been considered for  two  officials
      at Community Services Directorate, with one official on suspension for
      alleged fraud and corruption.

5.5   What remains a challenge is  the  financial  bailout  needed  for  the
      survival of the Municipality. This is estimated  at  R20  million.  If
      this is not forthcoming, the achievements on the interventions will be
      compromised.

6.    Committee Observations and Opinion
6.1   The Committee has observed the remarkable improvements  brought  about
      by  the  interventions  in  the  three  municipalities.  However,  the
      Committee is of the opinion that the success of any intervention rests
      on the collective co-operation of all stakeholders in a municipality.

6.2   The Committee is of the opinion  that,  for  service  delivery  to  be
      effective and efficient in a municipality, there has to be a committed
      political and administrative leadership with sound administrative  and
      management  processes  in  place.  The  Department   should   continue
      providing this kind of  support  to  all  its  municipalities  in  the
      Province.

7.    Recommendations

7.1    Having  deliberated  on   the   progress   reports   of   the   three
      municipalities in Eastern Cape Province, the Select Committee  on  Co-
      operative Governance and Traditional Affairs recommends as follows:

        1.  The  NCOP  should  endorse  the   progress   reports   on   the
           interventions in Alfred  Nzo  District,  Koukamma  and  Sunday’s
           River Valley Local Municipalities.


        2. The Eastern Cape Department of Local Government and  Traditional
           Affairs should continue providing ongoing  support  to  all  its
           municipalities, in order to  help  indicate  potential  problems
           before they become crises, so that municipalities  are  able  to
           implement their own corrective measures when problems arises.


Report to be considered.

2.  REPORT  OF  THE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  ON   CO-OPERATIVE   GOVERNANCE   AND
   TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON CONSIDERATION OF THE 2007/08 PERFORMANCE REPORT OF
   NORTHERN CAPE MUNICIPALITIES – DATED 23 NOVEMBER 2010

1.    Background and Overview

1.1   The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs, having considered the directive of the  National  Council  of
      Provinces (NCOP) to consider and report  on  the  2007/08  Performance
      Report of Northern Cape Municipalities’ tabled  by  the  MEC  for  Co-
      operative Governance, Human Settlements  and  Traditional  Affairs  in
      terms of the requirements of the Local  Government  Municipal  Systems
      Act (Act 32 of 2000), reports as follows:

1.2    Municipalities  are  required  by  legislation  to   produce   annual
      performance reports in terms of section 46 of  the  Local  Government:
      Municipal Systems Act. Based on these reports, the MEC responsible for
      local  government  has  to  compile  a  consolidated  report  on   the
      performance of municipalities in the province and submit a  report  to
      the NCOP in terms of section 47 of the Act. In this case,  the  report
      provides an analysis of the municipal performance in the Northern Cape
      Province and also makes recommendations for corrective measures to  be
      undertaken in that regard.

1.3   In terms of NCOP Rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of  the  NCOP
      referred  the  2007/08  Report  of   Northern   Cape   Municipalities’
      Performance to the Select Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and
      Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.

2.    Introduction
2.1    On  11  January  2010,  the  Northern  Cape  MEC   for   Co-operative
      Governance, Human Settlements and Traditional Affairs, Hon K Mmoiemang
      tabled  the  2007/08  Performance  Report  of  Municipalities  in  the
      Northern Cape to the Office of the Chairperson of the NCOP,  in  terms
      of  section  47  of  the  Local  Government  Municipal  Systems   Act.
      Subsequent to the tabling, the Committee held a briefing meeting on 19
      October  2010  with  the  Northern  Cape  Department  of  Co-operative
      Governance, Human Settlements and Traditional Affairs.

3.    Presentation on the 2007/08  Northern  Cape  Municipality  Performance
Report

3.1    The  MEC  for  Co-operative   Governance,   Human   Settlements   and
      Traditional   Affairs,   presented   the   Northern    Cape    2007/08
      Municipalities’ Performance Report to the Committee. In his  political
      overview,  the  MEC  indicated  that  only  18  of  32  Northern  Cape
      municipalities had submitted Section 46 reports to the  Department  by
      end June 2009. In the  previous  year  18  annual  reports  were  also
      received.

3.2   The  MEC  reported  that  Northern  Cape  municipalities  perform,  on
      average, 21 functions with some capacity, which is measured on  budget
      information, staffing, equipment  and  the  use  of  external  service
      providers. On average 16% of positions at municipalities were  vacant.
      Key positions,  such  as  municipal  manager,  financial  manager  and
      technical service manager are filled in some cases  by  a  person  who
      does not have a relevant qualification for the position. Not  all  key
      positions are filled by MSA Section 57 appointments e.g. six municipal
      mangers were acting,  eleven  financial  managers  and  two  technical
      managers.

3.3   All municipalities provide free basic  water,  except  for  Pixley  ka
      Seme District Municipality, which does not have any households  living
      in settlements within its area of jurisdiction. By June 2008,  72%  of
      the  R222  million  MIG  allocation  for  2007/08  to  Northern   Cape
      municipalities had been spent. Eighteen municipalities had  not  spent
      their full allocation by 30 June 2008. In addition, 31 municipalities’
      2007/08 financial statements have been audited by the Auditor General.
      One  municipality’s  audit  report  is  still   outstanding,   namely,
      Phokwane, which submitted late.  Audit  outcomes  have  improved  from
      2006/07 to 2007/08 financial years.

3.4   The presentation focused on  the  5-Year  Local  Government  Strategic
      Agenda, which remains the  guiding  strategic  approach  in  improving
      service delivery of all municipalities.  These  areas  are:  improving
      municipal transformation and organisational development,  accelerating
      basic  service  delivery,  putting  in  place  viable  local  economic
      development  strategies,   improving   the   fiscal   management   and
      discipline,  and  ensuring  overall   good   governance   and   public
      participation in the work of the municipality.

4.    Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

4.1    The  Department  reported  that,  at  the  end  of  July  2008,   all
      municipalities had  municipal  managers  although  nine  were  acting-
      managers. All municipal managers  are  MSA  Section  57  appointments,
      except for those who are acting. This is  an  improvement  from  March
      2008, when 14 vacant municipal manager posts were recorded,  with  all
      14 being filled by acting managers. All  financial  managers  in  July
      2008 were MSA Section 57 appointments, except for acting  managers  at
      Magareng, Phokwane, Gamagara, Ga- Segonyana, Hantam,  Karoo  Hoogland,
      Emthanjeni, Siyancuma, Ubuntu, Siyanda and Tsantsabane. There  is  one
      vacancy and three other appointments.

4.2   SALGA Northern Cape is part  of  the  independent  provincial  support
      task team to support all 32 municipalities  with  the  appointment  of
      municipal managers and section  57  managers.  For  the  period  under
      review, a total of 10 and 6 municipalities have  benefited  from  this
      support for the appointment of municipal managers  and  chief  finance
      officers respectively.


5.    Basic Service Delivery

5.1    Since  2003/04  all  the  Northern  Cape  municipalities  have   been
      delivering free basic services to indigent  households.  In  addition,
      some municipalities have also been providing free  basic  services  to
      households that are not indigent e.g. Sol Plaatje provides free  basic
      water to all households, as did  Moshaweng,  Ga-Segonyana,  Siyancuma,
      Umsobomvu, Karoo Hoogland, Mier, Kai !Garib, Kgatelopele,  Nama  Khoi,
      Kamiesberg and Magareng at the end June 2008.

5.2   It is expected of municipalities to provide  free  basic  services  to
      its indigent in a sustainable manner. However, fourteen municipalities
      provide FBW to all households, not only registered  indigents.  It  is
      not expected that a municipality provides free basic  services  beyond
      its financial and other capacities.

6.    Local Economic Development (LED)

6.1   The Department reported that 10 municipalities reported  almost  3,500
      jobs created by municipal LED activities in 2007/08.  Of  these  jobs,
      38% benefited women, 27%  youth  and  2%  the  disabled.  Furthermore,
      approximately 3,000 jobs were created by municipal  capital  projects,
      which employed people above the minimum wage for at least three months
      in 2007/08. This is  a  substantial  decrease  from  the  10,000  jobs
      reported in 2005/06. Half the jobs benefited women.

7.    Municipal Financial Viability and Management


7.1   Thirty–one Northern Cape municipalities had a combined income of  over
      R2 billion in 2007/08. The largest income was received by Sol  Plaatje
      of over R600 million and the smallest by Mier Municipality, with under
      R10 million. Eleven of the 20 municipalities that reported accumulated
      surpluses/deficits, had an accumulated surplus at the end of  2007/08,
      and nine had an accumulated deficit.  Seventeen  municipalities  ended
      the 2007/08 financial year with  a  surplus.  Fourteen  municipalities
      ended with deficits, of which nine were over  R1  million  i.e.  Karoo
      Hoogland, Siyancuma, Siyathemba, Dikgatlong,  Magareng,  Renosterberg,
      Ga-Segonyana, Kamiesberg and  Siyanda.  The  highest  deficit  was  at
      Magareng.

7.2   Hands-on support was provided to 10  municipalities  i.e.  Dikgatlong,
      Magareng,  Pixley  ka  Seme,  Emthanjeni,   Renosterberg,   Siyancuma,
      Siyathemba, Umsobomvu, Kamiesberg and Moshaweng. Support was given  to
      municipalities for the development  of  Service  Delivery  and  Budget
      Implementation Plans (SDBIPs) which have been linked  to  budgets  and
      Integrated Development Plans (IDPs) by September 2007. Monitoring  and
      further support is envisaged to be  provided  by  the  Department  and
      Provincial Treasury.

8.    Good Governance and Public Participation

8.1   By September 2007, 17 municipalities had  established  internal  audit
      committees and by March 2008 another one  municipality  had  done  so.
      Thirteen municipalities share audit committees.  Improvements  in  the
      capacity to account for public  resources  have  been  made.  Internal
      Audit Committees have been established in 18 municipalities

8.2   All wards have ward committees established in the Northern  Cape.  The
      numbers  of  wards  have  increased  from  174  to   183,   with   the
      establishment of nine wards  at  Mier  Municipality.   These  used  to
      function as Town Forums, in order to align with legislation.  However,
      not all these committees are functional. A total of 46 ward committees
      are reported to be non-functional. These committees will thus have  to
      be revised and reformulated.

9.    Committee Observations and Opinion

9.1   The Committee has observed  the  remarkable  improvements  in  certain
      areas, such as a  decrease  in  backlogs,  but,  in  other  areas,  no
      improvement  has  been  made.   An  example  here  is  MIG   spending.
      Interventions were implemented to address the  challenges  of  2006/07
      and 2007/08. These interventions are mostly on-going  and  demonstrate
      improved  service  delivery,   good   governance   and   capacity   at
      municipalities. The Department should continue providing this kind  of
      support to its municipalities in the Province.

9.2   Although progress  has  been  registered  in  other  areas,  municipal
      finances remain a challenge to municipalities, especially with  regard
      to the ability to effect proper credit control systems and the ability
      to generate income.

10.   Recommendations

10.1  Having  deliberated  on  the  2007/08  Northern  Cape  Municipalities’
      Performance Report, the Select Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance
      and Traditional Affairs recommends as follows:

      10.1.1       The  NCOP  should  endorse  the  2007/08  Northern   Cape
           Municipalities’ Performance Report.


      10.1.2      The Northern Cape Department of  Co-operative  Governance,
           Human  Settlements  and  Traditional  Affairs   should   assists
           municipalities in  the  Province  to  improve  their  employment
           profiles with respect to disabled people.


      10.1.3      The Northern Cape Department of  Co-operative  Governance,
           Human  Settlements  and  Traditional   Affairs   should   assist
           municipalities in the Province to  improve  the  situation  with
           respect to critical skills shortages and the filling  of  vacant
           positions, as well as ensuring that performance  agreements  are
           signed.


        4. The Northern Cape MEC for the Northern Cape  Department  of  Co-
           operative Governance, Human Settlements and Traditional  Affairs
           should table quarterly progress reports to the NCOP  in  respect
           of municipal performance in the Province.

Report to be considered.

3.  REPORT  OF  THE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  ON   CO-OPERATIVE   GOVERNANCE   AND
   TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON INTERVENTION  IN  MSUNDUZI  LOCAL  MUNICIPALITY  –
   DATED 23 NOVEMBER 2010
1.    Background and Overview
1.1   The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs, having considered the request made by the National Council of
      Provinces (NCOP) on 03 November 2010 to consider  and  report  on  the
      intervention notice invoked in terms of  section  139  (1)(b)  of  the
      Constitution at  Msunduzi  Local  Municipality  by  the  KwaZulu-Natal
      Provincial Executive Council (PEC), reports as follows:

1.2   The Office of the Chairperson of  the  NCOP  referred  the  notice  of
      intervention in the affairs of  Msunduzi  Local  Municipality  to  the
      Select Committee of Co-operative Governance and  Traditional  Affairs,
      in terms of  NCOP  Rule  101  for  consideration  and  reporting.  The
      Committee took a decision during its meeting to conduct  an  oversight
      visit to the above-mentioned Municipality on the 26 October 2010.

2.    Purpose and Objectives
2.1   The main objectives of the oversight visit was  to  determine  whether
      procedural requirements had been met and to verify whether the PEC had
      used  its  discretion  appropriately,  before  the   Committee   could
      recommend  approval/disapproval  of  the  intervention  to  the  NCOP.
      Through the deliberations and interaction with internal  and  external
      stakeholders, the Committee  wanted  to  determine  how  the  PEC  was
      intending to restore the fulfilment of the  relevant  obligations  and
      ensure  fulfilment  in  the  long  term.  The  aim   was   to   ensure
      intergovernmental checks and balances aimed at guarding the  integrity
      and efficiency of the intervention process.

3.    Delegation
3.1   The delegation of the Committee was composed of the following  Members
      of Parliament and Officials: Hon MH Mokgobi,  Limpopo  (ANC);  Hon  AG
      Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon TMH  Mofokeng,  Free  State  (ANC);  Hon  A
      Watson, Mpumalanga (DA);  Mr  NA  Mfuku,  Content  Adviser  (Committee
      Section); Mr MC Mbebe, Procedural Officer (NCOP); Ms V Makubalo, Stand-
      in  Committee  Secretary  (Committee  Section)  and  Ms  A   Nkwandla,
      Administration Assistant (Committee Section).

4.    Introduction
   1. On 22 October 2010, the KwaZulu-Natal MEC for Co-operative  Governance
      and Traditional Affairs tabled a notice of  intervention  in  Msunduzi
      Local Municipality to the Office of the Chairperson of  the  NCOP.  In
      terms of section 139 (2)(b)(ii) of the Constitution, the  intervention
      must end if the NCOP does  not  positively  approve  the  intervention
      within 180 days since the intervention began, in this case before  the
      end of 19 April 2011.

5.    Problems Identified by the Provincial Executive Council (PEC)
5.1   On 06  October  2010,  the  Executive  Council  of  the  KwaZulu-Natal
      Province resolved to intervene in the Municipality as contemplated  in
      terms of section 139(1)(b) of the Constitution. The background to  the
      intervention by the  Provincial  Executive  is  a  result  of  serious
      financial problems and the fact that the municipal executive committee
      and the municipal officials  had  failed  to  exercise  oversight  and
      fulfil specific legislative obligations, and services could no  longer
      be rendered effectively.


   2. The PEC  has  authorised  the  MEC  for  Co-operative  Governance  and
      Traditional Affairs to approach the Chairperson of South African Local
      Government Association (SALGA) to release Mr Johann Mettler,  a  local
      government  expert  employed  by  SALGA,  for   appointment   as   the
      Administrator of the Msunduzi Local Municipality.

6.    Appointment and Functions of the Administrator
6.1   The Administrator,  amongst  other  functional  responsibilities,  was
      appointed to undertake the following functions:

    • devise a turn-around strategy for the Msunduzi Local Municipality;

      • ratify all  decisions  taken  by  Municipal  Manager  and  Managers
        reporting to  the  Municipal  Manager  in  terms  of  delegated  or
        original authority;

      •   ensure   implementation   of   Council   resolutions   and    the
        administration;

      •  implement  a  system  to  control  and  approve  all   expenditure
        recommended by the intervention support team;

      •  implement  all  governance  systems   and   procedures   including
        appropriate councillor-oversight mechanisms;

      •  ensure  implementation  of   financial   systems,   policies   and
        procedures; and

      • approve a strategy  for  addressing  the  municipality’s  financial
        problems, including a strategy for reducing unnecessary expenditure
        and increasing the collection revenue.




7.    Oversight Visit to Msunduzi Local Municipality
   1. On 09 November 2010 the delegation of the  Committee  had  interactive
      and robust engagements with the internal and external stakeholders  of
      the  Municipality.  The  main  internal  stakeholders  the  delegation
      interacted with in the Municipality included  the  Speaker,  Executive
      Mayor, Chief Whip, Councillors, Ward Committee Members,  Administrator
      and  the  representatives  of  the  South  African  Local   Government
      Association (SALGA). The main  external  stakeholders  the  delegation
      interacted with included members of the community, the business  forum
      and non-governmental organizations.

8.    Presentation by the MEC for Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
Affairs
8.1   The MEC indicated that the report  of  the  Auditor-General  reflected
      major problems in finances of the Municipality, in which the Municipal
      Council has condoned irregular, fruitless  and  wasteful  expenditure.
      This was evident from the  Auditor-General's  report  on  the  2008/09
      financial year. The Municipal Council has dismally failed to  exercise
      an oversight role  over  the  municipality's  administration.  Despite
      several interventions by the Provincial Department, it has  gone  from
      one disaster to another.

8.2   In providing support, the MEC has sent three experts, two  accountants
      and an auditor to look at the expenditure and supply chain  management
      of the Municipality. The deployed financial experts have reported that
      there was a lack of co-operation from certain Senior Managers  of  the
      Municipality who have issued instructions  to  staff  not  to  provide
      urgently required information, on the basis of which  a  comprehensive
      financial recovery plan would be developed. Following this lack of co-
      operation, the provincial government was forced to  introduce  tougher
      measures. However, significant progress has been recorded and all  the
      allegations of corruption are being pursued.

8.3   For the purpose of this report, the submissions made by both  internal
      and external stakeholders are structured  on  the  basis  of  the  key
      strategic performance areas of the Local Government  Strategic  Agenda
      which are: Municipal Transformation; Basic Service Delivery; Municipal
      Financial Viability and Management, as well  as  Good  Governance  and
      Public Participation.

(A).  Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development
8.4   Municipal Council: It was appealed that  the  Provincial  Intervention
      Team (PIT), which was  appointed  to  assist  in  turning  around  the
      financial crisis  of  the  Municipality  and  to  develop  an  overall
      business plan,  should  not  be  removed,  as  there  are  still  huge
      challenges  ahead.  There  has  been  a  lot  of  infighting   amongst
      politicians. The municipal workers were  not  discharging  their  work
      appropriately, as  people  who  were  not  qualified  were  appointed.
      Furthermore, the Municipal Management has misled the Council in  terms
      of their reports.

8.5   The Office of the Premier has set a new  unit  to  expedite  cases  of
      investigations in the Province’s municipalities. The Municipality will
      engage with the Office of the Premier to take advantage  of  this  new
      unit. Mr Mike Tarr, the current City Mayor, has  since  resigned  from
      the Legislature to serve as the Mayor.

8.6   Administrator: The Administrator reported that the  current  political
      structure  of  Msunduzi  was  not  supportive  of  overall   corporate
      governance. As a result, a structure that will be embrace performance-
      based outcomes of all strategies  has  been  implemented.  The  senior
      staff members that were alleged to be involved in fraud and corruption
      have been suspended, with civil and criminal charges  pursued  against
      them. However, certain current positions cannot be filled as a  result
      of outstanding prosecutions.

8.7   Organised Labour: Both  the  South  African  Municipal  Workers  Union
      (SAMWU) and the Independent Municipal and Allied Trade  Union  (IMATU)
      supported the placement of the Municipality under administration. They
      further acknowledge the progress made thus far by  the  Administrator.
      Hence, they recommended the intervention to continue until  the  Local
      Government Elections in 2011.

(B).  Basic Service Delivery
8.8   Municipal Council:  Basic  service  delivery  had  deteriorated  to  a
      state of almost non-existence. However, this has  been  re-established
      to a semblance close to normality. It must  be  noted,  however,  that
      there is still some  way  to  go  before  service  delivery  is  fully
      functional and operational on an ongoing basis. It was  reported  that
      the sudden termination of the service delivery systems  and  processes
      would result in a disintegration of the efforts of  the  PIT,  as  the
      hand-over process to the relevant municipal  officials  was  far  from
      complete.

8.9   Administrator: In terms of infrastructure  development  and  strategy,
      there were challenges on the poor  running  of  fleet  management.  In
      rectifying this challenge, maintenance plans and tracking systems have
      been introduced to ensure vehicle availability. In terms of commercial
      and industrial waste collection, a new waste  collection  process  was
      introduced in order to enhance waste collection. A  process  has  been
      implemented  that  addresses   water   distribution   and   sanitation
      management, which was previously inadequate. Although 30 000 units for
      housing have been delivered since 1994,  there are still challenges of
      a  high  demand  for  housing,  shortage  of  skilled  staff,  missing
      beneficiaries and illegal occupation of units.

8.10  Ward Committees: There are high levels of unaccounted water losses  in
      Msunduzi. The consumers, especially the poor, were paying for the loss
      of water at the reservoir. It was reported that water and  electricity
      readers were not monitored, with rates being estimated.

8.11   Pietermaritzburg  Chamber  of  Business:  Waste  management  was   an
      unmitigated disaster in the Municipality, as  management  has  yielded
      its authority to the workers. The airport  almost  lost  its  licence,
      because the Council had prevaricated over the question of  who  should
      manage the facility. The Chamber was in support  of  the  intervention
      continuing, because, if the process  was  ended  prematurely,  serious
      flaws would remain, and it would only be a matter of time  before  the
      Municipality found itself in deep distress again.

8.12  Built Environment Support Group: The  Municipality  is  faced  with  a
      chronic backlog in housing delivery and access to basic services.  The
      Support Group has provided support to communities, who were evicted 14
      years ago, to go to a transit area that is still awaiting development.
      Another 1 200 households had  to  share  two  standpipes  while  their
      eviction was on hold, because no land could be  found  for  them.  The
      Support Group acknowledged the progress made by the Administrator  and
      PIT in the short term in saving the City from bankruptcy.

(C).  Municipal Financial Viability and Management
8.13  Municipal Council: The finances of the Municipality  reflected  a  net
      surplus of R58 million for the first quarter of the 2010/11  financial
      year, taking into consideration a  deficit  of  R522  million  in  the
      2009/10 financial year. However, the turnaround must be maintained and
      well managed by ongoing  adoption  of  stringent  financial  controls,
      until the end of the current  financial  year.  The  control  measures
      introduced by the  Administrator  have  to  be  maintained  to  ensure
      continuity of the positive trend. In cases where capacity  reflects  a
      challenge, local FET colleges should be  engaged  in  this  regard  to
      provide training.

8.14  Administrator: It was reported that apart from  redesigning  processes
      and implementing certain policies  and  procedures  by  the  PIT,  the
      following ongoing issues were still a major challenge confronting  the
      Municipality:
         • cost containment across the board;
         • revenue enhancement processes;
         • management accounting;
         • performance management processes; and
         • risk analysis.
8.15  On cash flow, projections  were  showing  signs  of  recovery,  as  is
      reflected by a positive cash flow position of R18, 4  million  by  the
      end of October 2010, and an expected upward movement of R3 million  at
      the end of November 2010. However, this requires  diligent  monitoring
      to keep the cash flow status in the positive. Furthermore, there is  a
      need for staff training in management  accounting,  since  this  is  a
      specialised section where all transactions and  operating  performance
      are tracked, traced and analysed. It stands to  reason  that  if  this
      function is aborted and/or does not get the attention  it  desperately
      needs, it will come to a standstill.

(D).  Good Governance and Public Participation
8.16  Built Environment Support Group: The Support Group reported  that  the
      largest single problem in keeping the ratepayers  and  the  public  on
      board with the turnaround measures, has been the lack of communication
      and public participation. Public engagement has been non-existent, and
      the IDP/Budget process held on 27 June 2010 was reduced to  a  single,
      poorly publicised meeting.

8.17  Ward Committees: The Ward Committees  reported  their  dissatisfaction
      with resource allocation for their  activities,  since  there  was  no
      budget for ward committees.

9.    Committee Observations and Opinion
   1. Where Municipal staff members have been implicated in cases  of  fraud
      and corruption, the Hawks should be  brought  in  for  the  successful
      prosecution of those cases. This matter should be speeded up.

   2. The approach on forensic investigation should be suspended as, in most
      cases, it does not lead to immediate  arrests.  The  Hawks  should  be
      approached instead, since there was no time  for  complacency  in  the
      fight against crime, and the Hawks would leave "no stone unturned"  in
      fighting organised crime.

   3. It was observed that  some  Councillors  were  irresponsible  and  not
      disciplined, since 70 Councillors should have been present during  the
      meeting, but less than 50% were present. This raised questions of  the
      seriousness  in  their  commitment  in  providing  leadership  to  the
      Municipality. The Mayor and Chief  Whip  should  summon  those  absent
      Councillors, in order to understand the reasons for their absence.

   4. The Committee is of the opinion that the lack of support and oversight
      by the Msunduzi Council points to the failure to provide  an  enabling
      framework to build the institutional  strength  and  functionality  of
      municipalities.

   5. There are capacity constraints in the  Municipality,  especially  with
      regards to financial accounting  and  management.  This  matter  needs
      urgent address, otherwise all efforts to  stabilise  the  Municipality
      will fail, with the real possibility of reverting to a worse situation
      than the Municipality was in at the commencement of the intervention.

10.   Recommendations
10.1  Having conducted the oversight visit to  Msunduzi  Local  Municipality
      and interacted with all relevant stakeholders, the Select Committee on
      Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs recommends as follows:

        1. The NCOP approves the  intervention  in  terms  of  section  139
           (1)(b) of the Constitution in Msunduzi Local Municipality for  a
           period of six months.
        2. The Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
           should approach the Hawks to pursue  criminal  investigation  in
           all cases of financial  irregularities  and  fraud  in  Msunduzi
           Local Municipality, as a matter of urgency. A progress report in
           this regard should be forwarded to the NCOP within one month.


        3. The Administrator should fast-track the  process  of  appointing
           skilled personnel, in order to facilitate the transfer of skills
           and to ensure continuity and stability.


        4.  The  KwaZulu-Natal  MEC   for   Co-operative   Governance   and
           Traditional Affairs should table quarterly progress  reports  to
           the NCOP and the Provincial Legislature on  the  status  of  the
           intervention  in  the  Municipality,  including  the  challenges
           encountered.

Report to be considered.

  4. Report of the Select Committee on Appropriations on the  First  Quarter
     Conditional Grants Spending Patterns on the National  School  Nutrition
     Grant for the 2010/11 Financial Year, dated 14 September 2010

     The Select Committee on Appropriations, having  analysed  the  spending
     patterns of the provincial departments of  Education  on  the  National
     School Nutrition Grant, reports as follows:

1.    Introduction

The Select Committee on Appropriations (the  Committee)  invited  identified
provincial departments of Education, who were either under-spending or over-
spending on the National School Nutrition Programme Grant, to come and  make
a presentation on their first quarter spending  for  the  2010/11  financial
year. The  statistics  on  spending  patterns  were  published  by  National
Treasury in August 2010.

The Committee meetings took place on 11 and 24 August 2010.

2.    Terms of reference

The hearings  formed  part  of  the  Committee’s  ongoing  interaction  with
provinces to monitor their  spending  on  conditional  grants  allocated  to
them. A framework for  each  grant  sets  out  the  purpose  of  the  grant,
measurable   objectives,   conditions,   allocation   criteria,   and   past
performance among other things.

Provinces were requested to make an oral  presentation  on  National  School
Nutrition Programme Grant and to take into consideration the following:
    • Data trends  in  allocations,  transfers  and  actual  expenditure  of
      conditional grants of the department;
    •  Assessment  of  department’s  monitoring  capacity  for  the  2009/10
      financial year  and  indicate  under/overspending  and  what  capacity
      constraints that impacted on these outcomes; and
    • Report whether monthly reports are received from receiving departments
      and or municipalities, and if not, what the departments are  doing  in
      order to ensure compliance with monthly reporting.

The  provincial  departments  of  Education  of   Eastern   Cape,   Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape,  Gauteng,  Free  State,
and KwaZulu Natal were  identified  and  invited.  However,  the  Provincial
Department of Education of Free State did  not  attend,  and  there  was  no
notification that the province was not going to attend.

National Treasury was invited to brief the Committee on  the  first  quarter
spending of the above-mentioned provincial departments.


3.    Presentations

3.1   National Treasury

National Treasury reported that R3.6 billion is the total  available  amount
that is budgeted  for  National  School  Nutrition  Grant  for  the  2010/11
financial year. Of this amount,  National  Treasury  said  that  R1  billion
(that is 27.5 percent of the total budget) has already been  transferred  to
provinces, but only R593 million was spent  as  at  the  end  of  the  first
quarter of the 2010/11 financial year.

National Treasury reported that some of the reasons given  for  under-/over-
spending by provinces are as follows:
    • The Province of Eastern Cape spent R110, 288 000 out of R190, 353  000
      that was received due to the late approval of a tender  for  April  to
      June feeding. National Treasury emphasized that  late  approval  of  a
      tender has led to reduced spending for the first  quarter  since  many
      schools were forced to revert to cheaper meals until  the  new  tender
      was confirmed. Furthermore, the Province of Eastern Cape was projected
      to under-spend by over R101, 357 000 as at  the  end  of  the  2010/11
      financial year.
    • The Province of Gauteng spent R38,  611  000  out  of  R109,  116  000
      received due to the late submission of invoices by suppliers.
    • The Province of KwaZulu-Natal spent R132, 823 000 out of R235, 041 000
      that was received due to a large number of claims that had to be  sent
      back to districts to be corrected and resubmitted.
    • The Province of Mpumalanga spent R48, 906 000 out of R97, 031 000 that
      was received owing to delays in the system which is used  to  validate
      claims.
    • The Province of North West spent R26, 592 000 out of R67, 940 000 that
      was received due to the delays caused by  the  process  of  converting
      from the Walker System to the Basic Accounting System (BAS).
    • The Province of Western Cape spent R30, 633 000 out of  R48,  698  000
      received. This is mainly due to the late  submission  of  invoices  by
      suppliers.
    • The Province of Free State spent R49, 804 000 out of R53.594 000.
    • The Province of Limpopo spent R135, 452 000 out of R181, 201 000
    • The Province of Northern Cape spent R20, 860 000 out of R23, 183 000.

National Treasury reported that there has been an aggregate  improvement  in
the spending rate on the National School Nutrition Programme  (NSNP)  grant.
The spending rate is 12.5 percent higher in comparison to the first  quarter
of the  2009/10  financial  year.  This  improvement  in  spending  rate  is
attributable to the provinces of Free  State,  Northern  Cape  and  Limpopo.
National Treasury added that the provinces  of  Eastern  Cape,  Gauteng  and
North West are spending at a lower rate in comparison to the  same  time  in
the 2009/10 financial year that is 18.4, 8 and 47 per cent, respectively.  A
combination of supply chain challenges and invoicing are impending  spending
on the NSNP grant.

3.2   The Province of Mpumalanga

The Province of Mpumalanga (Education) reported that  the  total  number  of
primary and secondary  school  learners  that  are  accessing  the  National
School Nutrition Programme Grant  are  751  767  from  1  539  schools.  The
Province of Mpumalanga further reported that a total number of  3  091  food
handlers are contracted at the ratio of 1 food handler per 240 learners  for
primary schools and 1 food handler per 200 learners for  secondary  schools.
The food handlers are paid a stipend of R600 per month.

The Province of Mpumalanga reported that  26  NSNP  monitors  supervise  the
implementation of the NSNP by visiting the schools. After visiting  schools,
monitors prepare and submit reports to the  provincial  office  for  further
monitoring and provision of adequate support to all schools.  Moreover,  the
School Governing Bodies further monitor the supply and the quality  of  food
at the school level.

The  Province  of  Mpumalanga  reported  that  it  under-spent  because  the
computerized system that was used for  the  capturing  and  verification  of
claims crashed.  Consequently,  there  were  delays  in  the  validation  of
invoices for the months  of  April  and  May  2010,  and  payments  thereof.
However, the Province of Mpumalanga reported that  the  programme  has  been
reinstalled and rewritten, and claims are processed faster.

With  respect  to  monitoring,  the  Province  of  Mpumalanga  informed  the
Committee  that  a  provincial  evaluation  team,  consisting  of  officials
responsible for the 2 grants  (namely  NSNP  and  Life  Skills  HIV  &  AIDS
Grant),  conducts  pre-evaluation  of  10-20  schools   before   the   final
evaluation by the national department  is  conducted  at  the  end  of  each
financial  year.  Evaluation  reports  are  compiled   by   the   provincial
evaluation team at the end of each financial year.

3.2.1 Committee Observations
    • The Special School Learners do not benefit from grant.
    • There  is  a  challenge  with  respect  to  categorizing  schools  per
      quintiles. This has contributed to schools  in  the  same  area  being
      classified in different quintiles whereas they are in the same area.
    •  The  Province  utilized  the  grant  funds  in  order  to  compensate
      employees.

3.2.2 Committee Recommendations
The Committee recommends that:
    • The Province of Mpumalanga should ensure that all needy  learners  are
      accessing the NSNP grant.
    • The Provincial Departments of Basic Education and  Agriculture  should
      fast-track the one-household-one-garden  programme.  Furthermore,  the
      National  Department  of  Basic  Education   should   coordinate   the
      review/correction of quintiles.
    • National Treasury should scrutinize why an  unauthorized  expenditure,
      using grant funds to pay salaries, was approved  by  the  Province  of
      Mpumalanga.

3.3   The Province of Limpopo

The Province of Limpopo (Education) reported that  due  to  some  constraint
with regard to payment of food handlers on monthly basis  as  schools  could
not claim for reimbursement on time; the  Province  of  Limpopo  decided  to
transfer grant funds to schools on a quarterly basis  as  from  the  2010/11
financial  year.  The  Province  of  Limpopo  added  that  the  schools  are
requested to submit invoices as proof of expenses incurred every quarter.

The Province of Limpopo reported that the  2010/11  business  plan  for  the
NSNP provides that R3.7 million should be used to procure  24  vehicles  for
the National School Nutrition Programme Unit.  The  Committee  was  informed
that the process of procuring these vehicles has started.  The  Province  of
Limpopo further reported that, during the 2009/10 financial year,  the  NSNP
received funds from roll-over to erect a cooking area. However, these  funds
are yet to be utilised. As a  result,  eight  schools  erected  kitchenettes
utilising their own funds.

With respect to monitoring, the Province of Limpopo reported  that  all  134
circuit offices have an accounting clerk who monitors the  NSNP  grant.  The
Province of Limpopo added that the critical constraint that is faced by  the
monitors is lack of transportation. Furthermore,  the  Province  of  Limpopo
further reported that the vehicles to be  purchased  will  be  stationed  at
district level and be used per cluster to minimize costs.

3.3.1 Committee Observation
    • The most contributing factor to under-spending is that the Province of
      Limpopo  is  penalising  service  providers  who  supply  insufficient
      quantities of food to schools.


3.3.2 Committee Recommendation
The Committee recommends that:
    • In instances wherein few quantities of food are provided, the Province
      of Limpopo should encourage the service providers to supply additional
      stuff and invoke the penalty clause as a last resort.

3.4   The Province of Gauteng
The Province of Gauteng (Education) reported that it is currently  providing
nutrition to a total of 533 644 learners in Quintiles 1-3  primary  schools,
85 305 learners in Quintiles 4-5 primary schools and  176  836  learners  in
Quintiles 1 and 2 secondary schools; and in  total  795  785  learners  were
served with meals. The target number of learners to be fed was 670  000  and
the number was exceeded by 125 785(19  percent).  The  Province  of  Gauteng
explained that the excess was due to the extension of feeding  programme  to
needy learners in Quintiles  4-5  primary  school  in  township  areas.  The
Province of Gauteng added that the NSNP has  been  successfully  implemented
in a total of 89 Quintile 2 secondary schools.

With respect to monitoring, the Province of Gauteng reported that, in  order
to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  service  delivery   as   well   as   the
identification of challenges that are  facing  the  programme,  two  monthly
meetings  were  convened  in  April  2010  and  May  2010  by  the  district
coordinators and provincial staff. The Province of Gauteng further  reported
that monthly financial reports are compiled.

Some of the challenges that have contributed  to  under-spending  that  were
mentioned by the Province of Gauteng include delays in payments  to  service
providers in the first quarter of the 2010/11 financial  year.  The  biggest
cause in relation to late payment was due to  service  providers  that  were
sending their invoices late.

The Province  of  Gauteng  reported  that  corrective  measures,  that  were
implemented together with  the  Provincial  Treasury,  include  ring-fencing
funds that were meant for conditional  grants  and  infrastructure  budgets;
minor enhancements to the financial system have  been  made  to  enable  the
Province of Gauteng to effect this decision;  internal  measures  have  been
put in place to rectify the matter as per resolution from  interacting  with
the service providers which stated that processing  of  payments  should  be
done in the second week of every month in order to ensure  that  all  claims
are paid on or before the end of each month in which a claim is made.

3.4.1 Committee Observations
    • The Province of Gauteng under-spent in comparison to the first quarter
      of the 2009/10 financial year and the late submission of  invoices  by
      service providers is one of the  main  contributing  factors  to  this
      under-spending.
    • The Province of Gauteng has exceeded the targeted number  of  learners
      to be fed by 19 percent.

3.4.2 Committee Recommendations

The Committee recommends that:
    • The Province of Gauteng should set stringent  timeframes  for  service
      providers to abide by when they are submitting its invoices.
    • The Province of Gauteng  should  ensure  that  the  excess  number  of
      learners, 19 percent do not result in over–spending at the end of  the
      2010/11 financial year.

5. The Province of KwaZulu-Natal

The Province of KwaZulu-Natal (Education) reported  that  it  was  allocated
R235, 041 000 for the first quarter of the 2010/11  financial  year  and  it
spent on R132, 823 000. With respect  to  reasons  for  under-spending,  the
Province  of  KwaZulu-Natal  reported  that  June  2010  invoices  were  not
captured due to the following: early closure of schools; late submission  of
claims by suppliers; an increase in activities for  a  programme  which  was
not  matched  by  reasonable  increase  in  personnel  due  to  cost-cutting
measures; and the long  process  of  reviewing  payment  process  so  as  to
eradicate bottlenecks.

With respect to monitoring capacity, the Province of KwaZulu-Natal  informed
the Committee that there are personnel at  provincial  and  district  levels
that monitor operations at schools and deal with claim processing; and  that
on-site physical  inspections  is  conducted  in  order  to,  amongst  other
things, ensure cleanliness and ensure that cooking processes  are  compliant
with specifications including quality and quantity of food. The Province  of
KwaZulu-Natal further reported that examination of claims are  conducted  to
ensure compliance with programme specifications and business plan; and  that
claims are in line with budget allocations are for approved schools per  the
programme.

The Province of KwaZulu-Natal reported that some of the challenges that  the
it is faced with include, among other things,  increased  volume  of  claims
with the because the programme is expanded; high food  costs  especially  on
vegetables; inadequate/lack of kitchens and food storage space;  cooking  on
rainy days is problematic because of lack of  kitchens;  shortage  of  water
supply in rural areas limits  food  production  in  schools;  and  non-/late
submission of claims by suppliers.

The Province  of  KwaZulu-Natal  reported  that  the  NSNP  is  feeding  all
learners in quintiles 1 and 2  in  secondary  schools  in  addition  to  the
quintiles 1 and 3 in primary schools. The Province  of  KwaZulu-Natal  added
that learners are scheduled to feed for all school  days.  The  Province  of
KwaZulu-Natal explained that the procurement method used  is  the  quotation
system and it has successfully used a combination of small medium and  micro
enterprises and local women  cooperatives.  The  Province  of  KwaZulu-Natal
further added on saying that it has employed contract workers  in  order  to
increase the capacity of the programme in  processing  payments  to  service
providers.

3.5. 1      Committee Observation
    • It is not only the late submission of invoices that contribute to late
      or non-payment of service providers. Internal  bottlenecks  are  other
      contributing factors to late payment of service providers  which  then
      leads to under-spending.

3.5. 2      Committee Recommendations
The Committee recommends that:
    • The Province of KwaZulu-Natal  should  ensure  that  it  its  internal
      control measures are fully implemented.
    • The Province of KwaZulu-Natal  should  ensure  that  it  continues  to
      capacitate service providers to such a point that they can be able  to
      bill properly.

3.6   The Province of Western Cape

The Province of Western Cape (Education) reported that it received  R173,318
000 for the first quarter of the 2010/11 financial year and spent  R30,  633
000. With respect to monitoring, the  Province  of  Western  Cape  presented
that it possesses capacity to monitor  spending.  The  Province  of  Western
Cape reported that additional fieldworkers will be required to increase  its
capacity  to  monitor  the  implementation  of  the  NSNP  at  schools  more
effectively.  Furthermore,  the  Province  of  Western  Cape  reported  that
monthly reports are received from districts offices i.e.  monthly  financial
statements and quarterly statistical and narrative reports.

The Province of Western Cape reported that all quintile 3 secondary  schools
will be prepared for the inclusion of all learners. The Province of  Western
Cape presented that 361 321 learners are provided with nutritious  meals  on
a daily basis at 1 004 targeted primary and secondary schools. The  Province
of Western Cape said that the total expenditure is below target as a  result
of fewer school days in June 2010. The  Province  of  Western  Cape  further
reported that a general increase in the number  of  learners  accessing  the
grant in July 2010, and that spending, with regard to kitchen equipment  and
facilities for quintile 3 secondary schools,  will  cause  normalization  in
the expenditure trends towards December 2010.

7. The Province of Northern Cape

The Province of Northern Cape (Education) reported that  its  spending,  for
the first quarter of the 2010/11 financial year, amounts  to  R20,  860  000
(25 percent) of the  main  grant  budget.  The  Province  of  Northern  Cape
further informed the Committee that the NSNP is exceeding  its  targets  (by
approximately 1.3%) of the number of learners provided with a  meal  a  day.
However, the Province of Northern Cape revealed that  1  483  food  handlers
were employed instead of  the  targeted  1  700.  With  respect  to  service
providers, the Province of  Northern  Cape  reported  that  only  317  small
medium and micro enterprises were utilised against  a  target  of  500.  The
Province of Northern Cape further reported that there are vegetable  gardens
at 341 schools but a target  was  to  establish  vegetable  gardens  in  300
schools. But the Province of Northern Cape added that targets for  providing
garden tools and implementation of nutrition guidelines to schools were  not
reached.

3.7.1 Committee Observations
    • The Committee observed that even though there are food gardens in  341
      schools versus the target of 300, irrigation water is scarce.
    • The Province of the Northern Cape has not employed  garden  caretakers
      as their documentation is was not provided by schools.

3.7.2 Committee Recommendations
The Committee recommends that:
    • The Province  of  Northern  Cape  should  form  partnership  with  the
      Provincial Department of Agriculture that seeks to provide support  to
      schools that have established vegetable gardens.
    • The Province of Northern  Cape  should  priorities  the  provision  of
      garden equipment and the implementation of nutrition guidelines.
    • The Province of Northern Cape should ensure that the number of schools
      with vegetable gardens are equal to or higher than 75 percent  of  341
      targeted schools before the end of the third quarter  of  the  2010/11
      financial year in terms of their business plans.


3.8   The Province of North West

The Province of North West (Education)  reported  that  it  has  under-spent
during the first quarter of the 2010/11 financial year. The  following  were
given as  reasons  for  under-spending:  migration  to  the  national  Basic
Accounting System (BAS) delayed the transfer of NSNP funds to  schools;  and
spending on cooking utensils that has not been effected yet.

With respect to monitoring of the programme,  the  Province  of  North  West
reported that  day-to-day  monitoring  of  the  programme  is  performed  by
designated  official  at  Area  Project  Office  (sub-district)  level   and
spending reports are submitted monthly. At school  level,  schools  maintain
registers that record expenditure and number of learners fed each day,  said
the Province of North West. The Province  of  North  West  further  reported
that monthly reconciliation is done against the approved business  plan  and
monthly  expenditure  reports  are  submitted  timeously  to  the   National
Departments  of  Basic  Education  and  Higher  Education,  and   Provincial
Treasury as prescribed in the Division of  Revenue  Act  and/or  the  Public
Finance Management Act.

With regard to remedial steps, the Province  of  North  West  reported  that
schools were advised to use funds allocated to comply  with  Section  21  of
Act No. 1 of 2010 to ensure that learners are not  adversely  affected  and,
personnel were deployed to support schools in  the  implementation  of  this
intervention. The Province of North West  further  reported  the  following:
that, with effect from July/August 2010, schools shall  receive  their  NSNP
funds as  scheduled  following  the  resolution  of  BAS  related  problems;
delivery of cooking utensils for quintile 3 secondary schools  is  scheduled
for third/fourth quarter; and secondary schools in quintile 3 shall  receive
their transfers in March 2011.

3.8.1 Committee Observation
    • The Committee is of the view that the plan to transfer grant funds  to
      secondary schools in quintile 3 at the end of the  financial  year  is
      equivalent to fiscal ‘dumping’.

3.8.2 Committee Recommendation
The Committee recommends that:
    • The Province of North West  should  ensure  that  it  avoids  delaying
      transfers of grants funds for cooking utensils to quintile  3  schools
      until the last month of the financial year.

3.9   The Province of Eastern Cape

The Province of Eastern Cape (Education)  reported  historical  problems  of
the NSNP grant since 2004. These include: the  inheritance  of  quintiles  4
and 5 schools which are not catered for by the  conditional  grant;  payment
backlogs because of collapse of SNP in 2006 due to  premature  incorporation
of cooperatives; the approval forensic audit by a company called  Ngubane  &
Associates which led to abrupt stoppage of programme due  to  investigation,
the forensic audit led to  additional  payment  backlogs  estimated  at  R40
million.

The Province of Eastern Cape added on saying that all  outstanding  invoices
since 2006 are being audited and additional  funding  will  be  required  to
eliminate payment  backlogs.  Furthermore,  the  Province  of  Eastern  Cape
reported that roll-over funds for the 2007/08 financial year  to  the  value
of R42.362 million, which was not granted to the Department, may  assist  to
deal with these payment backlogs.

The Province of Eastern Cape reported that a total of  1  126  727  learners
from grades R to 7 in quintiles 1 to 3  primary  schools  benefit  from  the
grant over 186 days per annum. Furthermore, 300 173 learners in grade  8  to
12 in quintiles 1 and 2 secondary schools  are  benefiting  from  the  grant
over 186 days per annum.

The Province of Eastern Cape reported some of the  contributing  factors  to
under-spending as follows: delays in the loading of  the  conditional  grant
budget in April (due to conditional grant codes) which led  to  payments  to
be made only in the last week of April 2010; slow, late  and  non-submission
of 1401’s BAS entity  forms  by  schools  which  is  an  additional  control
measure and prerequisite for transfer of meal servers payments  to  schools;
the non-awarding of  NSNP  tender  resulted  in  further  extension  of  the
contract in April-June 2010 which was approved late in June  2010  with  the
old price of R1.65  instead of R1.95  for  primary  schools  and  R2.00  for
secondary schools  instead  of  R2.95  and  this  translated  to  delays  in
payments; the extended tender continued to provide food  excluding  quintile
2 senior secondary schools  from April to June 2010 due to non-awarding   of
the tender.

With respect to remedial measures, the Province of Eastern Cape reported  as
follows: capacity issues in the programme are being addressed by  assistance
from the payment directorate to clear first  quarter  payment  backlogs;  an
audit team, to deal with payment backlogs dating  back  to  2004,  has  been
establish; the memorandum of understanding (MOU ),  signed  by  the  Eastern
Cape’s Provincial Department of Education and King Hintsa Further  Education
and Training College, will be  extended  in  order  to  provide  quintile  3
schools (primary and secondary) and primary  schools  with  mobile  kitchens
and  feeding utensils in the second quarter of the 2010/11  financial  year;
and awarding of the new SNP tender and the rollout thereof in  October  2010
will assist in addressing under expenditure.

The Province of  Eastern  Cape  reported  that  monthly  in-year  monitoring
reports were submitted in compliance with the Division of Revenue  Act.  The
Province of Eastern Cape  added  on  saying  that  compliance  to  menu  and
supplier performance have been monitored by districts and head office  staff
coordinators. The Province of  Eastern  Cape  informed  the  Committee  that
actions are taken against non-performing suppliers to  avoid  fruitless  and
wasteful expenditure. The Province of Eastern  Cape  assured  the  Committee
that regular monitoring visit by district staff and  submission  of  reports
are done as part of monitoring of spending.

The Committee was told that weaknesses in monitoring  result  in  inaccurate
data for budget planning (for example, confirmation of the number  of  grade
R‘s at schools, closed schools, and farm schools  will  assist  the  Eastern
Cape’s Department of Education in accurate budget planning); staff  shortage
in the NSNP Directorate  and  in  some   districts  is  exacerbated  by  the
absence  of  a  Director  for  NSNP  and  this  affects  implementation  and
management of the programme generally; and labour unrest in  the  department
at Head Office has an impact  on  the  timely  processing  of  payments  and
delays in awarding of tenders.

The Province of  the  Eastern  Cape  reported  that  an  application  for  a
rollover  and/or  appeal  for  additional  funding  will  be  made  to   the
Provincial Treasury to deal with the payment backlogs dating back  to  2004.
The Province of the Eastern Cape added that SNP Tender has to be awarded  by
the first week in September 2010 to ensure timeous issuing of award  letters
and orders to new service providers by Supply Chain  Management;  monitoring
of programme to be improved and learner data to be verified and lastly,  the
Province said payments to current service providers have  been  updated  and
are to be made within 30 days.

3.9.1 Committee Observation
    • The committee notes that the continuous extension of the contract that
      has expired is compromising the service provider because it  can  only
      charge the same price whereas food prices have increased. Furthermore,
      the supply chain unit is failing to discharge its function.

3.9.2 Committee Recommendation
The Committee recommends that:
    • The Province of the Eastern Cape should ensure that  the  NSNP  tender
      process is completed before the end of the second quarter.

4.    General Findings

The Committee noted that:
    • There is  shortage  of  water  in  schools  has  negative  effects  in
      vegetable gardens; planted seeds die because  they  are  not  provided
      with sufficient water;
    • The Supply Chain Managements challenges  are  contributing  to  under-
      spending; this is the  biggest  contributing  factor  to  the  Eastern
      Cape’s under-spending and
    • There is a new trend that of contract  workers  forcing  provinces  to
      employ them permanently.

5.    Further Recommendations

Having analysed the spending  patterns  on  the  National  School  Nutrition
Programme  Grant  by  provincial  departments  of  Education,   the   Select
Committee  on  Appropriations  recommends  that  the  National  Council   of
Provinces considers the following:

5.1   That the Provincial Departments of Water should devise other means  of
preserving water;

5.2   That the Provincial Department of Agriculture  should  assist  schools
that have vegetable gardens and encourage other schools  to  have  vegetable
gardens; and

5.3   That National and Provincial Treasuries should provide support to  the
provincial departments that have Supply  Chain  Management  challenges  i.e.
poor  tender  management  that  has  lead  to  under-spending   by   certain
provincial departments.

Report to be considered.

5.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
Development on the  provisional  suspension  from  office  of  Magistrate  L
Skrenya, dated 23 November 2010:

Introduction

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the report  on  the  provisional  suspension  from  office  of  a
magistrate, Mr L Skrenya, a magistrate and judicial head at Cala, tabled  by
the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development,  in  terms  of  the
Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

   1. On  5  August  2009,  the  Director  of  Public  Prosecutions:Transkei
      directed that Mr Skrenya be prosecuted on a charge of fraud.

   2. On 18 September 2009, Mr Skrenya appeared in the Cala District  Court.
      The criminal case was remanded to 21 and 22 September 2010 for trial.

   3. The criminal charge emanates from misrepresentations Mr  Skrenya  made
      to his sub-cluster head. Mr Skrenya claimed that on 24 April 2009,  he
      had used his  private  vehicle  on  an  official  trip  from  Cala  to
      Dordrecht and submitted a claim for a transport allowance. Mr Skrenya,
      in fact, used  a  government  vehicle  for  this  trip.  He  therefore
      committed fraud by submitting a claim that he was not entitled to.

   4. A preliminary investigation  conducted  into  other  complaints  filed
      against Mr Skrenya found prima facie evidence that, on 12 May 2009, he
      irregularly refused to adhere  to  a  request  by  the  Prosecutor  to
      withdraw a criminal charge  against  an  accused  before  a  plea  was
      tendered, meru moto postponed the case to 30  June  2009  and  ordered
      that the accused be kept in custody. This decision was later set aside
      by the High Court on special  review.  His  conduct  resulted  in  the
      Minster of Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  being  sued  for
      damages.

   5. It is further alleged that Mr Skrenya held a criminal court which  was
      not properly constituted, and that he postponed various criminal cases
      in chambers in the absence of the prosecutor.

   6. On 26 October 2009, the Commission informed Mr  Skrenya  that  it  was
      contemplating recommending that he  be  provisionally  suspended  from
      office pending the outcome of an investigation  into  his  fitness  to
      hold office. He was requested to show cause why  the  decision  should
      not be taken.

   7. On 26 August 2010, the  Commission,  having  considered  Mr  Skrenya’s
      response, resolved to advise the Minister to provisionally suspend him
      from office in terms of section 13(3)(a) of the Act.

   8. The Commission is of the view that the alleged misconduct  against  Mr
      Skrenya is of such a serious nature as to make  it  inappropriate  for
      him to perform the functions of a magistrate while the allegations are
      being investigated. It would also  be  inappropriate  for  a  judicial
      officer, appearing as an accused before a court of law on a charge  of
      fraud to still sit on the Bench.

Conclusion

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
considered the report on the provisional suspension from office of
Magistrate L Skrenya, recommends that the National Council of Provinces
confirms the provisional suspension from the office of Magistrate L
Skrenya.

Report to be considered

6.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
Development on the provisional suspension from  office  of  Magistrate  F  R
Rambau, dated 23 November 2010:

Introduction

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the report  on  the  provisional  suspension  from  office  of  a
magistrate, Mr F R Rambau, a regional magistrate  at  Polokwane,  tabled  by
the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development,  in  terms  of  the
Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

   9. The Regional Court President of  the  Limpopo  Province  informed  the
      Magistrates Commission, on 8 February 2010, that  Regional  Magistrate
      Rambau together with the prosecutor and an attorney, was arrested  for
      corruption on 5 February 2010.

  10. It is alleged that Mr Rambau, the prosecutor and the attorney together
      arranged the outcome of the trial by pre-determining the sentence  for
      financial reward.

  11. Mr Rambau and his two co-accused appeared in the Musina District Court
      on 8 February 2010 on charges of corruption. They were released on R10
      000 bail each. Mr Rambau  was  further  prohibited  from  entering  or
      visiting any Magistrates Office in the Thohoyandou Cluster.

  12. The Regional Court President requested the Magistrates  Commission  to
      provisionally suspend Mr Rambau from office.

  13. On 8 February 2010, the Ethics Division of the Magistrates  Commission
      informed Mr Rambau in writing that the  Commission  was  contemplating
      recommending that he be provisionally suspended from  office,  pending
      the outcome of an investigation into his fitness to  hold  office.  He
      was requested to show cause, in writing, why such  a  decision  should
      not be taken.

  14. The Magistrates Commission considered Mr Rambau’s response and at  its
      meeting held on 26 August 2010, resolved to  advise  the  Minister  to
      provisionally suspend Mr  Rambau  from  office  in  terms  of  section
      13(3)(a) of the Act.

  15. The Commission was of the view that the charges against Mr Rambau were
      of such a serious nature as  to  make  it  inappropriate  for  him  to
      continue  to  perform  the  functions  of  a  Magistrate   while   the
      allegations were being investigated.

  16. The Commission is of the view that the alleged conduct by Mr Rambau is
      of such a serious nature that it would justify his removal from office
      if he were found guilty of the misconduct charges against him.

Conclusion

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
considered the report on the provisional suspension from office of
Magistrate F R Rambau, recommends that the National Council of Provinces
confirms the provisional suspension from the office of Magistrate F R
Rambau.

Report to be considered

7.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
Development on the suspension from office of Magistrate  MN  Jassiem,  dated
23 November 2010:

Introduction

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the report on the suspension from office of a magistrate, Mr M  N
Jassiem, an additional magistrate at Mitchells Plein, Western  Cape,  tabled
by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, in terms of  the
Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

Background

 1. On 9 October 2006, 28 August 2007 and again  on  23  November  2009,  Mr
    Jassiem wrote to the Magistrates Commission  for  approval  to  run  his
    practice as an attorney whilst permanently appointed as a Magistrate.

 2. Mr Jassiem was  informed  in  July  2007  that  the  Service  Conditions
    Committee of the Commission had resolved to  refer  the  matter  to  the
    Magistrates Commission for further consideration.

 3. The Commission, on 23 August 2007, resolved not to approve Mr  Jassiem’s
    request to be allowed to practise as an attorney. In September 2001, the
    Commission informed the Judicial Head of the  Administrative  Region  of
    its decision and requested the Judicial Head to inform Mr Jassiem.

 4. Mr Jassiem was notified of the Commission’s resolution on  21  September
    2007.

 5. The Commission noted that Mr Jassiem was still practising as an attorney
    and that he was therefore deliberately in defiance of a decision by  the
    Commission that he not be allowed to  practise  as  an  attorney  whilst
    holding the office of Magistrate.

 6. The Senior Legal Officer of the Cape Law Society submitted an affidavit,
    dated 17 September 2009, that:

        1. Mr Jassiem ceased practising as an attorney on 9  October  2000,
           but recommenced to practise for own account as  MN  Jassiem  and
           Associates from 1 November 2006.
        2. He is the sole partner in the firm.
        3. There are no other  practitioners  at  the  firm,  and  that  he
           personally applied for a Fidelity  Fund  Certificate  for  2007,
           2008, 2009 and 2010.
        4. He is in possession of a 2010  Fidelity  Fund  Certificate,  and
           that he submitted an unqualified trust  account  audit  for  the
           period ending 28 February 2009 for MN Jassiem and Associates.

 7. After considering the contents of the affidavit and other correspondence
    received from the Cape Law Society, the Chairperson of  the  Commission,
    on 12 November 2009, requested Mr Jassiem to give reasons why he  should
    not be charged with misconduct for deliberately defying a decision taken
    by the Commission on 23 August 2007.

 8. Mr Jassiem  was  charged  with  misconduct  on  11  December  2009.  The
    misconduct inquiry commenced on 6 April 2010.

 9. Mr Jassiem initially pleaded guilty to the main charge but  changed  his
    plea to not guilty after indicating that he never ran any practice as an
    attorney but was doing conveyancing and estate administration.

10. In his judgment, the Presiding Officer found Mr Jassiem to be  dishonest
    in that he had, on 8 October 2006, misled the Cape Law Society.  He  had
    indicated in writing that he had the Commission’s permission to practise
    as an attorney. He only  requested  the  Commission’s  permission  on  9
    October 2006. He had also misled his Judicial Head  of  Office  in  this
    regard and his conduct therefore showed lack of integrity as an  officer
    of the court.

11. After considering all the evidence presented before him,  the  Presiding
    Officer found Mr Jassiem guilty of misconduct on the main count.

12. The Presiding  Officer  recommended,  in  terms  of  the  regulation  of
    26(17)(b) of the Regulations for Judicial Officers in the  Lower  Courts
    1994, that Mr Jassiem be removed from office as contemplated in  section
    13 of the Magistrates Act.

13. At its meeting  held  on  26  August  2010,  the  Commission  considered
    relevant documents as required in terms of regulation 26(22)  read  with
    regulation 26(19) of the Regulations  for  Judicial  Officers  in  Lower
    Courts, 1994. The Commission resolved to  accept  the  findings  of  the
    Presiding Officer and to recommend  to  the  Minister  for  Justice  and
    Constitutional Development to remove  Mr  Jassiem  from  office  on  the
    grounds of misconduct in terms of section 13(4)(a)(i) of the Magistrates
    Act, 1993.

Conclusion

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
considered the report on the suspension from office of magistrate Mr M N
Jassiem, reports that it concurs with the Minister for Justice and
Constitutional Development and recommends that Mr M N Jassiem be removed
from office.
Report to be considered

8.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
Development on the provisional suspension from office of Magistrate I W O  M
Morake, dated 23 November 2010:

Introduction

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the report  on  the  provisional  suspension  from  office  of  a
magistrate, Mr I W O M Morake,  an  additional  magistrate  at  Lichtenburg,
tabled by the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development, in  terms
of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

1. Mr Morake, as a Magistrate and Judicial  Head  at  Lichtenburg,  has  had
   several complaints lodged against him with  the  Magistrates  Commission.
   The allegations were as follows:

     1. Attorneys Ranamane Phungo Incorporated, acting on behalf of  Moeder
        Moraine Tirano, alleged that Mr Morake instructed their  client  to
        vacate the property she was occupying without any application being
        placed before him. It is alleged  that  Mr  Morake  had  called  Ms
        Tirano to his office and had personally instructed  her  to  vacate
        her premises.


     2. The Provincial Head of the South African Police Detective  Service,
        North West, requested the Commission  to  investigate  a  complaint
        made by one of its members against  Mr  Morake.  The  Investigating
        Officer,  in  a  stock  theft  case,  arrested  a  suspect  in  the
        Lichtenburg  district  and  impounded  the  stolen  livestock.  The
        suspect  was  charged   and   appeared   before   the   Lichtenburg
        Magistrates’   Court.   The   case   was   remanded   for   further
        investigation. The Investigating Officer alleged that a week  prior
        to the remand date, Mr Morake phoned him and ordered him to  appear
        before him. Mr Morke also threatened the Investigating Officer with
        arrest if he failed to appear. The Investigating  Officer  complied
        with the instruction and attended the meeting. The accused was also
        present at the meeting. Mr Morake asked the  Investigating  Officer
        how he could help the accused. The  Investigating  Officer  replied
        that the matter was in  court  and  that  he  could  not  help  the
        accused. The Investigating Officer later reported that he found  Mr
        Morake’s conduct unusual and threatening.

     3. The  Chef  Magistrate  of  the  North  West  Administrative  Region
        received a complaint from Legal and Tax Services (Pty) Ltd, a legal
        expense insurance company, which alleged that Mr Morake  agreed  to
        assist one of their clients with a loan agreement. The  matter  was
        forwarded to the Chief Magistrate of the North West  Administrative
        Region. The allegation was that their client had forwarded R950  to
        Mr Morake  to  secure  the  loan,  but,  since  no  assistance  was
        forthcoming, they requested to be refunded.


     4. It is further alleged that Mr Morake interfered in a private matter
        to such an extent that the complainant had to  approach  the  court
        for relief. It was alleged that Mr Morake contacted  Mr  Shohag,  a
        businessman,  and  ordered  him  to  come  to  Mr  Morake’s  office
        immediately. Mr Shohag informed Mr Morake that he could not make it
        and was threatened with arrest. Mr Shohag was advised not to attend
        and later that day was visited by three police officers. The police
        officers informed him that his employee had a problem with him  and
        he had to go and see the magistrate about the issue. Mr Shohag  and
        his two partners went  as  instructed.  Mr  Shohag’s  employee  was
        present at the meeting and  the  magistrate  questioned  Mr  Shohag
        about the problem between him  and  the  employee.  Mr  Shohag  was
        instructed by Mr Morake to sign an agreement that Mr  Shohag  would
        conduct business with his employee. Mr Morake threatened Mr  Shohag
        with deportation back to Bangladesh if  he  failed  to  follow  the
        instructions. Mr Shohag later  obtained  an  interdict  against  Mr
        Morake and reported the incident to the SAPS Organised Crime Unit.

     5. On 13 July 2007, Mr Morake appeared  in  the  Lichtenburg  District
        Court on three charges of theft. The case stands  postponed  to  18
        October 2010 for judgment.

     6. It is further  alleged  that  Mr  Morake  visited  a  lady  at  her
        workplace regarding a rental dispute she had with  another  person.
        Mr Morake ordered the lady to come to his  office  to  discuss  the
        matter. She acceded to his request and, with her husband,  attended
        the meeting where the other party  was  also  present.  The  matter
        involved the payment of arrears in respect of  electricity  to  the
        amount of R1 173. Mr Morake would not hear the woman’s  reason  for
        not paying and ordered that the woman pay the outstanding amount to
        him rather than to the municipality. He would pay the other  party.
        He threatened the lady with incarceration if she did not follow his
        instructions. The lady paid the money to  Mr  Morake,  but,  a  few
        weeks later, she was summoned to the Small Claims Court for payment
        of the amount of R1 173. The other party had not received the money
        from Mr Morake and was not aware that Mr Morake  had  received  the
        money. Mr Morake no longer had the money and said that someone  had
        taken it from his office.

   2. On 10 February 2010, the Magistrates Commission informed Mr Morake  in
      writing that the Commission was contemplating recommending that he  be
      provisionally  suspended  from  office  pending  the  outcome  of   an
      investigation into his fitness to hold office.  He  was  requested  to
      show cause, in writing, why the decision should not be taken.

   3. On 26 August 2010,  the  Commission,  having  considered  Mr  Morake’s
      response received on 25 February 2010, resolved to advise the  Minster
      to again provisionally suspend Mr  Morake  from  office  in  terms  of
      section 13(3)(a) of the Act. The Commission is of the  view  that  the
      existing evidence against Mr Morake is of such a serious nature as  to
      make it inappropriate for him to perform the functions of a magistrate
      while the allegations are being investigated.

   4. It would be furthermore  be  inappropriate  for  a  judicial  officer,
      appearing as an accused before a court of law  in  charges  of  theft,
      emanating from complaints within the district he is serving, to  still
      sit on the Bench.

   5. The Commission holds the view that the existing  evidence  against  Mr
      Morake is of such a serious nature that it would justify  his  removal
      from office should he  be  found  guilty  of  the  misconduct  charges
      against him.

Conclusion

The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional Development, having
considered the report on the provisional suspension from office of
magistrate I W O M Morake, recommends that the National Council of
Provinces confirms the provisional suspension from the office of Magistrate
I W O M Morake.

Report to be considered.

9.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
Development on the suspension from Office of Magistrate A Maharaj, dated  23
November 2010
Introduction
The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the report on the suspension from office of a  magistrate,  Ms  A
Maharaj, an additional Magistrate on probation at  George,   tabled  by  the
Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development,  in  terms  of  section
13(4)(a)(i) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90  of  1993),  reports  as
follows:

Background

   1. Ms Maharaj was serving as an additional magistrate on probation at the
      Magistrates’ Court in George. She was charged  with  misconduct  on  8
      March 2007. The misconduct inquiry against Ms Maharaj commenced on  20
      March 2007 at George Magistrates’ Court,  but  was  postponed  at  the
      request of the defence to confer with Ms Maharaj.

   2. On 24 July 2007 the inquiry resumed at Durban Magistrates’ Court,  but
      was postponed sine die pending submissions to be made by Ms Maharaj to
      the Commission  on  the  charges  laid  against  her.  The  Commission
      received Ms Maharaj’s written submission on the charges and  indicated
      that it accepted the explanation for charges three to eight and  would
      only proceed with the first two charges laid against her.
      However, a further five charges, i.e. counts 9  to  13,  were  brought
against her on 17 July 2008.

   3. The inquiry resumed on 12 March 2009 at Durban Magistrates’ Court.  Ms
      Maharaj pleaded not guilty to the charges. The Commission led evidence
      on 18 August 2009 and the presiding officer found Ms Maharaj guilty on
      the first two counts and on counts 9, 10 and 12. No evidence  was  led
      on count 11 and,  as  a  result,  she  was  acquitted.  She  was  also
      acquitted on count 13.
   4. The Presiding Officer passed sentence on 15 April 2010  and  concluded
      that each count on which she was found guilty “hits at  the  integrity
      of a judicial officer”. Having reviewed all the facts before  her  the
      Presiding Officer recommended that Ms Maharaj be removed  from  office
      as contemplated in section 13 of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no  90
      of 1993). The Commission  resolved  to  accept  the  findings  of  the
      Presiding Officer and to recommend to the  Minister  for  Justice  and
      Constitutional Development to remove Ms Maharaj from office  in  terms
      of section 13 of the Magistrates Act, 1993.

Conclusion

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the suspension from office of magistrate Ms  A  Maharaj,  reports
that  it  concurs  with  the  Minister  for   Justice   and   Constitutional
Development and recommends Ms Maharaj be removed from office.


Report to be considered.


_______________________________              Date:
The Honourable Mr T H Mofokeng, MP
Chairperson: Select Committee on Safety and Constitutional Development

10.   Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Development on the Draft Notice and Schedule in terms of section 12(3) of
the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), determining the rate at
which salaries are payable to magistrates annually, dated 23 November 2010

Introduction

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the Draft Notice and Schedule in terms of section  12(3)  of  the
Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993), determining  the  rate  at  which
salaries are payable to magistrates annually with effect from 1 April  2010,
referred to it, recommends that the Council approve the  said  Draft  Notice
and Schedule.

Report to be considered

11.   Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
Development on the Draft Notice and Schedule submitted in terms of section
2(4) of the Judges Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act, 2001 (Act
No 47 of 2001), determining the rate at which salaries are payable to
Constitutional Court judges and judges annually, dated 23 November 2010

Introduction

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the Draft Notice and Schedule submitted in terms of section  2(4)
of the Judges Remuneration and Conditions of Employment Act,  2001  (Act  No
47 of  2001),  determining  the  rate  at  which  salaries  are  payable  to
Constitutional Court judges and judges annually with  effect  from  1  April
2010, referred to it, recommends that the Council  approve  the  said  Draft
Notice and Schedule.

Report to be considered


