---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 11 November 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-11-11
---

THURSDAY, 11 NOVEMBER 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

    EXTENSION OF DEADLINE FOR AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE ON CODE OF JUDICIAL
    CONDUCT AND REGULATIONS ON JUDGES DISCLOSURE OF REGISTRABLE INTERESTS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Chair, I move without notice:

    That the Council -

        1) notwithstanding –


           a) Joint Rule 138(5), which provides that an Ad Hoc Joint
              Committee ceases to exist if it has completed its task by the
              date set for the completion of its task; and


             b) a resolution adopted by the Council on 26 October 2010 that
                the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Code of Judicial Conduct and
                the Regulations on Judges’ Disclosure of Registrable
                Interests had to report by 16 November 2010;


     2) condones the continued existence of the Ad Hoc Joint Committee; and


     3) extends the deadline by which it has to conclude its business to 28
        January 2011.


Question put: That the motion be agreed to.

IN FAVOUR: Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Limpopo,
Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT:
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: As you are aware, we have the questions to the
Deputy President today. Welcome, Deputy President, to the NCOP. We will
directly go to the questions. However, I would like to remind you that the
time for replies to questions is five minutes; time for supplementary
questions is two minutes; time for replies to supplementary questions is
four minutes; and only four supplementary questions are allowed per
question. New members, please note that.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, on a point of clarity: With your permission,
I just want to enquire about a question that I, on behalf of Cope,
submitted to the Deputy President in due time. According to my information,
it was the first question. I received correspondence from the Secretary to
the NCOP regarding the question. I then submitted a letter asking the
reasons for the ruling on the question. Until now, I have not received any
response. So, I just want your ruling in terms of the question that I
submitted.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You can redirect your letter to me; I will
investigate the matter. Thank you very much.

 Position and relevant details regarding South Africa’s support for current
                  sanctions on nuclear matters against Iran

19.   Mr M P Sibande (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


     Whether current sanctions on nuclear matters against Iran which
     South Africa supported are justified; if not, what is the position in
      this regard; if so, what are the relevant details?

            CO364E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Good afternoon, hon members and hon Chair. As a
country that remains firmly committed to the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction, South Africa does not wish to see even one other country
possessing or acquiring nuclear weapons, including Iran. South Africa’s
position is informed by our own national experience as the only country to
have voluntarily dismantled its nuclear weapons and related programmes. In
this regard, South Africa acts on the basis of the principles and in
support of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, where we are active as a member of its board of
governors.

During South Africa’s membership of the United Nations Security Council in
2007 and 2008, we focused our efforts on trying to de-escalate tensions,
promote dialogue, and establish confidence in Iran’s nuclear programme to
ensure that International Atomic Energy Agency processes were supported and
Iran remained part of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. The UN Security
Council resolution framework on Iran is aimed at negotiated solutions. The
United Nations Security Council is pursuing a dual-track approach of
incentives and pressure, but in both instances the stated objective is a
comprehensive negotiated solution.
While recognising that the United Nations Security Council could be called
upon to impose coercive measures such as sanctions, South Africa called for
these measures to be exercised with great caution, and only to support the
resumption of political dialogue and negotiations to achieve a peaceful
solution. We reminded members of the United Nations Security Council that
by voting in favour of sanctions, they had a special obligation to the
Iranian people. We reminded them that they had to exercise the highest
degree of scrutiny and oversight with regard to the implementation of the
sanctions to ensure that there were no unintended consequences and the sole
focus remained the nuclear programme.

In conclusion, South Africa upholds the right of all countries, including
Iran, to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, subject to appropriate
safeguards. For South Africa, it is important to ensure that the
international community’s response to the Iranian situation does not deny
any signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty the peaceful
application of nuclear technology. I thank you for your attention.

Mr M P SIBANDE: Ngiyabonga Phini likaMongameli ngempendulo yakho. [Thank
you, Deputy President, for your response.]

Deputy President, the only thing I would like to know is: What will be the
long-term impact on South Africa’s nuclear development? I ask this because
as society develops there is this trend of a lot of countries looking at
the nuclear option as an alternative to be used in terms of development.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, indeed, nuclear technology is the future
in terms of electrical energy generation. But, of course, the issue here is
that we as a country, within the integrated policy, will look at even the
generation of electrical power through nuclear technology. That is in the
pipeline, and that is clean energy. Nuclear energy is clean energy. That is
the future, as I have said. We have already been in possession of nuclear
warheads and that is why we voluntarily destroyed them. That is technology
that we will be able to revisit in future in order to meet the demand for
electricity. Thank you.

Mr R A LEES: Hon Deputy President, thank you very much for the answer to
the question. Following on your answer, may I ask: If you believe that
nuclear energy is clean energy and it’s the energy of the future, what is
your view then of the disposal of nuclear waste - which is a problem
millennium after millennium - which could create a huge dirty environment
for our children and grandchildren to deal with?

Secondly, the South African government adopted caution, or asked the United
Nations Security Council to adopt caution, with regard to sanctions. Is the
South African government in favour, or not, of the sanctions that have been
imposed? Thank you, hon Chair.
The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: The second question seems to be a new
question, not a follow-up question.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, the disposal of nuclear waste is a
challenge that confronts all of humanity. That is why this technology is to
be used in terms of the framework determined by the International Atomic
Energy Agency, which is a body that looks at the non-proliferation as well
as the management of nuclear waste.

The idea is to create a safe and healthy environment, rather than to
destroy the earth, as it were. That is the framework that we, as a country,
will have to be guided by so that we don’t dispose of nuclear waste in a
reckless manner, a manner which promotes hazards to the health of humanity.
That is why we will have to do this in a more responsible manner.

Solutions are being sought. Many countries that are already utilising
nuclear energy are doing lots of research on how to dispose of nuclear
waste. We know that some who are irresponsible try to dump it in waters far
away from their own continents. That is why this is a matter that must be
co-ordinated globally by an agency such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency.

The latter part of the question is a variation of the question that I
answered in the first instance, the first question posed by the hon member.
So, I don’t know whether I should simply repeat that answer or not. Thank
you.

 Meetings of Moral Regeneration Movement, MRM, and details relating thereto
20.   Mr R A Lees (DA) asked the Deputy President:


     Whether the Moral Regeneration Movement, MRM, has held any meetings
     during the period 1 January 2009 up to the latest specified date for
     which information is available; if not, why not; if so, (a) with whom
     were the meetings held, (b) what subjects were covered in the meetings,
     (c) what (i) decisions and (ii) recommendations were made at such
     meetings and (d) who attended the meetings?
                  CO539E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, the Moral Regeneration Movement, MRM,
which is a section 21 organisation, has held numerous management and board
meetings. The organisation held meetings with external stakeholders, both
in government and nonstate actors. Subjects covered varied from
organisational matters that were dealt with at management and board
meetings to meetings with external stakeholders that, naturally, focused on
strategic and programmatic matters or those matters that relate to the
successful implementation of the strategic priorities of the organisation.

If hon members are interested, I can request the MRM to supply its schedule
of meetings. These details, however, are not part of my work as a patron of
the MRM. Some of the details can also be obtained from the Department of
Arts and Culture, which is the department overseeing the work of the MRM. I
thank you.

 Details regarding meetings held by energy advisory council and conclusions
 reached by energy advisory council following the consideration of building
                       further nuclear power stations

21.   Mr R A Lees (DA) asked the Deputy President:

      (1)   Whether the energy advisory council has held any meetings during
           the period 1 January 2009 up to the latest  specified  date  for
           which information is available; if not, why not; if so, (a) with
           whom were the meetings held, (b) what subjects were  covered  in
           the meetings, (c) what (i) decisions  and  (ii)  recommendations
           were made at such meetings and (d) who attended the meetings;


      (2)   whether the energy advisory council has considered the building
           of any further nuclear power stations; if not, what is the
           position in this regard; if so, what conclusions were reached
           regarding the (a) need, (b) locality, (c) timing and (d)
           financing of the new nuclear power stations by the energy
           advisory council?            CO540E
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: The National Stakeholder Advisory Council on Energy
met on 8 December 2009 and on 15 October 2010. Members of the council are
drawn from government, labour, business and civil society organisations,
constituted along the same lines as Nedlac constituencies.

At its December 2009 meeting, the council discussed matters concerning the
rising cost of electricity and how this affected consumers, especially the
poor. It also discussed an innovative funding model for building new power
stations. The council agreed that while the National Energy Regulator of
South Africa is the authority that has the mandate to decide on Eskom’s
proposed new electricity tariffs, there was a need to devise means to
cushion the poor by introducing sloping block tariffs. The council also
agreed to consider the proposed funding model that was presented by the
labour movement.

In the meeting of 15 October 2010, the council considered a proposal on the
integrated resource plan. Some of the stakeholders felt that although they
had been given time to consider proposals on this plan, they still needed
more time to consider this, given its complexity. Government agreed to this
request.

The meeting also received a report on the process to create the independent
system and market operator in a phased approach to allow independent
operators to participate in the generation of electricity. This matter is
currently being processed by the Interministerial Committee on Energy.

On the matter of energy efficiency and demand-side management, government
indicated that it recognised the need to provide financial incentives in
order to stimulate the energy efficiency programme through rebates. The
required regulations for accessing these incentives have been drafted and,
once the concurrence of the Minister of Finance has been obtained, the
regulations will be circulated for public comment.

The council was also keen to have an update regarding the regional
electricity distributors programme and whether it would proceed or not.
Government indicated that the matter was under consideration at the
interministerial committee and that a decision will be announced in due
course.

Apart from considering the draft integrated resource plan that was
presented, the council did not take any nuclear-specific decisions. The
nuclear build programme remains part of our future plans. Once all
processes have been finalised, including consultation with stakeholders, we
will make a public announcement about the programme. I thank you.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Deputy President, in terms of the response that you have
just given, would you argue that interaction with the advisory council on
energy will enhance government’s pronouncement on the renewable energy feed-
in tariff, Refit, model for South Africa? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes, indeed it will enhance government’s response
because this advisory council, as I said, is constituted in a
representative manner along the lines of Nedlac, organised business,
organised labour and civil society organisations. So, its views reflect the
take from all these stakeholders. Thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Chairperson, through you to the Deputy President, does the
Deputy President think that if we go the way of nuclear power stations in
the future South Africa will still have the technological know-how to
effect the running of these stations, bearing in mind that there have been
problems with Koeberg in this regard? Reactor 1 closed down; and then there
was Reactor 2, which shut down as well. I believe this has a lot to do with
retaining the technological know-how on how to service these stations.
Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, yes, it is in the country’s interests
not only to retain such technological know-how, but also to produce more of
the same because opportunities exist for our nuclear scientists to gain
practical experience in countries that are willing. For instance, South
Korea has an institute which trains nuclear engineers and physicists, and
they have expressed the willingness to accept young South African students
who are keen to pursue studies in that regard.

It is really for us as a country, through the Human Resource Development
Council, to work out the needs of expertise in this area and prepare
accordingly, so that at the time when the decision is made to go back to
nuclear power, we should not then find that we don’t have personnel. So, it
is indeed in our interests to retain such nuclear expertise.

Mr D B FELDMAN: Chairperson, through you to the Deputy President, I would
just like to correct myself or ease my mind, Deputy President. Why did we
close down one of the state-owned enterprises, SOEs, the pebble bed modular
reactor, PBMR, which I think was closed due to financial constraints, and
then jump over to coal energy? Could you explain this to me, please? Thank
you.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: You have taken a very good chance; I will
allow the Deputy President to respond, if he wants to.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, the PBMR programme was really doing
research in what is called fourth generation nuclear technology. Quite
clearly, the fiscus could not sustain that kind of advanced research.
However, we, as a country, do retain the intellectual property rights with
regard to that research. Thank you.
 Integration of traditional and religious leaders into government’s efforts
  to fight HIV/Aids, addressing of issue of gender equality in traditional
   societies dealing with HIV/Aids and new strategies and plans to target
                   youth with HIV/Aids prevention messages

22.   Prince M M M Zulu (IFP) asked the Deputy President:

     (1)    (a)  To  what  extent  are  traditional  and  religious  leaders
          integrated into  the  government’s  efforts  to  fight  HIV/Aids,
          especially in the rural areas, and (b) how  does  the  government
          address the issue of gender equality in traditional societies  in
          dealing with HIV/Aids;


      (2)   what new (a) strategies and (b) plans will the government put in
           place in the next 5 to 10 years to assist existing programmes,
           like loveLife, in order to target youth with HIV/Aids prevention
           messages?                               CO554E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, both traditional and religious leaders
are represented in the SA National Aids Council, Sanac, and participate in
all the deliberations of the council and its programmes, including World
Aids Day events and the national HIV counselling and testing campaign.

Traditional leaders have been integrated into the work of the Department of
Health in KwaZulu-Natal, KZN, and through the medical male circumcision
campaign that was mandated and launched by His Majesty King Goodwill
Zwelithini. As recently as last month, the House of Traditional Leaders
reaffirmed its commitment to campaigning against HIV and Aids, and resolved
to participate in the various programmes implemented in their areas of
jurisdiction.

The issue of gender equality is a broad social issue that impacts on
health, but is not exclusively a health issue. Civil society, community
leaders and other government departments also have a role to play. Sanac
includes the women’s and men’s sectors that have as their objective
changing gender roles and addressing gender inequalities. Working with
nongovernmental organisations, Sanac participated in the launch of the
Brothers for Life campaign, which seeks to make men more responsible for
ensuring an equal society.

The medical male circumcision campaign in KwaZulu-Natal also focuses on the
roles and responsibilities of men. Young men are taught these
responsibilities in the province, including far rural areas, by community
leaders and elders. It is hoped that such programmes will decrease the
incidence of gender-based violence and sexual assault.

The lifespan of the current HIV and AIDS Strategic Plan ends at the end of
2011. The idea is that a new plan will be developed through a consultative
process during the course of 2011. Thank you.

Mr R A LEES: Hon Chair, through you to the hon Deputy President: Deputy
President, in your reply you mentioned the circumcision drive in my
province, KwaZulu-Natal. Are you aware of the extensive use of the Tara
KLamp, which had really severe complications in tests in Orange Farm, and
that, despite the results of these tests and the complications encountered
at Orange Farm, the Department of Health persists in using this clamp for
circumcision in KwaZulu-Natal? If you are aware of it, what are your views
about the continued use of the Tara KLamp? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Lees, our role, really, in Sanac is to preach and
spread the word about the limited benefits of medical male circumcision.
That can be done in a clinic or a hospital, and the equipment used is
really out of our space, as it were.

In KwaZulu-Natal, yes, indeed, this Tara KLamp is being used. People have
been trained and it is being used. So far, we have not received any
complaints, as it were. It is not clear whether the people in Orange Farm
who are reported to have experienced difficulties after using it were
actually properly trained to do so, or not. It is also not clear whether
these were operations conducted in a clinic and/or in a hospital. What we
do know is that in KwaZulu-Natal it is working so far, and there have not
been any complications. Thank you.

 Reports on progress by municipalities in fight against poverty, as part of
   antipoverty campaign, municipalities’ functioning indigent policies and
  programmes in place targeted at poor, and government plans to assist with
 regard to advancing fight against poverty, social marginalisation of poor,
                 child-headed households and senior citizens

23.   Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

    (1)     Whether,  as  part  of  his  antipoverty  campaign,  he  or  the
          Presidency has received any reports regarding the  progress  made
          by municipalities in the fight against poverty; if not,  what  is
          the position in  this  regard;  if  so,  what  are  the  relevant
          details;


     (2)    whether all municipalities have functioning (a) policies  and/or
          (b) indigent programmes in place that are targeted at  the  poor;
          if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details;


      (3)   whether the government has any plans to assist poor
           municipalities in playing a critical role with regard to (a)
           advancing the fight against poverty, (b) the social
           marginalisation of the poor, (c) child-headed households and (d)
           senior citizens; if not, why not; if so, what plans?
           CO560E
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, the War on Poverty campaign is part of
the comprehensive antipoverty strategy of government. It is an urgent and
intermediate intervention against poverty.

Progress reports on the War on Poverty campaign are submitted to the
national war room, which in turn briefs the Presidency. We do not just
receive reports, but we also undertake regular verification visits to areas
where the War on Poverty campaign has been launched to review progress for
ourselves.

According to our monitoring reports, all municipalities have indigent
policies. Municipalities complete a template every quarter which reports on
whether they have indigent registers, how many people are registered, and
the number of persons benefiting from free basic services. Free basic
services such as water and electricity are examples of local government
programmes that are targeted at the poor and are being implemented in most
municipalities.

National government, through the Department of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs, currently has three programmes that support
municipalities with initiatives that target the poor. The municipal
infrastructure grant enables municipalities to roll out basic services to
poorer communities. The Siyenza Manje programme provides technical hands-on
support to municipalities.

The Community Work Programme is an initiative designed to provide an
employment safety net by providing participants with a predictable number
of days of work per month, thus supplementing their existing livelihood and
affording them a basic level of income security through work. The programme
is targeted at unemployed and underemployed people of working age,
including those whose livelihood activities are insufficient to lift them
out of poverty. The programme currently has 75 000 participants. More
details on these programmes can be obtained from the Minister for Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs.

In addition to this, government has a plethora of programmes that address
the social marginalisation of the poor. For example, we have significantly
increased the number of no-fee schools, school feeding programmes, early
childhood development facilities and many other programmes.

The Department of Social Development has programmes for child-headed
households. These include foster care and monitoring by social workers and
justice officials, as per the Children’s Act and the provisions of our
Constitution. We also work in partnership with nonstate actors to address
the issues of children in our country.

With regard to senior citizens, per capita grants are given to institutions
that provide residential care for senior citizens. Social programmes to
keep our senior citizens involved in the social life of our communities are
being implemented across the country. We have also taken a conscious
decision to include the affairs of senior citizens in all our new
programmes such as the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme. Most
recently, a South African female senior citizens football team represented
the country abroad. Thank you.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Ndiyabulela, Sekela-mongameli. [Thank you,
Deputy President.] I want to know, Deputy President, whether the government
encourages or accepts shared service delivery arrangements with poor
communities and households such as the one we witnessed when the City of
Cape Town built open toilets for the community of Makhaza with the
expectation that the community would find means to cover themselves even if
it means using blankets.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, I think that for any shared services to
work - we have seen that in the provision of RDP houses in a number of
communities – or when that kind of service is to be provided to any
community, it is best when the community is involved from the planning
phase and is also organised accordingly. Then it is possible for residents
in a street comprising a number of households to know that they can,
together, build a home - or a toilet, if it is a toilet that has to be
built - for each household.

If it is not done with their involvement and in that fashion, it is bound
to result in problems and a sense of not being provided with the requisite
service or support. It only works when it is done in the spirit of letsema
or “let us do it together”. That way it works better because those who are
on the waiting list then know that they are on such a list, and they also
know the product and its quality because they are involved in its
construction and delivery, as it were.

I think that the case you are referring to suffered from that weakness
because the community, as I followed the story, were made to sign some
documents which purportedly recorded their acceptance of the toilet seats
that were not covered. We believe that had the community been engaged and
involved in the provision of those structures, they would have done it
sequentially. We also believe that at the end - whatever time it would have
taken - all of them would have ended up with covered toilets. Thank you.

Mr A WATSON: Thank you, Chairperson. Deputy President, I think your
government must be commended for your efforts - which you have just
explained to us - of alleviating the strife of those who are mostly poverty-
stricken in our country, as well as your efforts of addressing the issue of
joblessness. But the ancillary problem in this regard is, of course,
corruption.

I would like to know what your government is doing in all those many ANC-
controlled municipalities across the country where you, as the government,
have put in so much of the efforts to alleviate poverty. Those funds are
corrupted and stolen by corrupt officials, as was evidenced just this week
in the “City of Choice”, Msunduzi Municipality, KwaZulu-Natal province. Do
you have plans in place to stop this flow – I want to say, this tide of
corruption - that steals the money meant for the poor and indigent?

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Okay, that looks like a
secondary question to the initial question, but I wouldn’t like to deny the
Deputy President the opportunity to share some ideas if he wants to
respond.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon members, the government has five priorities. The
first is education, because it has many problems. Yet, education is the
real equaliser in society. So that’s a priority. Health is the second
priority. We know that public hospitals need to be improved. The third
priority is the creation of jobs because unemployment, poverty and all the
attendant problems remain stubborn. In fact, the number of people who are
dependent on social grants has risen to 13 million, and that figure is
unsustainable if it relies on the fiscus. We’ve got to find a way of
creating jobs to reduce that figure.

The fourth priority is rural development because, unless we attempt
development in rural areas, the migration into urban areas and the
resultant increase of informal settlements will remain a problem. The fifth
priority is the fight against crime and corruption. Corruption, by whatever
name we call it, must be fought and eliminated. Where we have evidence and
so on, there are specialised units, over and above the law enforcement
units, that can deal with such cases.

Indeed, the government is committed, and that is why you see this high
turnover of those who are caught with their fingers in the till, so to
speak. I can only repeat the fact that it is a societal problem and it
affects all of us. That is why whistle-blowers are important in this
regard. Thank you.

Ms M P THEMBA: Thank you, Chairperson. Deputy President, after how long
does the government require reports from municipalities regarding their
progress in this regard?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I did not get the essence of the question, hon
member. Can you please elaborate a bit?

Ms M P THEMBA: The government offers assistance to the municipalities
through the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs.
My question is: After how long does the government require reports from the
municipalities on the progress that they are making with the assistance
that is offered to them by the Department of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Well, municipalities are there to render services to
communities. The national department assists them to, firstly, obtain
unqualified audits. That’s the first goal of the assistance. The number of
municipalities that are now receiving unqualified audits has increased. The
department has a target to eliminate those that still receive qualified
audits. That’s the broad measure, otherwise it’s very difficult to say.

The department does not wait for reports from the municipalities. It is out
there generating data on the weaknesses that are found in the
municipalities in order to introduce corrective measures. That’s an ongoing
interactive process, but the broad tool used for checking progress is the
audit.

Mr R A LEES: Hon Chairperson, through you to the Deputy President: Deputy
President, you are to be congratulated on the Community Work Programme and
creating 75 000 jobs under these economic circumstances. That’s tremendous.
My question is: With the emphasis on decent jobs, would those jobs be
classified, in your opinion, as being “decent jobs”?

The second part of my question relates to the restriction on work
opportunities, in particular the textile industry, with its minimum wage
rates that resulted in the controversy. This is something which, I’m sure,
you are aware of, particularly in my province in Newcastle. I would like to
know about the restriction imposed on job creation by minimum wage rates in
line with these job opportunities here. On the one hand, you are doing a
fantastic job of creating job opportunities, but, on the other hand, should
we not be looking at opening the opportunities where we have restrictions
such as minimum wage rates which chase the work overseas or to other
countries?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Lees, the minimum wage is not restrictive because
it determines the barest minimum that should be paid to a worker in a
particular sector. That is why employers - those who set up factories, and
so on - are free to employ anybody at the barest minimum prescribed by law.
The minimum wage has been introduced even for domestic servants. Therefore,
in itself it’s not a restriction.

If the employers want to use prison labour, that is now being outlawed in
South Africa. In the past, there were opportunities for employers to employ
prisoners. When one employed prisoners, she or he paid Correctional
Services a certain fee. The prisoners worked and Correctional Services fed,
housed and clothed them. That way, one almost got free labour.

However, in the labour market, a minimum wage has been set, and other
employers pay far more than that. Therefore, if you employ people and you
are happy with their work, they should also be happy about what they earn
even if it is a minimum wage. There is no need for inspectors to impose any
higher wages than what is prescribed as a minimum.
The situation that you are referring to regarding the factories in
Newcastle, KwaZulu-Natal, involves employers who get workers into
“sweatshops”. In other words, the conditions in those factories are
hazardous, and so on.

On that point, we recall cases where some of those employers locked up
employees in the factories at night. And, as a result, some of them died.
They did not even allow their employees to leave the factory. Now, those
kinds of conditions are not allowed in terms of our labour laws.

The Ministry of Labour, therefore, sent the inspectors to check the
situation in those factories. I don’t think it was a minimum wage issue; it
was more the overall working conditions that impelled the labour inspectors
to close down those factories. Thank you.

     Details regarding infrastructure investment in ensuring supply and
  preservation of clean water, water storage and distribution, and clearing
    out national water infrastructure backlog in Limpopo, Northern Cape,
                         Eastern Cape and Mpumalanga

24.   Ms N D Ntwanambi (ANC) asked the Deputy President:


     Whether any part of the R300 billion the government has been spending
     annually on infrastructure investment includes investment in ensuring
     (a) the supply and preservation of  clean water, (b) water storage and
     (c) distribution, especially in clearing out our national water
     infrastructure backlog in communities of the rural areas and townships
     of Limpopo, Northern Cape, Eastern Cape and Mpumalanga that have been
     battling with drought, inconsistent water supply, contaminated water
     and/or still use natural water streams and dams; if not, why not; if
     so, what are the relevant details?            CO561E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, hon members, as with many other basic
services, the provision of water to the people of South Africa is severely
influenced by the application of unequal policies in the past. Some rural
communities are in the catchment areas for water supplies to the big cities
and, although they watch the water being piped off to the cities, they
themselves do not have access to potable water.

We now look at managing water in its entirety in our Water for Growth and
Development Framework. This is a sector approach to water management,
instead of having water resources and water services as separate
disciplines.

While “water rights” was the term used in the old Water Act of 1956, the
current National Water Act of 1998 refers to “water use entitlements”. The
Act makes provision for rural communities to apply for a water use license.
This replaces the riparian rights principle which excluded an estimated 90%
of blacks from obtaining water and which was the basis of the Water Act of
1956.

With regard to your question, hon member, the answer is yes. Through its
regional bulk infrastructure grant and Accelerated Community Infrastructure
Programme, the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs is investing
up to R5 billion over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework to reduce the
current backlog in the supply of bulk potable water for socioeconomic and
developmental needs in all provinces of South Africa.

Hon Ntwanambi asks specifically about the rural areas and townships of
Limpopo, Northern Cape, Eastern Cape and Mpumalanga. Starting with
Mpumalanga, government is attempting to address the challenge by installing
water treatment package plants in the communities of Ntunda, Louisville,
Skhwahlane, Brooklyn and Draaikraal.

During my visit to the Mpumalanga province on 30 October this year I had
the honour of opening a 2 megalitre package plant costing R2,8 million in
the Ntunda village, and a pipeline to reservoirs costing R1,4 million. This
project now supplies potable water to at least 7 000 people in the Ntunda
and Skhwahlane villages.

Through the bulk infrastructure grant in the Limpopo province, the
Department of Water and Environmental Affairs allocated an amount of
R228 million in the 2009-10 financial year for the funding of nine water
supply projects. An additional allocation of R28,66 million in the 2010-11
financial year from the community infrastructure programme ensures that
reticulation takes place in the municipalities.

In the Eastern Cape, R23 million has been invested for the supply of water
and to address water-pollution-related issues. In the Northern Cape, a
total of R8,37 million has been invested in three municipalities to cater
for the Northern Cape waste water and sewerage pump stations refurbishment
and water supply.

A number of municipalities were declared drought-stricken areas in the
Eastern Cape, Western Cape and Limpopo provinces in late 2009. In
consultation with the affected municipalities, these provinces have
conducted assessments to quantify the needs and the resources required to
bring about drought relief.

The interministerial committee approved a sum of R86 million for the
Eastern Cape and R185,2 million for the Western Cape. Of this amount,
R53,7 million was transferred to the Western Cape during November 2010, and
a further amount of R141,5 million for the 2010-11 financial year. An
amount of R54 million was approved for the Limpopo province in January
2010. Funds were made available from 1 July 2010.

With regard to initiatives to address acid mine drainage, Cabinet appointed
an interministerial committee to address the serious challenges related to
acid mine drainage in the Witwatersrand. Subsequently, a team of experts
was appointed and they presented their report to the interministerial
committee on 21 October this year. The interministerial committee has asked
the team of experts to look at the cost implications of their
recommendations and other options to resolve acid mine drainage. I thank
you for your attention.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE NCOP: Thank you very much, Chair. Deputy President...


... ndifuna ukuqonda ukuba njengoko umbane nawo unyuke kangaka, ingaba
urhulumente usabambelele kulaa mbane uzikhilowathi ezingama-50 indlu
nganye? Ingaba awuzokunyuswa na laa mbane umntu awuphiwayo? [... since the
electricity price has also increased this much, I would like to know
whether the government will continue to subsidise each household with the
free 50 kilowatts of electricity?  Will that free electricity not be
increased?]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: We are now mixing water and electricity ...
[Interjections.] ... All right. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Ngokolwazi lwam, urhulumente akakalihlaziyi inani
leekhilowathi elinikwa abantu bakuthi ngaphandle kwentlawulo. [As far as I
know, government has not yet reviewed the number of free kilowatts that are
subsidised for our people.]

Mr B A MNGUNI: Chairperson, Deputy President, there is general concern in a
certain community that by 2025 the country will be in short supply or in
dire need of clean fresh water. Does the government have a long-term
strategy to avert this foreseeable calamity, such as pumping or piping
desalinated water from the coastline, or perhaps going as far as the Great
Lakes?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: As I indicated in my initial response, government is
seized with efforts to address the challenge of ours being a water-scarce
country. There are a number of ways in which government is responding to
this challenge. Key amongst those is, first and foremost, to harvest as
much water as we possibly can and keep it in reservoirs and dams, as well
as to purify water that is available in many streams across the country.
The example of the Ntunda community that I visited last month is
instructive in this regard. Here is a plant that does not cost anything
more than R6 million. It pumps the water out of a river, purifies it, makes
it potable, and pumps it to take care of the communities.

The reality is that supply is not enough just on its own. We have to
explore the possibilities of recycling water. We also have to embark on
massive education of our people. For example, in many instances where there
are only three grains of rice in the sink we open the tap to flush them
down instead of picking them up. This reflects that we are not aware of the
fact that this source of life, clean water, is in short supply, because
people just use water recklessly.

So, this is a challenge that we, as government, are seized with. We are
quite aware of this challenge and we are doing everything possible to
ensure that we do not end up with severe water shortages. Without water
there is no sanitation and there is no life. All kinds of complications
will arise here. Thank you.

Mr M P JACOBS: Chair, my question to the Deputy President is: What
mechanism does the government have in place to ensure that when dams are
built people from surrounding areas benefit from that water? Currently,
that is not the case. You find that water is being transported to
industrial areas and people in the surrounding areas do not benefit from
those dams. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Chairperson, under the current National Water Act,
what I referred to as water use entitlement seeks to address precisely this
problem. Communities live close to massive dams and yet they have no
access. This is because the old Water Act gave rights to certain commercial
farmers, to the exclusion of local communities. That is what this water use
entitlement seeks to address. That is the legal instrument for addressing
precisely that challenge here. Thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Chair, in the province I come from, there are a lot of
problems with the municipalities with regard to them not spending money on
the maintenance of infrastructure. By that I mean sewerage plants and water
purification plants. Whilst the municipalities do get the bulk
infrastructure grants, they tend to be more for new projects. There is talk
that municipalities are supposed to spend money on maintaining their
existing infrastructure. In addition, there has been talk that certain
amounts of money will, in future, be ring-fenced to ensure that money is
spent by the municipalities on maintaining infrastructure, particularly
with regard to water supply.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Worth, you have put your finger on the nub of the
problem. This does not only apply to water, it applies to all bulk economic
and social infrastructure, whether it is a school, a road, or any
infrastructure. The weakness that is common is that we do not make
provision for maintenance.

In addition, as you know, a city such as Cape Town, for example, is old. At
some point, the pipes are bound to show old age and, therefore, wear and
tear, unless the municipality, the Metro, intervenes. In Gauteng, this is
what people are experiencing. Through seepage, lots of water is lost and it
goes to waste.

So, indeed, the key to solving all these problems is that, after delivering
any major project, there must be a maintenance team in place to maintain
that infrastructure. If we do not do that, it will always cost us a fortune
to repair and reconstruct. Essentially, just by maintaining it, most bulk
economic infrastructure can give us good service for almost 50 years.
However, if there is no maintenance, it means every second term or so you
have got to reconstruct from scratch. And that goes, as I said, for all
infrastructure - the schools, the hospitals, the clinics. With maintenance,
paintwork and all of that, on an ongoing basis, we would save a lot,
actually. Thank you very much, Chairperson.

Mr T B BEYLEVELDT: Hon Chair, hon Deputy President, the problem we found at
the municipal level is that the government is giving money for
infrastructure projects, but there is very little money going towards
maintenance. For example, you can spend millions on low-cost housing
projects, but there is no follow-up funding from the government to maintain
municipalities. It then becomes a municipal responsibility, and that makes
it very difficult.

If we can get the municipal infrastructure grant, as you have said - and
for that we are very grateful - we can have a long-term funding model to
support the government’s initiatives regarding infrastructure building. It
will make a huge difference because a municipality’s income comes from the
residents. That is the only source of money that they actually have. How
can you maintain poor people’s houses if they cannot pay rates and taxes?
Due to poverty relief measures, many people are dependent on equitable
shares and on grants from the municipalities to keep them alive.

So, I do not think that is really a question, it is just an opinion I am
expressing. Maybe we must really look to support our municipalities more
with maintenance money. Thank you, Mr Deputy President.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: That was an input and a contribution, not a
question.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: I agree with him.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Yes, and the Deputy President agrees with you.
[Laughter.]

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

The Council adjourned at 15:12.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                         WEDNESDAY, 10 NOVEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS
National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Correctional Services


          a) Correctional Matters Amendment Bill [B 41 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 33683 of 25 October 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on
             Correctional Services of the National Assembly, as well as
             referral to the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for
             classification in terms of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

2.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

      1) Tax Administration Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of
         Finance.


        Referred to the Standing Committee on Finance and the Select
        Committee on Finance.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

     a) Report of the Auditor-General of South Africa to Parliament on an
        investigation at the Commission for Gender Equality – October 2010
        [RP268-2010]

        Referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration and
        to the Ad Hoc Committee on the Commission for Gender Equality
        Forensic Investigation for consideration and report in terms of
        their respective mandates.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1. Report of the Select Committee on Finance on its Oversight Visit  to  the
   Municipalities in the North West on the 20  –  23  July  2010,  dated  14
   September 2010

1.    Introduction

The Select Committee on Finance (the Committee) was established in terms  of
section 4(1) of the Money Bills  Amendment  Procedure  and  Related  Matters
Act, No. 9 of 2009. In terms of section 4(2) of the Act, the  Committee  has
the powers and functions conferred to it by the  Constitution,  legislation,
the standing rules or resolution  of  a  House,  including  considering  and
reporting on:
      a) the national macro-economic and fiscal policy;
      b) amendment to the fiscal framework, revised  fiscal  framework  and
         revenue proposals and Bills;
      c) actual revenue published by the National Treasury; and
      d) any other related matter set out in this Act.

Furthermore, the mandate encompasses the Committee’s function to  legislate,
conduct  oversight  of  the   Executive;   promote   public   participation,
facilitate international agreements and review matters  of  public  interest
in relation to National Treasury  (NT)  and  its  entities,  and  the  South
African Reserve Bank  (SARB).   The  Money  Bills  Amendment  Procedure  and
Related Matters Act makes  provision  for  this  Committee  to  amend  Money
Bills.

1. Delegation

The oversight visit took place from 20 to 23 July 2010. Meetings  were  held
at Mafikeng/Mmabatho (Mmabatho Palms Hotel) and in  the  City  of  Matlosana
(Metcourt at Rio Hotel) in the Province of North West.

1.2   Terms of reference

The  visit  formed  part  of  the  Committee’s  ongoing  interactions   with
municipalities in monitoring collaboration and co-ordination  pertaining  to
the provision of municipal services and support given to the  municipalities
by Provincial and National Departments. The  municipalities  in  North  West
that were identified for  the  visit  are:  Ditsobotla  Local  Municipality,
Greater  Taung  Local  Municipality;  Kagisano  Local  Municipality;  Lekwa-
Teemane  Local  Municipality;  Tswaing  Local  Municipality;  Tlokwe   Local
Municipality; Moses Kotane Local Municipality;  Naledi  Local  Municipality;
Maquassi Hills  Local  Municipality;  Mamusa  Local  Municipality;  Mafikeng
Local   Municipality;   Madibeng   Local   Municipality,   Moretele    Local
Municipality; Kgetlengrivier Local Municipality;  City  of  Matlosana  Local
Municipality;  and  Ventersdorp  Local  Municipality.  Greater  Taung  Local
Municipality could  not  attend  the  oversight  meeting  and  Tlokwe  Local
Municipality presented on the 2008/09 financial year instead of the  2009/10
financial  year.   The   Committee   resolved   to   re-invite   these   two
municipalities to appear before it in Cape Town, Parliament, at a date  that
will be communicated to them in the near future.

The  stakeholders  (including  National  and  Provincial  Departments)  that
accompanied the Committee on this visit are the following: Department of Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA), North West  Department
of Local Government and Traditional Affairs (LGTA), National Treasury  (NT),
North  West  Provincial  Treasury  (PT),  South  African  Local   Government
Association (SALGA),  Department  of  Energy  (DME),  Financial  and  Fiscal
Commission (FFC), National Department of  Water  and  Environmental  Affairs
(DWEA), National Department of Public Works (DPW), Provincial Department  of
Public Works (PDPW), Auditor General  (AG),  Development  Bank  of  Southern
Africa (DBSA) and ESKOM.


1.3   Purpose of the Visit

The purpose of the oversight visit was to engage  with  the  above-mentioned
municipalities along with national and  provincial  departments,  and  other
stakeholders on the following areas:

    • Development and implementation of municipal budgets;
    • Municipalities’ compliance with the Municipal Finance Management  Act,
      No. 56 of 2003;
    •  The  spending  and  performance  of  municipalities  with  regard  to
      conditional grants;
    • The municipalities’ relations and collaboration with various  national
      and provincial departments and entities;
    • Capacity constraints of the municipalities (if any);
    • The extent to which municipal services are provided; and
    • The alignment of  municipalities’  Integrated  Development  Programmes
      with the Provincial Growth and Development Strategy.

2.    Presentation by Auditor General

The Office of the Auditor General (AG) briefed the Committee on the  2009/10
audit outcomes of  municipalities  in  the  North  West  and  indicated  the
following:

      • The report showed that, of the 24 municipalities in  the  province,
        13 audit reports were issued (as on  30  April  2010)  of  which  4
        reports were not yet issued and 7 municipalities had not  submitted
        their financial statements for auditing purposes.
      • Of the 13 issued audit reports  2  received  an  unqualified  audit
        opinion, 3 qualified audit opinions, 1 adverse audit opinion and  7
        received disclaimer audit opinion.
      • The report further showed that 7 municipalities (namely,  Madibeng,
        Naledi, Ditsobotla, Tswaing, Ventersdorp, Greater Taung  and  Moses
        Kotane) within the province are currently under  administration,  4
        municipalities (namely,  Tlokwe,  Naledi,  Maquassi  Hills  and  Dr
        Kenneth  Kaunda)  had  vacant  municipal   manager   positions,   6
        municipalities (namely, Madibeng, Mafikeng, Tswaing, Greater Taung,
        Rustenburg and Dr Kenneth Kaunda) had their municipal  managers  on
        suspension, and 2 municipalities (namely, City of Matlosana and  Dr
        Kenneth Kaunda) had their chief financial positions vacant while  4
        municipalities (Moretele, Ventersdorp, Rustenburg and Ngaka  Modiri
        Molema) had their CFOs on suspension.
      • The report further showed non-compliance with  section  71  of  the
        Municipal Finance Management Act, 2003 (reporting not  always  done
        or often submitted late) by some municipalities.
      • The AG conducted what  it  calls  a  door-to-door  campaign  within
        certain municipalities to provide them with support.

Committee Recommendation

The Committee recommended that the  office  of  the  Auditor-General  should
compile a report on the door to door campaign/survey they undertook  in  the
province  and  that  the  expected  report  should  be  forwarded   to   the
municipalities and stakeholders that  were  involved,  and  should  also  be
forwarded to the Committee for future reference.

3.    Presentations by Municipalities

 1. Kgetlengrivier Local Municipality

Kgetlengrivier Local Municipality  (KRLM)  reported  that  their  integrated
development plans (IDP) has been aligned to  the  North  West’s  Growth  and
Development Strategy (NWGDS).  However,  the  non-core  functions  of  local
government  are  truly  dependent  on  the  strategic  plans  of  Provincial
Departments which are expected to be aligned to the NWGDS as well.

KRLM reported that their supply chain management policy had been  developed,
reviewed and is being implemented, and  that  they  were  having  three  bid
committees  (bid  specification,  evaluation  and  adjudication  committees)
which had been established in June 2010 and were functional. KRLM  mentioned
that their budget and treasury office  (BTO)  functions  were  reviewed  and
aligned to sections 80 and 81 of the Municipal Finance Management Act.

It was also reported that  the  2008/09  annual  financial  statements  were
submitted after the deadline to the office of the  Auditor-General  and  the
audit will be finalised by 31 July 2010. It was mentioned  that  section  71
reports were submitted. However, due to  lack  of  capacity,  these  reports
were not submitted on time. However, KRLM reported that they do not have  an
internal audit unit, the unit was included  in  the  revised  organizational
structure and appointments will be done before the end  of  September  2010.
The Bojanala Platinum District Municipality offered  to  share  their  Audit
Committee in assisting the KRLM.

KRLM reported the following capacity constrains: several key  positions  are
occupied by aged staff in their Finance  Department,  and  as  a  result  it
makes it difficult to build  capacity  and  to  introduce  new  legislation.
Training  on  the  Municipal  Finance  Management  Act,  GRAP  and  the  new
Financial Management System was  still  needed.  KRLM  reported  that  their
employee related cost was at 35 per cent (R28, 8 million) of  the  operating
budget and the repairs and maintenance costs at 7 per cent (R5,  7  million)
of the operating budget. KRLM reported that 87 per  cent  of  their  funding
was in the form of  capital  grants  and  subsidies  dependency.  Their  own
revenue was 13 per cent of the total funds.

Committee Recommendations

The Committee recommended that:
    • all sector  departments  should  provide  the  municipality  with  the
      necessary support in order to enable it to overcome challenges;
    • The municipality should utilise the funds that were invested with ABSA
      in  order  to  be  able  to  deliver  basic  services  needed  by  the
      communities;
    •  Services of inmates from the local correctional services centres  and
      those  of  the  learners  from  local  FET  Colleges  in   engineering
      disciplines  could be utilized to the benefit of the municipality;
    • Services of interns trained by Provincial Treasury could  be  utilized
      to address capacity challenges; and
    • The North West Provincial Treasury should submit a detailed report  on
      the status of financial management of KRLM  to  the  Committee  within
      three months after the adoption of this report by the House.

 2. Moretele Local Municipality

Moretele Local Municipality (MLM) reported that the focus  and  approach  of
IDP was aimed  at  the  attainment  of  the  Provincial  Growth  Development
Strategy (PGDS) but  the  challenge  was  that  targets  were  set  for  the
Bojanala Platinum District Municipality. MLM  reported  that,  in  terms  of
section 111 of the MFMA, they had developed and implemented a  supply  chain
management policy. Three bid committees had been established,  (namely,  the
specification committee, evaluation committee and  adjudication  committee).
It was reported that members of the bid committees  were  appointed  by  the
Municipal Manager.


MLM reported that the 2008/09 financial statements were  submitted  late  on
14 January 2010 due to employee/labour strikes. All section 71  reports  for
the 2008/09 financial  year  have  been  submitted  to  the  Provincial  and
National Treasury as per MFMA requirements. It  was  reported  by  MLM  that
section 71 reports for the 2009/10 financial year had been submitted  up  to
March 2010 but the Municipality  had  experienced  serious  challenges  with
regard to making submissions as required in terms of the MFMA.

MLM reported that their internal audit unit  had  been  established  by  the
Municipality.  This  unit  reports  directly  to  the   accounting   officer
(Municipal Manager) and had been  established  due  to  a  serious  lack  of
capacity that was identified in the unit  in  the  2008/09  financial  year.
With the assistance of  the  Development  Bank  of  Southern  Africa  (DBSA)
finance secondee, the Municipal Manager has revitalized the  internal  audit
unit. It was reported that the internal audit unit  was  better  capacitated
and functional in the 2009/10 financial year and,  as  a  result,  the  unit
accomplished some work in certain areas. It was reported  that  R28  million
(33 per cent) was allocated  from  the  Municipality’s  overall  budget  for
salaries.  The  Municipality  was  dependant  on  capital  grants   and   on
operational grants.


MLM  identified  the  following  as  their  service  delivery  and  capacity
constraints:
    • The continuity of water supply in the areas was serviced by  the  City
      of Tshwane.
    • The Temba and Klipdrift water purification plants were operated beyond
      their capacity and could not cope with the demand.
    • The City of Tshwane was restricting bulk water provisions due to  late
      or non-payment of accounts by MLM. 
    • MLM reported that it could not afford to pay the  monthly  bulk  water
      invoice from the City  of  Tshwane  amounting  to  approximately  R3.5
      million per month.
    •  MLM reported that an amount of approximately R120 million is required
      in order to remedy the challenges of bulk water supply.
    • The incapacity of the MLM to maintain water borne sanitation makes  it
      rely on Bojanala Platinum District Municipality.

Committee Recommendations

    • The Committee recommended that sector  departments   (namely  National
      Treasury, Provincial Treasury, Co-operative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs, Department of Water and Environmental Affairs and  the   City
      of Tshwane), should meet to assist the MLM on the financing of a  debt
      amounting to R84 million for water supplied by the City of Tshwane;
    • A need was identified that all municipal managers should be trained by
      the Association of Public  Accounts  Committees  on  their  roles  and
      responsibilities; and
    • The Department of Water and Environmental Affairs should assist MLM by
      providing  services  of  environmental  assessment  expected  at  this
      municipality.

 3. Moses Kotane Local Municipality

The Moses Kotane Local Municipality (MKLM) was placed  under  administration
in terms of Section 139 of the Municipal Finance Management Act  No.  56  of
2003.  It  was  reported   that   the   administrator   had   reviewed   the
organisational structure of the MLM, and that vacant  posts  would  soon  be
filled. The DBSA had been  requested  to  provide  technical  support.  MKLM
reported that salaries, including those of councillors, accounted for 39,  7
per  cent  of  the  total  budget  allocation.  It  was  reported  that  the
municipality was using a developmental agency and that it was  of  the  view
that it should be disbanded.

MKLM reported that they launched a water demand project that was  funded  by
the Department of Water and  Environmental  Affairs  (DWEA)  and  the  local
mines.  The sector departments were not participating  to  the  satisfactory
level in the IDP process of the MKLM. It was reported that,  although  Eskom
provided electricity in the MKLM, the progress was at a slower pace than  it
was expected.

Committee Recommendation

The Administrator should provide the Committee with  a  progress  report  on
the service delivery and financial affairs of the MKLM within  three  months
after the adoption of this report by the House.
 4. Madibeng Local Municipality

Madibeng Local Municipality (MDLM)  is  currently  under  administration  in
terms of Section 139 of the Municipal  Finance  Management  Act  No.  56  of
2003.  MDLM  reported  that  senior  managers  were  resigning  from   their
positions. This meant that the recruitment process had  to  start  all  over
again. Approximately 350 officials of the  MDLM  were  registered  with  the
Company and Intellectual Property Rights Organisations (CIPRO).  There  were
10 ‘ghost’ workers, but at the time of the oversight visit the MDLM  was  in
a process of addressing these issues. MDLM  further  reported  that  20  per
cent  of  its  budget  and  treasury  office  might  be  suspended  due   to
allegations of fraud, maladministration and corruption.

MDLM informed the Committee that they budgeted  R47,9  million  for  repairs
and maintenance but enough had not been done as they only managed  to  spend
R20 million of the budget. MDLM further reported that salaries  were  at  27
per cent (R224, 9 million) of operating  budget.  Furthermore,  it  reported
that an investigation of funds at the Britz  Treatment  Plant  amounting  to
R20 million was commissioned.

Committee Recommendation
The Committee recommended that the administrator of MDLM  should  adopt  the
management model demonstrated by  the  administrator  of  the  Moses  Kotane
Municipality because it had a hand on approach when the daily operations  of
the municipality were concerned.

 5. Naledi Local Municipality

The Mayor of the Naledi  Local  Municipality  (NLM)  reported  that  he  has
requested  the  MEC  for  Finance  to  intervene  in  the  running  of   the
municipality, and were provided with the services  of  an  Acting  Municipal
Manager and a Chief Financial Officer. It is reported  that  both  of  these
officials have performed very well. It was  reported  that  the  troika  was
functioning well until January  2010  when  the  situation  changed  due  to
personal interests in the housing project.

NLM  reported  that  a  budget  and  treasury  office  had   recently   been
established. However, it was still experiencing a  high  vacancy  rate  that
would soon be addressed in consultation with the human resources  unit.  NLM
further reported on its inability to implement the Municipal Credit  Control
Policy due to a lack of co-ordination in the NLM as there was no agreement.

NLM reported that, between August 2009 and June 2010,  its  Council  took  a
decision to appoint staff in acting managerial positions. This practice  led
to wasteful expenditure amounting to R810,  000.  The  Council  resolved  to
stop the process and those affected were expected to pay back the monies.

NLM  reported  that  there  was  a  loss  of  electricity  due  to   illegal
connections to the value of R11 million. They have  arranged  payments  with
ESKOM and managed to pay their last installment in March 2010.

NLM was also faced with a lack of co-operation by some of the local  farmers
when it wanted to provide services to the farm dwellers.

Committee Observation

The Committee observed that there was a need for the  Municipal  Manager  to
get all stakeholders on board in order to enable  the  NLM  to  resolve  the
challenges it was facing. The Committee advised that the  Municipal  Manager
enhances his negotiating skills.

Committee Recommendations

The Committee recommended that:
    • The Naledi Local Municipality should  engage  with  Agriculture  South
      Africa on the matter of farm dwellers  in  order  to  reach  a  common
      understanding on the service delivery issue; and
    • The Department of Water and Environmental Affairs should make  a  plan
      for the Kagisano communities who are nearby the Vaal Dam to get access
      to clean drinking water that was  running  through  their  residential
      area.

 6. Kagisano Local Municipality

Kagisano Local Municipality  (KLM)  reported  that  their  2010/11  IDP  was
aligned to the PGDS and  that  their  supply  chain  management  policy  was
reviewed and adopted on 29 June 2010. It was reported that two of the  three
bid committees had been established, namely  the  evaluation  committee  and
the adjudication committee.

KLM received an unqualified  audit  opinion  for  the  2006/07  and  2007/08
financial years. The annual financial statements for 2008/2009 had not  been
submitted to the Office of the Auditor-General as yet, whereas they  had  to
be submitted by 31 July 2010. The KLM reported that the delay to submit  the
financial statements on time was due to  a  lack  of  capacity  (skills  and
human resources), and compliance with the  Generally  Recognised  Accounting
Principles (GRAP) 17. The conversion of the fixed assets  register  to  GRAP
proved to be a challenge. Submission of section 71 reports to  the  relevant
Treasuries were delayed due to the  following  reasons/challenges  faced  by
the Budget and Treasury Office: high staff turnover (due to payment  of  non
market- related salaries), lack of capacity (skilled personnel), and  having
to deal with multi-year processing and finalizing  the  annual  reports  and
financial statements for the 2008/09 and 2009/10 financial years.

Furthermore, KLM reported that lack  of  service  delivery  such  as  refuse
removal had been caused by a lack of capacity such as  human  resources  and
an insufficient budget, partly because these services should be  a  function
of the district municipality. KLM did not have a refuse  removal  unit  that
deals with this function due  to  a  lack  of  funds,  human  resources  and
equipment.

Committee Recommendations

The Committee recommended that:
    • The Department of Water and Environmental Affairs should find  options
      to pump water from  the  Vaal  Dam  for  use  by  the  communities  of
      Kagisano;
    • National Treasury and the Departments of Co-operative  Governance  and
      Traditional Affairs and Water and Environmental Affairs should resolve
      the issue relating to refuse removal of municipalities;
    • KLM should hire graders from private companies and farmers  to  enable
      them  to  grade  roads  because  they  budgeted  for  this  particular
      activity;
    • KLM should hire  local  people   for  the  removal  of  refuse  at  an
      affordable fee;
    • Senior officials from the sector departments  should  attend  the  IDP
      processes of the municipalities as they are binding on commitments;
    • The Chief Financial  Officers  at  municipalities  should  attend  the
      training sessions, offered by National Treasury  in  order  to  enable
      them to gain and plough back the knowledge  to  their  municipalities;
      and
    • Fraudulent cases against  municipal  officials  should  fast-track  in
      collaboration with the Special Investigating Unit (SIU).

 7. Mamusa Local Municipality

Mamusa Local Municipality (MMLM) reported that the  alignment  of  municipal
IDP  to  PGDS  was  guided  by  the  five  Pre-determined  Local  Government
Development  objectives.  One  of  the  objectives  of  PGDS  was  to  halve
unemployment by the 2014 calendar year and to create  jobs.  MMLM  mentioned
that the Council adopted  the  supply  chain  management  policy  which  was
aligned to the National Treasury Guidelines.  MMLM  reported  that  the  bid
evaluation and adjudication committees were established and that  they  were
functioning  effectively,  with  the  exception  of  the  bid  specification
committee. Amounts of R26 million (37, 7 per cent)  had  been  budgeted  for
salaries and R7 million (11 per cent) for repairs and maintenance.

MMLM reported that a budget and treasury office  had  been  established  but
that  it  was  under-staffed.  The  existing  organisational  structure  was
approved in 2003 and the officials need training in  Microsoft  Excel,  MFMA
and GRAP. The annual financial statements for  the  2007/08  financial  year
had not been submitted due to challenges  experienced  with  the  conversion
from Institute of Municipal Finance Officers (IMFO)  to  General  Recognized
Accounting Practices (GRAP). MMLM reported that it  has  complied  with  the
submission of the section 71 and conditional grants  reporting  requirements
as at 31 March 2010.

Dr Ruth S Mompati District Municipality provided  internal  shared  services
for auditing to MMLM. The annual report for the 2007/08  financial  had  not
been finalised due  to  outstanding  annual  financial  statements  for  the
2007/08 financial year.

Service delivery and capacity constraints were hampered  by  the  poor  debt
collection rate (23%),  impediments  to  debtor’s  collection,  and  limited
legal action caused by outdated by-laws. The issue of funds  being  consumed
by operational expenses resulted in a  lack  of  funds  for  capital  items,
refurbishments,  infrastructure  maintenance  and  general  maintenance   of
equipment. The national and provincial Departments of Public Works had  been
identified as the main debtors. The  Municipal  Infrastructure  Grant  (MIG)
funding amounting to R11.4 million for the 2010/11 financial year  had  been
allocated to them to address the huge backlog but it was insufficient.

Committee Recommendations

The Committee recommended that:
    • Provincial Treasury should fast track the payment of  monies  owed  by
      sector departments to municipalities and individuals;
    • Provincial Treasury should assist  municipalities  with  the  auditing
      function  because  a  system  of  sharing  an   audit   committee   by
      municipalities was not functioning in most cases; and
    • Sector departments present should assist municipalities by drafting  a
      strategy to deal with the challenges.

 8. Tswaing Local Municipality

Tswaing Local Municipality  (TLM)  was  currently  under  administration  in
terms of Section 139 of the Municipal Finance Management Act No. 56 of  2003
and it was reported that its IDP was not wholly aligned  to  PGDS.  However,
it was focusing on the Small Medium Micro Enterprises’  (SMMEs)  development
as part of the Local  Economic  Development  (LED).  TLM  reported  that  it
appointed 120 employees within a short space of time, hence the salary  bill
exceeded its monthly income.

TLM reported that the supply chain  policy  was  reviewed  and  approved  by
council on 31 May 2010  Annual financial statements were  submitted  to  the
AG on time and section 71 reports of the MFMA were also  submitted  for  the
period up to 31 May 2010.  The internal audit committee  was  in  place  and
functional (and shared service with the  district),  and  a  plan  had  been
developed to  address  concerns  raised  by  the  AG.  The  conversion  from
Institute  of  Municipal  Finance  Officers  (IMFO)  to  General  Recognized
Accounting Practices (GRAP) and updating of the asset register has started.

TLM reported that it was faced  with  the  following  service  delivery  and
capacity constraints:

    • Stronghold of the ratepayers association that was withholding payments
      and paying ESKOM directly to avoid service cuts;
    • Access to potable water was still a serious challenge in the areas  of
      Letsopa/Ottosdal and Agisanang/Sannieshof;
    • Lack of funding for bulk  infrastructure  in  Agisanang  where  1  000
      housing units had been allocated in 2005;
    • Lack of basic infrastructure, especially roads; and
    • Solid waste disposal and refuse removal remain a serious challenge  as
      old unserviceable equipment are being used.

Committee Recommendations

The Committee recommended that:
    • ESKOM should transfer funds paid by the  Ratepayers  Association  into
      the  municipality’s  bank  account  with  the  interest  that  it  has
      generated; and
    • The Department of Water and  Environment  Affairs  should  assist  the
      relevant district municipalities in its  planning  on  the  supply  of
      clean drinking water to communities.


 9. Mafikeng Local Municipality

Mafikeng Local Municipality (MFLM) reported that the  alignment  of  IDP  to
PGDS was guided  by  the  five  pre-determined  local  government  strategic
agenda  that  includes  amongst  others,  local  economic  development.  MLM
reported that it had developed their Local Economic Development Strategy  in
line with to the PGDS. It was reported that  salaries  as  a  percentage  of
operating expenditure was 53 per cent.

It was further reported that supply chain management policy was  adopted  by
Council and was aligned to the National Treasury  Guidelines  and  had  been
implemented since 2007. MFLM reported  that  bid  specification,  evaluation
and adjudication committees  were  established  and  they  were  functional.
However, the bid specification committee was meeting on  ad  hoc  basis.  It
was reported that a budget and treasury office  had  been  established.  The
existing structure was  approved  in  2003.  However,  financial  management
skills remained a  challenge  and  GRAP  and  the  MFMA  introduced  further
challenges. MFLM complied with  section  71  of  the  MFMA  and  conditional
grants reporting requirements, and endeavours were  being  made  to  improve
the quality of reporting.

MFLM  reported  that  its  annual  financial  statements  for  2008/09  were
prepared on Institute of Municipal  Finance  Officers  (IMFO)  standards  of
accounting, and they were submitted to the  AG  on  time.  MFLM  received  a
“disclaimer” audit opinion due to a lack of supporting  documents,  a  fixed
assets register,  debtors  database  and  provision  for  bad  debts,  funds
created under the IMFO without cash-backing, the non-implementation of  risk
management (internal control systems, internal audit, audit committee)  and,
lastly, the non-functional internal  audit  shared  service.  MFLM  reported
that the following steps would be taken to remedy the situation:
1. Drafting of a project plan to convert annual financial  statements  (AFS)
from IMFO to GRAP during the 2009/10 financial year.
2. Appointment of consultants to assist with  the  proper  management  of  a
fixed assets register and debtors database.

Committee Recommendations

The Committee recommended that:
    • The Member of Executive Council (MEC) for Finance (North West)  should
      assist municipalities  in  the  timely  payment  of  intergovernmental
      accounts;
    • Municipalities should use the funds invested in the  money  market  to
      address service delivery backlogs; and
    • The Department of  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs
      should review its approach and strategy, and improve on assisting poor
      municipalities.

10. Lekwa-Teemane Local Municipality

The Mayor of the Lekwa-Teemane Local Municipality (LTLM)  reported  that  it
was in need of assistance as it was nearly the end of term  for  Councilors.
LTLM reported that it was spending well on conditional grants. However,  The
LTLM reported that it was experiencing challenges  on  the  deals  with  the
Library Grant amounting to R2,5 million, and the confusion on the roles  and
responsibilities of the department and the municipality on the  spending  of
grants.

LTLM  reported  that  they  were  facing  service  delivery   and   capacity
constraints. These included sector departments that were  not  participating
in the IDP process, and most of the land that  belong  to  the  municipality
were used as dumping sites.  Over  the  past  five  years,  they  have  been
discussing this issue with the  Department  of  Mineral  and  Energy  (DME),
requesting it to come to the rescue by relocating these sites. LTLM  further
reported that is was also experiencing  a  challenge  at  Bloemhof,  in  the
sense that it  was   being  serviced  by  two  DME  regions  that  were  not
operating  in terms of the same set of rules (namely, North West Region  and
Gauteng Region).

LTLM further reported that they were a water service provider and  that  the
district was not coming clear on  the  equitable  share  for  funding  water
services and that this creates a challenge as  people  were  drinking  water
from  the  rivers.  LTLM  further  reported  that  National   Treasury   and
Provincial Treasury were assisting  them  with  regard  to  compliance  with
financial management matters.
Furthermore, the following issues were raised:

    • Ageing infrastructure, causing approximately 15 per cent  distribution
      losses.
    • The supply of electricity to Geluksoord Extension 2 through Integrated
      National Energy Plan (INEP) was problematic as  it  was  a  Greenfield
      development and the Department of Mineral Resources  is  reluctant  to
      approve the project as those sites are not occupied at present.
    • Maintaining the effluent within the acceptable standards.
    • Approximately 70% of the stands in Christiana as well  as  the  entire
      Hoek portion in Bloemhof still use septic tanks.
    • The internal reticulation of sanitation in certain areas of  Utlwanang
      and especially Boitumelong Extension 5 is problematic.
    • The road infrastructure was not properly maintained over the  past  20
      years while most of the roads  are  gravel  roads  that  need  regular
      maintenance.

Committee Observations

    • The Committee observed that although the municipality was  struggling,
      there are plans in place to deal with the challenges;
    • The Committee undertook that district municipalities should be invited
      to participate in oversight visits;
    • The Committee expressed its disappointment on the report presented  by
      the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs (DWEA),  the  reason
      being that a high number of people was exposed to  contaminated  water
      and cholera was killing people; and
    • A meeting had to be  scheduled  urgently  to  meet  the  DWEA  on  the
      spillage of sewerage into the Vaal Dam.

Committee Recommendations
The Committee recommended that:
    • Municipalities should use  available  funding  to  hire  graders,  for
      repairs and maintenance in order to deliver services;
    • The municipal engineer  need  to  check  the  sewer  network  plan  to
      establish whether it was properly designed;
    • LTLM should review policies on the establishment of an agency  as  the
      current ones are not doing what is required of them;
    • LTLM should also review human resources’ policy with an aim to address
      the  limitations  of  its  workforce  (including  the  possibility  of
      early/voluntary retirement);
    • DME should continuously interact with the municipalities in  order  to
      support them (Section 154 of the Constitution of the Republic of South
      Africa); and
    • The Department of Transport,  together  with  the  Department  of  Co-
      operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, should assist  the  LTLM
      with road infrastructure; and
    • The Department of Water and Environmental Affairs, together  with  the
      Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, should,
      as a matter of urgency, assist the municipalities on their  water  and
      sanitation issues.


11. Ditsobotla Local Municipality

The Ditsobotla Local Municipality (DLM) was currently  under  administration
in terms of Section 139 of the Municipal Finance Management Act  No.  56  of
2003, and the administrator has been appointed since October 2009.

DLM reported that it requested the SIU to investigate fraud with  regard  to
the MIG amounting to approximately R40 million. DLM’s report indicated  that
a service provider for the  evaluation  of  properties  delivered  a  below-
standard project. DLM pointed out that  there  was  a  need  to  conduct  an
investigation  as  their  IDP  was  aligned  to  the  PGDS.  DLM  was   also
investigating the monthly crash of the information system that was  creating
difficulty in terms of reporting.
DLM reported that, as a result of  difficulties  in  the  municipality,  the
Council did not renew some of the manager’s  contracts  and  that  that  has
hampered service delivery.

Further challenges were as follows:
    • The estimated water backlog for the municipal area based on households
      below RDP standard is 18 023 of the total 38 582 households  and  this
      requires a capital investment of R133 million.
    • The rural backlog accounts for 75% of the backlog.
    • The number of households  with  sanitation  below  the  RDP  standards
      stands at 10 274 of the total 38 582 households.
    • Conditional grants are used by the municipality to  cover  operational
      expenditure.
    • The municipality does have tarred  roads  but  with  potholes  and  an
      amount of R100 million is required for refurbishment of  these  tarred
      road.
    • Boikhutso, Itsoseng and Coligny are rural areas  whereby  houses  were
      flooded during heavy rains.

Committee Recommendation

The Committee recommends that:
    • The Department of Water and Environmental Affairs, together  with  the
      Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs,  should
      investigate challenges in Boikhutso,  Itsoseng  and  Coligny,  and  to
      report to the House on how the Department of Water  and  Environmental
      Affairs and the Department of Co-operative Governance and  Traditional
      Affairs plan to address these challenges within three months after the
      adoption of this report by the House.

12. Maquassi Hills Local Municipality

Maquassi Hills Local Municipality (MHLM) reported that they were having  the
following bid committees: specification committee, evaluation committee  and
an adjudication committee and that these Committees  were  approved  by  the
Council on 11 August 2005. MHLM’s budget and treasury office were not  fully
staffed.  Furthermore,  MHLM  reported  that  it   had   appointed   Sediesy
Consulting to assist the municipality with  financial  reporting  (including
GRAP implementation).

MHLM reported  that  illegal  connections  of  water  and  electricity,  and
employment of unskilled and unqualified staff led to  service  delivery  and
capacity constraints.  MHLM’s  needs  for  funding  were  as  follows:   R24
million for the mainline sewer connection  of  Makwassie  Town;  the  annual
estimated costs for a multi-year plan for road and storm water  amounted  to
R300 million.  The estimated cost for the wasted  water  treatment  plan  at
Wolmaranstad is R64 million.

Further challenges were reported as follows:
    • No sufficiently qualified  and  competent  staff  within  the  finance
      directorate.
    • Organs of state owe the municipality a sum of R1 094 985.
    • Compliance with GRAP reporting requirements

Committee Recommendations

The Committee recommended the following:
    • That the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs  should  assist
      the Maquassi  Hills  Local  Municipality  on  their  plans  for  clean
      drinking water to the communities of this municipalities; and
    • That the Department of Public Works should consult  the  community  on
      the building of a correctional services  centre  because  it  was  not
      adding value to the community.

13. Ventersdorp Local Municipality

Ventersdorp Local Municipality (VLM) is currently  under  administration  in
terms of Section 139 of the Municipal  Finance  Management  Act  No.  56  of
2003.  It  reported  that  an  electricity  substation  that  had  not  been
functioning for the past two years was a  problem.   Assistance  was  sought
from ESKOM but nothing  came  of  it.  It  was  reported  that  the  service
provider who could not finish a project had now taken  the  municipality  to
court, suing it for R2 million. It was further reported that  they  did  not
have a single electrician at the municipality but  had  advertised  for  the
post.

VLM informed the Committee that, for the first time,  they  were  having  an
Information Technology  section  that  was  fully  operational  through  the
assistance of  the  secondees  through  the  Development  Bank  of  Southern
Africa’s Siyenzamanje programme.  VLM  further  reported  that  their  major
challenge was that of not  having  vehicles  for  refuse  removal  but  were
previously using a fleet. The company took the  municipality’s  truck  as  a
deposit. The district municipality committed to assist them  but  could  not
do so, and now they entered into an agreement with the City of Matlosana  to
assist them during weekends when refuse has  to  be  removed.  The  district
municipality budgeted funds for the existing  financial  year  in  order  to
deliver the abovementioned services.

Committee Recommendations
The Committee recommends that:
    • Provincial Treasury and Provincial  and  National  Department  of  Co-
      operative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs  should  assist   the
      municipality as they are aware that it was struggling;
    • VLM should table its solar system project to ESKOM as it was involving
      electricity;
    • VLM should consider using prepaid electricity system  for  communities
      in order to minimise bad debts;
    •  National  Treasury,  Provincial  Treasury,   Infrastructure   Finance
      Corporation Limited and the VLM should discuss and resolve the dispute
      between Infrastructure Finance Corporation Limited and the VLM; and
    • The VLM should operate on  the  cheapest  model  for  the  removal  of
      refuse.

3.14  City of Matlosana Local Municipality

The City of Matlosana Local Municipality (CMLM) reported that the Mayor  was
the chief ambassador for the clean audit. CMLM further reported that it  was
surrounded by a mining area  and  mining  was  scaling  down  and  this  was
increasing there unemployment rate. Furthermore, there was a challenge  with
the indigent register. CMLM reported that the  former  Department  of  Local
Government and Housing appointed a  service  provider  to  build  houses  on
behalf of the municipality. In addition, there was a  court  case  that  was
costing the CMLM huge amounts.

Committee Observations

    • CMLM could not adequately provide free basic services  to  communities
      that were living in rural areas;
    • CMLM had R19 million in a bank account and R88 million in  investments
      which could have been  used  for  delivering  services  to  the  rural
      communities;
    • CMLM was not paying all their employees a grade 10 level as those paid
      at lower levels were taking it to court; and
    • CMLM did not inspect their housing project as some of them were  in  a
      process of being demolished.

Committee Recommendation

The Committee recommends that:
    • CMLM should consider releasing funds that they were invested  in  bank
      accounts (investments)  and  use  them  for  the  provision  of  basic
      services to the communities, especially  those  who  reside  in  rural
      areas (farms).

4.    Comments by Stakeholders

4.1   MEC of Finance

The Member of Executive Council (MEC)  for  Finance  (North  West)  reported
that Provincial Treasury was looking at  enhancing  its  own  organogram  in
order to assist the  struggling  municipalities.  It  was  further  reported
that, with  regard  to  the  issue  of  GRAP  17,  Provincial  Treasury  was
designing a plan to assist municipalities, especially with respect to  asset
management. Furthermore,  National  Treasury  visited  municipalities  which
were under administration in terms of section 139  of  the  Constitution  of
the Republic of South Africa, Act No. 108 of 1996.

With regard to the issue of the  Moses  Kotane  Municipality  which  has  an
agency  called  Moses  Kotane  Development,  the  administrator   had   been
approached to disband it as it was not able to submit  annual  reports.  The
MEC reported that the Province of North West took  over  the  responsibility
of housing from municipalities but the actual  payment  was  still  done  by
municipalities.  The  Province  of   North   West   made   it   clear   that
municipalities should reduce the use of consultants.

4.2   Auditor General

The Office of Auditor-General (AG)  reported  that  district  municipalities
were complaining that municipalities were not  participating  in  their  IDP
processes. The AG further reported that it was experiencing a  challenge  as
some municipalities do not have chief financial officers. Furthermore,  most
of the finance unit’s officials did not understand and cannot implement  the
GRAP 17.

A challenge  of  reports  being  modified  by  entities  after  having  been
provided by the AG was highlighted. For example,  entities  tend  to  change
figures that do not correspond  with  those  in  the  AG’s  office.  The  AG
resolved to provide them with an unsigned report  for  the  purpose  of  not
tampering with figures, and following upon this, a signed  one  is  provided
as the official annual report to be tabled in the Council.

4.3 South African Local Government Association

The South African Local Government Association (SALGA) reported that it  had
agreed to a workshop to further capacitate  Councilors  on  their  oversight
role.

4.4   National Treasury
National Treasury (NT) reported that  the  budgets  of  most  municipalities
that made a  presentation  were  unrealistic,  even  though  they  had  been
provided with training on how to prepare  their  budgets.  It  was  reported
that the Mafikeng Local Municipality required assistance from NT,  but  when
the secondees arrived at this municipality, no senior  officials,  including
the CFO, were present. Municipalities were also having a challenge in  terms
of the reporting standards on section 71 reports.  Some  of  them  submitted
their reports late and others did not submit at all  even  though  they  had
been trained together with Provincial Treasury.

NT reported that they were assisting municipalities in developing their  by-
laws and community development programmes such as drafting of  audit  plans.
They  were  also   capacitating   them   land   evaluation.   NT   cautioned
Municipalities against the high salary rate versus the high vacancy rate  as
reported by most of them.

NT advised that municipalities should start to monitor their contractors  in
order to prevent a wasteful expenditure. With regard to the dispute  between
Ventersdorp Local Municipality and INCA, NT reported that they attempted  to
intervene, and suggested that the municipality should pay the  company  what
was owed to it.

4.5   Provincial Treasury

Provincial Treasury (PT) reported that they were  assisting  the  struggling
municipalities with their finances and also with issues raised by the AG  on
their annual reports. It further reported that the Mamusa and Tswaing  Local
Municipalities had an overdraft of R3 million and R1 million,  respectively.
Provincial Treasury was assisting Naledi Local Municipality  with  its  bank
reconciliation, and the municipality was  advised  to  stop  the  use  of  a
service provider and take over the full finance function.

4.6   ESKOM

ESKOM reported that it appointed a manager  to  deal  with  all  the  issues
relating to electricity in the Bojanala District  Municipality.  It  further
reported that their system had been upgraded in order to allow customers  to
buy electricity over the counter in a number of outlets.

ESKOM reported that there was a need for municipalities  to  complete  their
indigent registers so that those,  who  are  eligible,  receive  free  basic
electricity can do so. Furthermore,  indigent  registers  should  be  shared
with councilors as at times failure  to  do  so  create  challenges  between
ESKOM and councillors.

ESKOM  further  reported  that  funds  amounting  to  R5  million  had  been
allocated to the Kagisano Local Municipality, but the  main  challenge  lies
with  the  quality  of  data  and  infrastructure  on  the   side   of   the
municipality.

4.7   Provincial Department of Local Government and Traditional Affairs

The Provincial  Department  of  Local  Government  and  Traditional  Affairs
(LGTA) reported that the  issue  of  the  North  West  Housing  Co-operation
needed to be addressed as it was creating a challenge to municipalities  and
had been there since the early 1990s.

LGTA reported that there was a need for the  turnaround  strategies  of  the
Tlokwe and Lekwa-Teemane Local Municipalities to become part of their  IDPs.
It  was  reported  that  they  were  assisting   the   Lekwa-Teemane   Local
Municipality with the refuse removal at Bloemhof but the challenge was  that
of the district was not on board.

All municipalities in the Bophirima District Municipality  were  sharing  an
audit committee. However, sharing of an audit committee  was  not  effective
because the Audit Committee, itself, was not fully resourced.

4.8   Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs

The Department of Co-operative Governance and  Traditional  Affairs  (CoGTA)
reported that all municipalities  had  been  able  to  spend  the  Municipal
Infrastructure   Grant   (MIG)   except   for   the   Kgetlengrivier   Local
Municipality. CoGTA reported that the Naledi Local Municipality project  was
not approved by the Council. CoGTA went  onto  say  that  they  intended  to
assist the municipality in addressing this issue.

CoGTA reported that the Ventersdorp Local  Municipality  had  not  committed
their MIG for the 2009/10 financial year and that they  needed  to  speedily
commit before the end of September 2010.  It further  reported  that  sector
departments  should  not  start  projects  in  municipalities  with   proper
consultation and buy-in  because  there  is  a  need  for  a  co-coordinated
approach, taking into account the IDP.

4.9   Department of Energy

The Department of Energy (DME) reported that it  was  having  four  district
energy forums in a year and that the Bojanala District Municipality was  the
most participating one and was showing positive results. There  was  a  need
for municipalities to update their data  quality  as  it  was  incorrect  in
terms of their backlogs.

DME also reported that it was in a process of waiving  their  80%  occupancy
policy by means of doing it in phases, and were in a process of moving  away
from the policy.

4.10  Department of Public Works

The Department of Public Works (DPW) reported that some municipalities  were
not aware of the  Expanded  Public  Works  Programme  (EPWP)  and  that  the
programme could be of assistance  to  them.  Furthermore,  the  spending  by
those who are benefiting from EPWP is not an acceptable standard.

DPW  further  reported  that  they  would  be  assisting  municipalities  to
rejuvenate some of their townships and that Mamusa  Local  Municipality  has
started the process. It also reported that DPW was billed by  municipalities
for properties that were not belonging to them and, that according to  their
records they owed  them  R10  million  as  compared  to  R159.9  million  as
reported.

It was reported that municipalities may approach the DPW when  it  comes  to
land being owned by DPW. However,  they  can  only  do  this  when  land  is
required for projects and not  for  the  purpose  of  selling  it  to  other
stakeholders or private companies.

4.11  Provincial Department of Public Works; Roads and Transport

The Department of Public Works, Roads and Transport  (DPWRT)  reported  that
it had outstanding liabilities that should  have  been  paid  prior  to  the
devolution of the property rates fund to the province.   Furthermore,  DPWRT
indicated that  they  were  paying  property  rates  to  municipalities  for
properties that were owned by municipalities.

The issue of Tlaakamang where schools were burnt was raised. It was  alleged
that schools were burnt because Government promised to tare roads for  them,
and the MEC was  concerned  as  no  funds  were  available  in  the  current
financial year. Therefore the DPWRT  has  to  examine  the  availability  of
funds in order to  address  the  matter.  The  previous  Government  made  a
commitment that was even bigger than the  provincial  budget  and  this  has
created challenges.

4.12  Department of Water and Environmental Affairs

The Department of Water and Environmental Affairs (DWEA)  reported  that  it
provides regulatory assistance to municipalities in terms of the  Blue  Drop
certificates that encourages local municipalities  to  improve  their  water
quality management while empowering consumers with the right to  information
on what was running out  of  their  taps.  DWEA  further  reported  that  it
assisted with the Green Drop  certificate  programmes  for  wastewater  care
works.

DWEA reported that municipalities were providing a water  service  that  was
not within their mandate. They had been doing this for years without  having
been funded (unfunded mandates). The  Bophirima  District  Municipality  had
been allocated R27 million for the current financial year  for  the  purpose
of reticulating water at the Taung Dam. They were experiencing  a  challenge
with the signing of service level agreements with municipalities,  and  were
in a process of engaging district municipalities.

DWEA was of the  view  that  the  Department  of  Human  Settlements  should
consider providing water tanks when new houses are being built.

The sewer plant for the City of Matlosana had been assessed and  R5  million
had been allocated for this project. The municipality spent 50 per  cent  of
the amount.  A further amount of  R1  million  had  been  allocated  to  the
municipality for water purposes.

4.13  Development Bank of Southern Africa

The Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA) identified a need for  better
co-ordination of sector departments in terms of planning  and  in  providing
assistance  to  those  municipalities  that  are  still   struggling.   DBSA
committed itself to assist the Lekwa-Teemane Local Municipality in terms  of
funding and in addressing the challenges of water and sanitation.

The  DBSA  reported  that  it  was  working  further  with  the   Provincial
Department of Local Government  and  Traditional  Affairs  on  a  water  and
sanitation programme and  that  R994  million  had  been  approved  for  the
following municipalities: Maquassi Hills; Dr Ruth  Mompati  District;  Ngaka
Modiri Molema District; Madibeng; Kgetlengrivier;  Moses  Kotane;  Moretele;
Rustenburg; City of Matlosana; and Ventersdorp.

4.14  Financial and Fiscal Commission

The  Financial  and  Fiscal  Commission  (FFC)  reported  that   they   were
participating in the review of  the  Division  of  Revenue,  the  Provincial
Equitable Share, and the Local Equitable Share and were  moving  with  speed
under  the  current  government.  FFC  further   reported   that   all   the
municipalities which were experiencing challenges  with  unfunded  mandates,
should forward such mandates to the FFC.

5.    Key Observations

The Committee observed that there was a lack of leadership  with  regard  to
intergovernmental relationships. This was also the case with regard  to  co-
ordination amongst municipalities  and  sector  departments.  Some  of  them
requested an  increase  in  the  grants  allocations  while  investing  huge
amounts  of  money  in  the  money  market,  and  the  Committee  could  not
understand the rationale behind these requests for more  money  while  other
funds are locked in bank accounts.

Some  of  the  municipalities  who  met  the  Committee  reported  on  their
challenges with regard to the late submission of the annual reports  to  the
office of the Auditor-General. They reported that this delay was  caused  by
lack of understanding for the implementation of GRAP 17.

The  Committee  observed  that  the  work  of   municipalities   that   were
administered in terms of Section 139 of  the  Municipal  Finance  Management
Act No. 56 of 2003 was satisfactory. The Committee  has  identified  a  need
for the municipalities to take forward the good work that was being done  by
the administrators.

The following additional observations were made:
    •  Some municipalities did not  have  fully  functional  internal  audit
      committees;
    • Training is needed with respect to the  Municipal  Finance  Management
      Act, GRAP reporting requirements and financial systems;
    • Some municipalities do not submit reports according to  the  Municipal
      Finance Management Act;
    • The capacity of water purification  plants  does  not  cope  with  the
      demand for clean drinking water;
    •  Most  sector  departments  do  not  participate  in  the   Integrated
      Development Plans;
    • Illegal electricity connections  are  costing  municipalities  a  huge
      amount of money;
    • There is a lack  of  co-operation  from  most  farm  owners  to  allow
      delivery of services to communities living on farm lands;
    • The debt collection rate is poor;
    • Ratepayers Associations are refusing to pay for municipal rates;
    • The treasury and budget offices of most municipalities are  not  fully
      staffed;
    • Municipal budgets are unrealistic;
    • The indigent registers of most municipalities are not up-to-date;
    • The EPWP II programme is not known to most municipalities; and
    •  There  is  poor  co-ordination   between   sector   departments   and
      municipalities especially when the former is implementing projects  in
      municipalities.

6.    Further Committee Recommendations

The Select Committee on  Finance,  after  a  careful  consideration  of  the
service  delivery  and  financial   performance   of   the   above-mentioned
municipalities in the North West, recommends that the  National  Council  of
Provinces considers the following:

    • That the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
      and  the  North  West   Provincial   Treasury   should   ensure   that
      municipalities appoint qualified officials;
    •  That  municipal  managers  should  provide  quality  information   to
      councilors to enable  them to make quality decisions;
    • That the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
      and the Provincial Department  of  Local  Government  and  Traditional
      Affairs should develop a plan to  further  capacitate  Councillors  in
      their oversight role;
    • That the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
      and the National Treasury should  contribute  to  the  Municipal  Turn
      around  Strategy  by  developing  tools  that  are  going  to   assist
      municipalities to comply with all provisions of the Municipal  Finance
      Management Act;
    • That the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
      and The presidency should develop rules  and  procedures  on  how  the
      provincial  and  national  government  departments  should  fully  and
      actively participate in the Integrated Development Plans (IDPs) of the
      municipalities and ensure that IDPs  are  aligned  to  the  provincial
      Growth and Development Strategy;
    • That the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
      and the National Treasury should develop programmes aimed at assisting
      municipalities  (especially  low-capacity  municipalities)  with   the
      conversion from the Institute of Municipal  Finance  Officers  to  the
      Generally Recognised Accounting practice reporting systems;
    • That the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
      and the National Treasury should ensure that the  plans  to  establish
      internal audits, audit committees, and budget and treasury offices are
      included by municipalities in their municipal turnaround strategies;
    • That the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs  should  assist
      municipalities in providing communities with clean drinking water  and
      the removal of refuse at Bloemhof;
    • That the Ministers of Correctional Services and Public  Works  endorse
      the cancellation  of  the  planned  correctional  services  centre  at
      Ditsobotla Local Municipality;
    •  That  municipalities  should  honour  agreements  with   regards   to
      interventions;
    •  That  the  Department  of  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs, in consultation  with  National  and  Provincial  Treasuries,
      should review conditional grants with an aim of improving  appropriate
      spending on conditional grants;
    •  That  the  Department  of  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs, National Treasury  and  other  affected  shareholders  should
      strengthen intergovernmental relations, in a co-coordinated way,  when
      interventions are made in municipalities;
    • That National Treasury should  examine  the  supply  chain  management
      matters as most of the municipal tenders are not taken through all the
      processes;
    • That the  Select  Committee  on  Finance,  together  with  the  Select
      Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional  Affairs,  should
      do a joint follow-up visit to the municipalities in  the  Province  of
      North West to ascertain progress made by  sector  departments  as  per
      commitments they made during this oversight visit and that this follow-
      up visit be made three months after the adoption of this report.
    • That the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional  Affairs
      should closely monitor the support that is given to the municipalities
      by national and provincial departments, Eskom, and SALGA in  terms  of
      intergovernmental  relations  framework  and  section   154   of   the
      Constitution;
    •  That  the  Select  Committee  on  Finance  should  engage  with   the
      Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces on the  establishment
      of a dialogue with the Premier and the  political  leadership  of  the
      Province of North West with regard to  the  Committee  recommendations
      and monitoring of municipalities and provincial departments; and
    • That the Department of Co-operative Government and Traditional Affairs
      and the Department of Water and Environmental  Affairs  should  engage
      with  district  municipalities  on  their  status  as  water   service
      providers.
Report to be considered.

2. Report of the Select Committee on Appropriations  on  the  First  Quarter
   Conditional  Grants  Spending  Patterns  on  Mass  Sport  and  Recreation
   Participation Programme Grant for the 2010/11 financial  year,  dated  14
   September 2010

   The Select Committee on Appropriations, having analysed the first quarter
   spending patterns by various provincial departments of Arts  and  Culture
   in the 2010/11 financial year, reports as follows:

1.    Introduction

The Select Committee on Appropriations (the  Committee)  invited  identified
provincial departments of Sports and  Recreation,  who  were  either  under-
spending or over-spending on the Mass  Sport  and  Recreation  Participation
Programme Grant, to come and make a  presentation  on  their  first  quarter
spending in the 2010/11 financial year. The statistics on spending  patterns
were published by National Treasury in August 2010.

The Committee meetings took place on 25 and 27 August 2010.

2.    Terms of Reference

The hearings  formed  part  of  the  Committee’s  ongoing  interaction  with
provinces to monitor their  spending  on  conditional  grants  allocated  to
them. A framework for  each  grant  sets  out,  amongst  other  things,  the
purpose  of  the  grant,  measurable  objectives,   conditions,   allocation
criteria, and past performance.

Provinces were requested to make an oral  presentation  on  National  School
Nutrition Programme Grant and to take into consideration the following:
    • Data trends  in  allocations,  transfers  and  actual  expenditure  of
      conditional grants of the department;
    •  Assessment  of  department’s  monitoring  capacity  for  the  2009/10
      financial year  and  indicate  under/overspending  and  what  capacity
      constraints that impacted on these outcomes; and
    • Report whether monthly reports are received from receiving departments
      and or municipalities, and if not, what the departments are  doing  in
      order to ensure compliance with monthly reporting.

The  provincial  departments  of  Sport  and  Recreation  of  Eastern  Cape,
Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Northern Cape, North West, Western Cape, Gauteng,  Free
State,  and  KwaZulu  Natal  were  identified  and  invited.  All  provinces
honoured the invitations.

National Treasury was invited to brief the Committee on  the  first  quarter
spending of the above-mentioned provincial departments.


3.    Presentations
3.1   National Treasury

National Treasury presented that the main budget  for  provinces  as  at  30
June 2010 was R426  385  million  and  R123  227  million  was  received  by
provinces. However, National Treasury said that the actual amount  spent  by
provinces as at the end of  the  first  quarter  was  R70  230  million  (57
percent of funds received).

National Treasury reported  that  the  general  reasons  for  under-spending
were, amongst other things, due to: restructuring of programmes  in  certain
provinces;  some  federations  are  not  properly  registered  as   business
entities or NGOs and this has led  to  procurement  delays  and  challenges;
late signing of  business  plans  and  programme  implementation  agreements
(PIAs) in certain provinces; and  poor performance on certain outputs,  (for
example, a low number of athletes absorbed into formal structures and a  low
number of communities, schools and  clubs  with  access  to  local  sporting
facilities).

3.2   The Province of Gauteng

The Province of Gauteng (Sport and Recreation)  reported  that  it  received
R25.3 million for the first quarter of the 2010/11 financial year and  spent
R8.7 million as at 30 June 2010.  The  Province  of  Gauteng  reported  that
there are three programmes under this  grant:  Siyadlala  Programme,  School
Sport Mass Participation Programme and Legacy  Programme.  The  Province  of
Gauteng informed the Committee that the total  budget  for  compensation  of
contract workers is R4 million.

The Province of Gauteng reported that it under-spent on this grant and the
reasons that were given for under-spending were as follows:
      • That most of the programmes were not implemented due to the FIFA
        World Cup.
      • That the Department implemented the integrated Gauteng Provincial
        Government Holiday Programme and most of the Human Resources were
        deployed to this activity. Since this took place during June/July
        months, the expenditure will only reflect during the second
        quarter.
With respect to challenges experienced, the  Province  of  Gauteng  reported
the following: that events that were hosted in the evening posed  risks  for
personnel and spectators, especially  in  far  out  and  unlit  areas;  that
reaction  to  events  as  they  surfaced  stretched  the  capacity  of   the
directorate; that there was lack of staff in some units which  hampered  the
implementation  of  programmes;  that  stakeholders  did  not  submit  their
business plans timeously; that there were change  of  plans  that  were  not
communicated or effectively communicated by relevant stakeholders; and  that
slow procurement processes hampered the delivery of some services.

With regard to monitoring, the Province of Gauteng reported that  monitoring
of the programme is lacking. However, the  required  staff  to  assist  with
this directorate is being  reworked  for  submission  to  the  Head  of  the
Department.

3.3   The Province of KwaZulu-Natal

The Province of KwaZulu-Natal (Sport and  Recreation)  reported  that  R13.6
million (40 percent) of the first quarter budget of R22.2 million was  spent
as at 30 June 2010.

With respect to personnel capacity and, monitoring  and  evaluation  of  the
programme,  the  Province  of   KwaZulu-Natal   reported   that   the   Mass
Participation  Programme  structure  includes:  a  Manager  who  is  overall
responsible for the conditional grant; three Deputy Managers  (School  Sport
Mass Participation Programme, Siyadlala, and Legacy)  and  four  Conditional
Grants Administration Officers tasked with the monitoring and evaluation  of
the programme in each cluster. The Province of KwaZulu-Natal added that  the
structure allows for ongoing monitoring and evaluation  of  all  aspects  of
the three sub-programmes from ward to provincial level.

Furthermore, the Province  of  KwaZulu-Natal  reported  that  the  Strategic
Management Unit  was  tasked  with  the  function  of  monitoring  all  Mass
Participation Programme’s projects to ensure compliance  with  the  business
plans. The Province of KwaZulu-Natal added that  Finance  and  Supply  Chain
Management Units are responsible for  ensuring  compliance  with  the  grant
framework. Regular checks of projects against the operational  and  business
plans are  made  in  order  to  ensure  that  fruitless  and  wasteful,  and
unauthorized  expenditure  are  avoided.  Weekly  cash  flow   reports   are
presented to all managers with an iam to detect early possible  over-/under-
spending. The  Province  of  KwaZulu-Natal  added  on  saying  that  monthly
Finance  Committee  meetings  between  the  Finance  Unit   and   the   Mass
Participation Programme Unit are scheduled to address grant  compliance  and
spending issues.

With respect to under-spending, the Province of KwaZulu-Natal reported  that
the reasons for under-spending in the first quarter were as follows:
    • That the training of 770 contract workers and 648 educators (totalling
      a budget of R6 165 000) has been rescheduled for  the  second  quarter
      due to the closure of schools  during  the  World  Cup  2010  and  the
      involvement of some volunteers in the World Cup 2010.
    • That the hub/club festivals were also rescheduled for  the  third  and
      fourth quarters due to the intensive World Cup 2010 Mass  Mobilization
      Programmes that was prioritized.

3.4   The Province of North West

The Province of North West (Sport and Recreation)  reported  that  it  spent
R2.5 million out of R8.5 million that was received for the first quarter  of
the 2100/11 financial year. The Province of North West  explained  that  all
of the three sub-programmes (Siyadlala, School sport and Legacy) have under-
spent.

The Province of North West reported  that  the  pending  appointment  of  95
sport co-ordinators, 110 sport assistants,  45  sport  development  officers
and  administrators  for  the  Siyadlala,  School  Sport  and  Legacy   sub-
programmes respectively. The appointment of these personnel is  pending  due
to litigation has  impacted  negatively  on  procurement  of  equipment  and
attire to implement the Siyadlala sub-programme.  Furthermore,  the  pending
confirmation of the roll-over of funds is also hampering  implementation  of
activities.

With respect to  monitoring,  the  Province  of  North  West  reported  that
Management and Monitoring Information System is  in  place  to  monitor  and
evaluate projects. The Province of North West further reported that  weekly,
monthly and quarterly reporting are  done  timeously  and  that  assists  in
early detection  and  allows  timely  interventions  to  address  identified
challenges.

3.5   The Province of Western Cape

The Province of Western Cape (Sport and Recreation) reported that,  for  the
first quarter of 2010/11  financial  year,  it  has  spent  R7  million  (38
percent) out of R18.8 million that were received. The  contributing  factors
to the under-spending were reported as follows:
    • Most of the funding for the 2010 “fanjols” were only paid out in July
      2010.
    • There were logistical challenges with regard to the implementation of
      School Sport Mass Participation Centres.
    • Clubs and federations did not respond timeously with  regard  to  the
      effective roll-out of the club development programme

The  Province  of  Western  Cape  reported  that  the   following   capacity
constraints that are contributing to under-spending:
    • Long distances to be travelled for meetings,  events  and,  monitoring
      and evaluation.
    • Lack of understanding of efficient and effective service  delivery  by
      activity coordinators/sport assistants.
    • Slow response of federations with regard to reporting.

With respect to addressing its challenges,  the  Province  of  Western  Cape
reported that: additional vehicles have been purchased and allocated to  the
regional offices to alleviate the situation;  induction  training  programme
with activity co-ordinators, and  regular  monthly  and  quarterly  meetings
with all personnel,  are  scheduled;  federations  have  been  connected  to
regional offices and this has improved communication  and,  reporting  lines
and timeframes.

3.6   The Province of Free State

The Province of Free State (Sport and Recreation)  reported  that  it  spent
R2.6 million (9 percent) of the total budget of R28 million as  at  the  end
of the first quarter of the 2010/11financial  year.  The  Province  of  Free
State reported that the  reason  for  under-spending  was  as  a  result  of
putting on hold many programmes that were not connected to  the  2010  World
Cup.  Another reason for under-spending that was mentioned by  the  Province
of Free State was that contracts of volunteers had expired  and  there  will
be no reappointments of these contractors. The contracts  of  the  other  28
volunteer/contract workers are due to expire in March 2011.

The Province of Free State reported that a new strategy  has  been  proposed
to capacitate educators. The Province of Free State informed  the  Committee
that the long term plan is to assist the targeted schools in  the  programme
to compete in the mainstream school sport competitions.

3.7   The Province of Limpopo

The Province of Limpopo (Sport and Recreation)  reported  that  it  received
R11.3 million for the Mass Sport and Recreation Participation Programme  and
has spent R12.3 million (109 percent) as at the end of the first quarter  of
the 2010/11 financial year. The Province of  Limpopo  explained  that  over-
spending was as a result of the liabilities carried over  from  the  2009/10
financial year (that is payment  of  sport  equipment  which  could  not  be
delivered on  time  by  the  end  of  the  2009/10  financial  year  due  to
challenges faced at the harbour).

With respect to monitoring, the Province of Limpopo  reported  that  monthly
reports are submitted to the National Department  of  Sport  and  Recreation
through forms 14 and 15 as well  as  statistics.  The  Province  of  Limpopo
added  that  these  are  quantitative  reports  which  culminate  into   the
submission of quarterly reports that are aligned to the business plan.

3.8   The Province of Northern Cape

The Province of Northern Cape (Sport, Arts and  Culture)  reported  that  it
received R8.9 million for the first quarter of the  2010/11  financial  year
and it had spent R4.8 million (54 percent)  as  at  the  end  of  the  first
quarter of the  2010/11  financial  year.  The  Province  of  Northern  Cape
explained that the reason for over-spending on the Legacy programme was  due
to the “My 2010 Schools World Cup” Programme. The Province of Northern  Cape
reported that this was part of the 2010  FIFA  World  Cup  Legacy  Programme
which  resulted  in  additional  costs  (in  the  form   of   accommodation,
transport, and procuring of sport attire for the team)  that  were  incurred
when sending the Provincial Team to the National Tournament.

The Province of Northern Cape assured the Committee  that,  to  avoid  over-
spending at the end of  the  2010/11  financial  year,  the  planned  legacy
programmes for the remainder of the  year  will  be  scaled  down  to  bring
planned spending within budget.

With  respect  to  under-spending  in  Siyadlala  and  School   Sport   Mass
Participation programmes (MPP), the Province of Northern Cape reported  that
all planned first quarter programmes did not take place as a result  of  the
2010 FIFA World Cup; and these programmes  have  been  rescheduled  to  take
place in the remaining quarters of the 2010/11 financial year.

With respect to monitoring of the  grant,  the  Province  of  Northern  Cape
reported that management team has been established comprising  of  assistant
manager for each of the programmes (Siyadlala  MPP,  School  Sport  MPP  and
Legacy) to monitor the overall performance of the  grant.  The  Province  of
Northern Cape added that support staff  includes  grant  financial  officer,
programme facilitator and three administrators to monitor implementation  of
programmes and grant spending.

Furthermore, the Committee was informed that a Project Management Unit is
to be established within the Sport & Recreation Directorate by end of
November 2010 to:
         • Respond timeously and assist in the implementation of effective
           and efficient systems to account and verify,
         • Ensure the provision of accurate, reliable & quality information
           on time,
         • Assist the Province in determining its impact and growth path,
           and
         • Achieve excellence and advance social cohesion.

3.9   The Province of Eastern Cape

The Province of Eastern  Cape  (Sports  and  Recreation)  reported  that  it
projected to spend R19.9 million as at the end of the first quarter  of  the
2010//11 financial year but only R14 million was  spent  (71  percent).  The
Province of Eastern Cape informed the Committee that the reason it  did  not
spend all of the funds that were received was due to the following: a  delay
in replacement  of  coordinators;  a  delay  in  implementation  of  stipend
increment; and a delay in procurement and payment  processes.  The  Province
of  Eastern  Cape  explained  that  the  devolution  of  procurement/payment
function to districts further  contributed  to  under-spending  because  the
Province of Eastern Cape had  to  follow  correct  channels  and  capacitate
districts before they can be able to perform this function.

3.10  The Province of Mpumalanga

The Province of Mpumalanga (Sport and Recreation) reported to the  Committee
that it spent R4.8  million  (83  percent)  of  the  R5.7  million  that  it
received in the first quarter of 2010/11 financial year. The  Committee  was
informed that the reason for under-spending was due  to  Golden  Oldies  and
Regional Indigenous Games  that  could  not  be  facilitated  in  the  first
quarter of the 2010/11 financial year towing to  the  hosting  of  the  2010
FIFA World Cup. These games are postponed to the second and  third  quarters
of the 2010 financial year. In addition, slow  submission  of  documentation
by service providers which led to the delay in  the  processing  of  payment
further contributed to under-spending. The Province of  Mpumalanga  informed
the Committee that all programmes that were put on hold will be  rolled  out
the  remainder  of  the  2010/11  financial  year  and  payment  of  service
providers will be prioritized.

The Province  of  Mpumalanga  further  reported  that  the  Mass  Sport  and
Recreation  Participation  has  been  implemented  in  three  regions  (Gert
Sibande,  Nkangala  and  Ehlanzeni)  and  eighteen  municipalities  of   the
Province of Limpopo are benefiting from  this  programme.  The  Province  of
Mpumalanga added on  saying  that  260  schools  are  participating  on  the
programme and that 536 volunteers are employed through this grant.

With respect to  the  outputs,  the  Province  of  Mpumalanga  reported  the
following: 90 sport administrators, coaches  and  technical  officials  were
trained;  Municipal  and  Regional  Sports  Councils  were  established  and
assisted  to  coordinate  meetings;  Bafana-Bafana   Supporters   Club   was
established and will continue to get support in the 2010/11 financial  year;
two workshops were facilitated to train 800 volunteers on how to run  Public
Viewing  Areas;  and  a  container  gym  was  provided  to  one  school   in
Kwaggafontein.

With respect to monitoring capacity, the  Province  of  Mpumalanga  reported
that, at municipal level, Sport and Recreation Officials visit Hubs twice  a
week to monitor the work of Hubs Coordinators and Cluster  Coordinators.  At
regional level, regions facilitate monthly meetings, which  are  chaired  by
Regional Heads, with volunteers to discuss and  evaluate  implementation  of
the programme. The  Committee  was  further  informed  that,  at  provincial
level, monthly  reporting  meetings  are  convened  with  all  officials  to
discuss  reports  including  conditional  grant  reports;  unannounced  Hubs
visits are conducted by the Director and the Chief Director.

The Province of  Mpumalanga  added  that  the  filling  of  the  Deputy  and
Assistant Directors contract posts for Monitoring  and  Evaluation  will  be
finalized by the end of second quarter of the  2010/11  financial  year  and
the employment of three data capturers  will  increase  the  monitoring  and
evaluation capacity. Furthermore, the Province of Mpumalanga  reported  that
Provincial  Treasury  continues  to  monitoring  the  grant  spending.   The
Province of Mpumalanga concluded that the National Department of  Sport  and
Recreation visits  it  on  quarterly  basis  to  evaluate  and  monitor  the
implementation of the Mass Participation Programme Grant.
4.    General findings

The Committee noted the following:
    • That the framework of the grant requires provinces to employ  contract
      workers.  However,  these  workers  have  taken  provinces  to   court
      demanding permanent employment. As a result of this, provinces  cannot
      contract new volunteers/contract workers until judgement on litigation
      cases has been given and this causes provinces to under-spend.
    • That the provinces purchased the 2010 FIFA World Cup tickets and it is
      not clear whether this was  in  line  with  their  business  plans  as
      required by conditional grant framework.
    • That the Province of the Free State only spent on activities that  had
      to do with the 2010 FIFA World Cup. Because all other activities  were
      put on hold, the spending outcomes as reported  by  the  province  are
      virtually nothing.

5.    Recommendations

Having considered the spending patterns on the  Mass  Sport  and  Recreation
Participation Programme Grant by the afore-mentioned provincial  departments
of Sport and Recreation, the Select Committee on  Appropriations  recommends
that the National Council of Provinces considers the following:
   1. That the provinces, in particular the Province of North  West,  should
      approach the National Commissioner and the Senior Commissioner of  the
      Commission on Conciliation Mediation and  Arbitration  and  report  to
      them the slow process of  finalizing  the  litigation  cases  and  its
      effect on service delivery.
   2. That National Treasury should conduct a thorough review  of  all  Mass
      Sport and Recreation Participation Programme  Grant’s  business  plans
      and submit its findings to Parliament within three  months  after  the
      adoption of this report by the House.
   3. That the Province of the Free State should intensify  and  improve  on
      the rolling out of all activities that had been put on hold.
   4.  That Provincial Treasury, in consulation with National  Treasury  and
      the Auditor-General, should investigate the appropriateness of the use
      of public funds by any provincial departments on the 2010  FIFA  World
      Cup and report to  Parliament  and  the  National  Department  of  Co-
      operative Governance and Traditional Affairs within three months after
      the adoption of this report by the House.

Report to be considered.

3. Report of the Select Committee on Appropriations on the  oversight  visit
   to Eastern Cape Municipalities from 27-29 July 2010, 14 September 2010.

1.    Introduction

The Select Committee on Appropriations (the Committee)  was  established  in
terms of section 4(3) of the Money Bills  Amendment  Procedure  and  Related
Matters Act, No 9 of 2009. In  terms  of  section  4(4)  of  this  Act,  the
Committee has the powers and functions conferred to it by the  Constitution,
legislation, the standing rules  or  a  resolution  of  a  House,  including
considering and reporting on:
     a) spending issues;
     b) amendments to the Division of Revenue Bill, the Appropriation Bill,
        Supplementary Appropriations  Bill  and  Adjustment  Appropriations
        Bill;
     c) recommendations of the Financial and Fiscal  Commission,  including
        those referred to in the Intergovernmental  Fiscal  Relations  Act,
        No. 97 of 1997;
     d) reports on actual expenditure published by the  National  Treasury;
        and
     e) Any other related matter set out in this Act.

Furthermore,  the  mandate  of  the  Select  Committee   on   Appropriations
(henceforth referred  to  as  the  Committee)  encompasses  the  Committee’s
functions to legislate, conduct oversight of the Executive;  promote  public
participation, facilitate international agreements  and  review  matters  of
public interest in relation to National Treasury and its entities,  and  the
South African Reserve Bank.

1.1   Delegation
The oversight visit took place from 27-29 July 2010. Meetings were  held  at
Queenstown (Queens Casino Hotel); Mthatha (Savoy  Hotel);  and  East  London
(Premier Hotel Regent) in the Eastern Cape.

The delegation consisted of:
   Hon. Mr TA Chaane (ANC) (Chairperson of the Committee;
   Hon. Mr CJ de Beer (ANC);
   Hon. Ms TM Memela (ANC);
   Hon. Mr  SD Montsitsi (ANC);
   Hon. Mr  BL Mashile (ANC);
   Hon. Mr  WM Makhubela (COPE); and
   Hon. Mr  A Lees (DA);


Eastern Cape’s Provincial Legislature Members
   Hon. Mr S. Gqobana (MEC Local Government and Traditional Affairs);
   Hon. Mr M. Matomela (Chairperson PC on Finance);
   Hon. Ms D. Komose (Chairperson PC on Public Works);
   Hon.  Ms  M.  Qhoboshiyane  (Chairperson  PC  on  Local  Government   and
   Traditional Affairs); and
   Hon. Ms N Ponco (PC on Finance)

The parliamentary officials that  accompanied  the  delegation  are:  Mr.  L
Nodada (Committee Secretary),  Mr.  M  Tau  (Researcher),  and  Mr.  S  Goba
(Committee Assistant).

1.2   Terms of reference
The  visit  formed  part  of  the  Committee’s  ongoing   interaction   with
municipalities to monitor collaboration and coordination pertaining  to  the
provision of municipal services  and  support  given  to  municipalities  by
provincial and national departments.  The  municipalities  in  Eastern  Cape
that were identified for the visit are:  Joe  Gqabi  District  Municipality,
Maletswai Local Municipality; Inkwanca Local  Municipality;  Nkonkobe  Local
Municipality; Mbhashe Local Municipality; Ingquza Hill  Local  Municipality;
Engcobo Local Municipality;  Emalahleni  Local  Municipality;  Makana  Local
Municipality; Nxuba Local Municipality, Chris  Hani  District  Municipality;
and Ngqushwa Local Municipality.

The  stakeholders  (including  national  and  provincial  departments)  that
accompanied  the  Committee  on  this  visit  are:  National  Department  of
Cooperative Governance, Eastern Cape’s Provincial  Treasury,  South  African
Local Government Association, Department of  Energy,  Financial  and  Fiscal
Commission, Provincial Department of Public Works, Provincial Department  of
Cooperative Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs,  National  Department  of
Water  and  Environmental  Affairs,  National  Treasury,  Auditor   General,
Development Bank of Southern Africa, and ESKOM.


1.3   Purpose of the Visit
The purpose of the oversight visit was to engage  with  the  above-mentioned
municipalities  along  with  national  and  provincial  departments  on  the
following areas:
    • Development and implementation of municipal budgets;
    • Municipalities’ compliance with the Municipal Finance Management  Act,
      Number 56 of 2003;
    • The spending and performance of the  municipalities  with  regards  to
      conditional grants;
    • The municipalities’ relations and collaboration with various  national
      and provincial departments and entities;
    • Capacity constraints of the municipalities (if any);
    • The extent to which municipal services are provided; and
    • The alignment of  municipalities’  Integrated  Development  Programmes
      with the Provincial Growth and Development Strategy.


2.    Auditor General’s overall presentation on identified Municipalities

The Office of the Auditor General (AG) briefed the Committee on the  2009/10
audit outcomes for the financial year2009/10 of the selected  municipalities
in  Eastern  Cape.  The  AG  reported  that  the  audit  opinions  of   five
municipalities received disclaimers. These  municipalities  included:  Chris
Hani District Municipality;  Maletswai  Local  Municipality;  Mbhashe  Local
Municipality;  Engcobo  Local  Municipality;  Nkonkobe  Local  Municipality;
Ngqushwa  Local  Municipality.   The   AG   further   reported   that   five
municipalities received an  adverse  audit  opinions.  These  municipalities
included: Emalahleni Local Municipality; Joe  Gqabi  District  Municipality;
Ingquza Local  Municipality;  and  Makana  Local  Municipality.  Lastly,  AG
reported that two municipalities received qualified audit opinions  reports.
These are Inkwanca Local Municipality and Nxuba Local Municipality.

The AG informed the Committees that key issues,  on  leadership,  that  need
attention and contributed to these audit opinion are: instability  and  lack
of commitment in administrative leadership in  municipalities;  the  correct
style of leadership  (attitude  towards  the  control  environment)  is  not
displayed; and, in most municipalities, action plans were  neither  complied
not  followed  through  and  monitored  in  order   to   address   financial
challenges. With regard to financial management, AG reported that there  was
lack  of  knowledge  and  understanding  of  General  Recognized  Accounting
Practices (GRAP); monthly management information was  neither  credible  nor
prepared; accounting functions such as the  reconciliation  of  key  control
accounts were not performed. With regard  to  governance,  the  AG  reported
that the Audit and  Internal  Audit  Committees  were  not  effective;  risk
assessment and fraud prevention plans were not in place nor adhered to;  and
there was insufficient monthly oversight by the councils.

The AG reported that their Eastern Cape’s Business Unit has  embarked  on  a
door to door visit  of  all  municipalities  to  roll-out  guidance  on  the
responsibility of the mayors with regard  to  oversight  of  the  day-to-day
administration of the municipality. The AG said that they are going to  have
monthly interactions with mayor and municipal management. This will  enhance
communication of key controls and the  monitoring  thereof  on  a  quarterly
basis by means of walk-throughs. Moreover, follow  up  visits  to  determine
the progress made  and  current  status  where  cost  effectiveness  is  not
conducive  for  monthly   visits,   the   initiative   will   be   monitored
telephonically or via e-mail. In this  case,  two  monthly  visits  will  be
undertaken. Furthermore, AG  said  it  intends  to  have  interactions  with
Provincial  Executive,  Local  Government  and  Provincial  Treasury.   This
interaction will result in setting up a sustainable forum where  actions  by
role-players  can   be   shared   and   synchronized   to   ensure   maximum
effectiveness.

3.    Municipal Performances and Analysis
14. Maletswai Local Municipality
The MLM  reported  that  for  the  financial  year  2008/09  it  received  a
disclaimer  audit  opinion.  MLM  reported  that  reasons  for  receiving  a
disclaimer include non-compliance with GRAP;  information  not  supplied  to
auditors on time; valuation roll not accurate and complete.

The MLM reported 34 per cent of  its  operating  revenue  is  for  salaries.
With regard to the performance of conditional grants, the MLM reported  that
it is doing  well  in  terms  of  complying  with  the  grant  framework  as
stipulated in  the  Division  of  Revenue  Act  (DORA).  The  Committee  was
informed that Development Bank of Southern Africa  (DBSA)  has  seconded  an
official who is assisting the MLM to provide services at a faster rate.

With respect to compliance with the Municipal Finance  Management  Act,  the
MLM reported that the supply  chain  management  policy  was  developed  and
adopted in 2006 and is reviewed annually together  with  all  other  budget-
related policies. The MLM informed the Committee  that  its  bid  committees
namely: bid evaluation and bid adjudication are functional  and  members  of
these committees were trained except  for  a  newly  appointed  Manager  for
Community Services. The MLM reported  that  a  Budget  and  Treasury  Office
(BTO) is not established as yet, however the  Financial  Management  Section
currently performs the functions of the Budget and Treasury Office.

The  MLM  added  that  internal  audit  function  was  outsourced  to  Price
Waterhouse and Coopers (PWC) as from 2008/09 financial year. Their  contract
expires in 2011. The municipality claimed that an intern  is  being  trained
to take over from PWC as soon as the contract lapses  between  MLM  and  PWC
expires.

The MLM informed the Committee that  in  the  2008/09  financial  year,  the
annual  financial  statements  were  submitted  on  time.  The  MLM  further
reported  that  monthly  budget  statements  (section  71  reports  of   the
Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA) were  not  submitted  on  prescribed
time-frame to the National  Treasury  due  to  the  introduction  of  a  new
financial management system introduced during the  2008/09  financial  year.
However, according to the MLM, this matter was attended to and resolved.

Findings
After deliberations with the Maletswai  Local  Municipality,  the  Committee
observed the following:
    • The Maletswai Local Municipality does not have a Budget  and  Treasury
      Office and therefore it is in violating of Section 10 of the Municipal
      Management Act No. 56 of 2003.
    • The MLM is not GRAP compliant hence they received a  disclaimer  audit
      opinion of the Auditor General.
    • The figures presented by the MLM were not reliable since they did  not
      tally with those in possession of National Treasury.
    • There are regular sewer spillages into the Orange River due to  ageing
      infrastructure.
    • Even though the MLM claim to have  eradicated  the  bucket  system  in
      2007, people of Jamestown are still  using  the  bucket  system  as  a
      sanitary relief.
    • There is a huge housing backlog and  basic  services  that  should  be
      provided to the indigents.


The Committee recommends the following:
 • The MLM should establish the Budget and Treasury Office as a matter of
      Urgency.
    • The MLM  should  ensure  that  it  complies  with  General  Recognized
      Accounting Practices in the 2011/2012 financial year.
    • The figures submitted by  the  MLM  to  the  Provincial  and  National
      Treasury should at all times, be verified and accurate.
    • The Department of Water and Environmental Affairs should  monitor  and
      put stricter measures that seek to avoid water contamination.
    • The MLM should ensure that the  bucket  system  is  eradicated  and  a
      better sanitation system should be put in place.
    • As a matter of urgency, the MLM should strive to address  the  housing
      backlog and provide basic service to the poor.

3.2   The Inkwanca Local Municipality
The Inkwanca  Local  Municipality  (ILM)  reported  that,  for  the  2009/10
financial year its total capital budget was R6  million  and  the  operating
budget was R27 million. Personnel costs for the  same  financial  year  were
R13.2 million. The ILM reported that it spent all  funds  allocated  through
grants except for a variance  of  R675  215  for  the  financial  management
grant. However, the ILM said that the funds are committed but are yet to  be
claimed. The ILM presented that a Budget and Treasury  Office  (BTO)  exists
and is headed by the Chief  Financial  Office  who  is  supported  by  three
accountants  who  are  responsible  for  revenue,  expenditure,  budget  and
reporting. The ILM reported that some of the section 71 reports of the  MFMA
were submitted on time, however others were submitted after  the  due  date.
The ILM reported that it is 100 per cent capital grant dependant and 73  per
cent operational grant dependant. The ILM further reported that 49 per  cent
of the operational budget went to salaries.

The ILM added  that  it  complies  with  MFMA,  and  as  a  result,  it  has
established a functioning Internal Audit and Audit Committee. The  ILM  said
the Audit Committee, shared  services,  was  established  2008/09  financial
year 2008/09.  The  shared  services  are  utilised  with  other  two  local
municipalities,  Inxuba  Yethemba  and  Tsolwana,  with   clear   terms   of
reference. The ILM reported that the 2008/09 annual report was submitted  on
time.

With respect to service delivery, the ILM reported that the bucket  sanitary
system was eradicated and all households  in  the  municipality  have  water
borne toilets. However, the households in  farms  have  not  benefited  thus
far.

With respect to challenges, the  ILM  reported  that  it  is  struggling  to
employ a qualified  electrical  engineer.  To  rectify  the  situation,  the
municipality said that it  has  offered  a  student,  who  studies  at  Vaal
University of Technology, a bursary. That student was said to be  at  third-
year of study. The ILM also said that the BTO  officials  are  inexperienced
because they have less than three years experience.

Findings
    • The ILM is unable to produce financial statements and, as a result, it
      relies on consultants.
    • The ILM compensation of employee’s budget is 49 percent of  the  total
      operating budget. This amount is high.

The Committee recommends that:
    • The IML should utilize the FMG  to  train  the  current  CFO  and  all
      officials in the BTO as  they  cannot  produce  financial  statements.
      Furthermore, the ILM should refrain from utilizing consultants because
      they add no value as the municipality continues  to  receive  negative
      audit opinion.
    • The ILM should comply with the acceptable salary percentage guidelines
      as stipulated in MFMA.

3.3   The Nkonkobe Local Municipality
The  Nkonkobe  Local  Municipality  (NLM)  reported  that  it   received   a
disclaimer for three consecutive  years.  As  a  result  of  this,  the  NLM
negotiated with with the University of Fort Hare to  have  a  service  level
agreement, the negotiations  are  at  an  advance  stage.  The  NLM  further
reported that corruption and fraud in the municipality continue  to  be  big
problem. The Committee was informed that  two  previous  Municipal  Managers
have been charged due to allegations of corruption and fraud. The  NLM  said
it is still trying to recover funds lost due to mismanagement.

The NLM reported that all grant funds were spent on time.  The  NLM  further
reported that it had established a  development  agency,  Nkonkobe  Economic
Development  Agency  (NEDA),  in  2002  which   is   responsible   for   the
implementation of municipal projects. This agency is  100  percent  financed
by Industrial Development Corporation. However, this agency has  never  been
audited because its Board of Directors refuses  to  be  accountable  to  the
NLM, therefore they are considering closing it down. The NLM added that  its
Integrated Development Plan (IDP) is  aligned  with  the  Provincial  Growth
Development Strategy (PGDS) and it aims to address  the  six  priorities  of
the PGDS which are poverty eradication;  Agrarian  transformation  and  food
security; infrastructure; manufacturing diversification and  tourism;  human
resource development; and public sector and institutional transformation.

With respect to the establishment of the Budget  and  Treasury  Office,  the
NLM reported that the office exists but it is not  fully  capacitated.  With
respect to the  reported  the  submission  of  Annual  Financial  Statements
(AFS), the NLM reported  that  the  AFS  for  2008/09  financial  year  were
submitted late due to  unskilled  personnel  (Chief  Financial  Officer,  in
particular) and lack of understanding of the financial system.

The NLM admitted that it did not submit the section 71 reports of  the  MFMA
for 2009/10 financial year. Moreover, the NLM reported that  Internal  Audit
and  Audit  Committee  were  established  and  are   functional.   The   NLM
acknowledged that it is struggling to provide services to  the  people.  The
NLM explained that there is a backlog in providing  roads;  construction  of
community halls, houses, storm  water;  electrifying  its  jurisdiction  and
collecting refuse. The NLM added that an amount of R12.2  million  has  been
set aside for electrifying  an  area  called  Alice  Golf  Course.  The  NLM
further reported that the appointed contractor  will  be  introduced  during
the first week of August 2010.

The NLM further admitted that it  did  not  spend  100  percent  budget  for
indigent households. With respect to achievements, the NLM reported that  it
spent all funds that were  transferred  for  the  Municipal  Infrastructural
Grant;  Municipal  Finance  Management   Grants;   and   Municipal   Systems
Improvement Grants.

Furthermore, the NLM informed the Committee that  it  is  experiencing  some
challenges. These are that the municipality has a low revenue  base  due  to
its rural nature; it is struggling to attract and retain  skilled  technical
and  financial  personnel;  the   road   Infrastructure   construction   and
maintenance is a challenge due to the shortage of  engineers;  there  is  no
full participation  of  sector  departments  in  IDP  processes;  there  are
limited funds for implementing infrastructural  projects;  the  municipality
is not GRAP compliant and fails to submit Section 71 reports of the MFMA.

Findings
    • Even though the NLM has an adopted Supply Chain Management Policy,  it
      is not fully implemented due to staff shortage which results  in  poor
      functioning of the bid committee.
    • The NLM is affected by poor  financial  management  and  violation  of
      legislations, and as a result reports are not submitted on time.

The Committee recommends that:
    • The municipality should submit to Provincial Department of Cooperative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs a turn around strategy within three
      months after the adoption of this report by the House.
    • The Provincial Government, working together with South  African  Local
      Government Association, should intervene by seconding  highly  skilled
      officials to this municipality.

3.4   The Mbhashe Local Municipality
The Mbhashe Local Municipality (MBLM) reported  that  it  has  collected  93
percent of the planned revenue collection. The MBLM  further  reported  that
it is 80 percent grant dependent; 30 percent of  its  operating  budget  was
spent on salaries; 68 percent was spent  on  repairs  and  maintenance;  the
total capital grant  in  comparison  to  the  total  capital  budget  is  91
percent. MBLM reported that,  through  Integrated  National  Electrification
Programme Grant (INEP), 38 villages (3512 household) are to  be  electrified
and  a  sum  of  R10  million  has  been  set  aside.  The  MBLM  said  that
electrification project is divided into phases, the first phase targets  700
households, of these 500 household have been give access to electricity  and
the remaining 200 are to be given access to electricity by 07  August  2010.
Futhermore, the MBLM said that  the  Municipal  Infrastructure  Grant  funds
have been spent but there is a variance of R104 054  872.47;  the  Municipal
Systems Improvement Grant has a variance of R290 495.00; and  the  Financial
Management Grant has a variance of R34 571 which is committed to  travelling
and accommodation.

With respect to backlogs, the MBLM reported that Vision 2012 of  Electricity
Universal Access and 2014 of Passable and Trafficable Road Network  may  not
be achieved. The MBLM argued that the latter is mainly due to  slow  process
in  appointing  a  service  provider  to  quantify  access  roads   backlog.
Furthermore, the MBLM reported that it has capacity constraints  because  it
is unable  to  attract  people  with  requisite  skills.  The  MBLM  further
reported that competing with well-established municipalities  for  resources
(namely: plant hire, service providers etc)  is  a  huge  challenge  because
funding is not enough. With regard to electricity, the  MBLM  said  that  it
does not have a dedicated unit for electricity and electrification  projects
are outsourced and not monitored.

With respect to compliance with the MFMA,  the  MBLM  reported  that  supply
chain management policy is in place  and  is  reviewed  annually.  The  MBLM
added that all three bid committee and the BTO are  in  place;  and  monthly
reports and annual financial  statements  were  submitted  on  time  to  the
relevant offices. The MBLM further reported that audit  and  internal  audit
committees are in place.

With respect to intergovernmental relations, the MBLM reported  that  sector
departments  are  involved  in  the  IDP  processes  and  they  participate.
However, the MBLM said that there  is  inconsistency  in  attendance  during
planning meetings; departments delegate junior officers who loose  track  of
decisions taken and their implementation. Furthermore, the MBLM  highlighted
that,  through  its  various  departments,  it  liaises  directly  with  the
government agencies such as Development  Bank  of  Southern  Africa  (DBSA),
Eastern Cape Development Cooperation  (ECDC),  National  Development  Agency
(NDA), Small Enterprise Development Agency (SEDA), and ESKOM.

Findings
    • The Committee observed that government departments (Public Works;
      Department of Justice and Constitutional Development;  and  Department
      of
      Basic Education) owe the MBLM payments for rates.


    • The Mbhashe Local Municipality received a disclaimer  opinion  due  to
      the fact
      that financial records were not in place.

The Committee recommends that:
    •  The  Departments  of  Public  Works,   Justice   and   Constitutional
      Development, and Basic  Education  and  other  government  departments
      should make every effort to ensure that they pay all monies due to all
      municipalities, starting with the Mbhashe  Local  municipality  within
      two months after the adoption of this report by the house.


    • The MLM should develop and implement  a  plan  to  improve  its  audit
      outcomes and comply with the MFMA. A turn around  strategy  should  be
      compiled and submitted in  parliament  within  two  months  after  the
      adoption of this report by the house.


3.5   The Joe Gqabi District Municipality
The Joe Gqabi District Municipality (JGDM) reported that  all  grants  funds
were spent and there were no deviations to  be  reported.  With  respect  to
budget performance, the JGDM reported that its total operating budget  of  R
322 million was under-spent by 17.46 percent.   The  JGDM  added  that  with
respect  to  planned  revenue  collection  it  underperformed   because   it
collected  24  percent  less  than  its  budgeted  revenue  collection.  The
municipality  further  reported  that  it  is  86  percent   capital   grant
dependent; it is 87 percent operational grant dependent; and 27  percent  of
the operational budget was used  to  pay  for  salaries.  The  JGDM  further
reported that 7.7 per cent was spent on repairs and maintenance.

With respect to compliance with the MFMA, the JGDM reported that its  supply
chain management policy has been revised and was still  to  be  approved  by
the Council. The JGDM further reported that the three  bid  committees  (Bid
Specification, Bid Evaluation, and Bid Adjudication),  as  required  by  the
MFMA  and  stipulated  in  the  Supply  Chain  Regulations,   are   properly
established. The JGDM explained that members of these three  bid  committees
were appointed by the municipal manager. The JGDM reported that the BTO  was
established in May 2010 and it by the Chief Financial Officer and has  three
sections namely: Financial Accounting, Income and  Expenditure,  and  System
Administration. The annual financial statements of the JGDM  were  submitted
to the Auditor-General.

With  respect  to  service  delivery  and  capacity  constraints,  the  JGDM
reported that the costs of eradicating water  and  sanitation  backlogs  are
R445 million and R247 million, respectively. The JGDM added that,  in  light
of limited and insufficient funds to eradicate  backlogs,  the  targets  are
always shifted to later years. The JGDM further reported that roads  are  in
poor conditions and they require huge maintenance costs. The  JGDM  reported
that the commercial farming community as  well  as  the  urban  areas,  have
access to access to electricity, however rural arrears have  limited  access
to electricity. The JGDM reported that  challenges  persist  in  as  far  as
collection and disposal of waste is concerned. The  JGDM  reported  that  it
has  managed  to  maintain  good  spending   patterns   on   the   Municipal
Infrastructure Grant (MIG). The JGDM added that MIG grant has helped  it  to
address backlogs on water and sanitation over previous 6 years.

With respect to audit issues, the JGDM  reported  that  the  internal  audit
function was outsourced and the procurement procedures  were  followed.  The
JGDM added that the audit and oversight committees were established and  are
operational The JGDM assured the committee that an Audit Action Plan  exists
and was approved by the Council in January 2010 in response to the  previous
audit report. The JGDM added that weekly monitoring of the action  plan  was
done by the internal audit with the  intention  to  unblock  delays,  ensure
focus on audit improvement and, monitor performance  of  staff  and  service
providers.

The JGDM reported that intergovernmental relations framework  was  developed
and adopted by the Council. Furthermore,  the  JGDM  said  that  the  Public
Participation Strategy and  Communication  Strategy  were  both  adopted  in
October  2008  and  reviewed  in  2009.  These  strategies  encourage   that
community outreached programmes be held twice per financial year;  and  that
the  Integrated  Development  plan  includes   budget   community   outreach
programmes.  The  JGDM  assured  the  Committee  that   stakeholders   fully
participated in the IDP process and that its IDP is aligned with PGDP.

Findings
    • Reports that are required in terms of the MFMA  were  submitted  later
      than the prescribed time.


    • Even though the internal audit  functions  of  the  municipality  were
      performed by a service provider, the audit outcomes have not improved.


    • During the audit  process  senior  managers  do  not  make  themselves
      available to provide information to Auditor-General staff as a  result
      the JGDM has been receiving negative audit opinions for the  past  two
      years.


    • The JGDM performs functions that are meant for  provincial  sphere  of
      governance, like procurement of mobile clinics.


The Committee recommends that:
    • The JGDM should refrain from violating the MFMA and submit reports  on
      time.   The  JGDM  should  submit  to  the  Provincial  Department  of
      Cooperative Governance a turn around strategy that  seeks  to  improve
      its audit outcomes within three after the adoption of this  report  by
      the House.

    • The JGDM should utilise the Municipal Systems Improvement Grant and
      capacitate its own employees in the internal audit  unit  and  refrain
      from out
      sourcing that function because doing so does  not  improve  the  audit
      outcomes.


    • The Council should ensure managers are  always  available  during  the
      auditing process.


    • The JGDM should only perform functions meant for the local  sphere  of
      government unless a  service  level  agreement  is  in  place  with  a
      provincial or national government.


3.6   The Ingquza Hill Local Municipality
The Ingquza Hill Local Municipality (IHLM) reported that it  performed  very
well in terms of spending on the  conditional  grants.  The  IHLM  submitted
that  all  grants  funds  (Financial  Management  Grant,  Municipal  Systems
Improvement Grant, and Municipal Infrastructure Grant) were spent  in  full.
However, the IHLM added that the Tshoya Electrification  Programme  Phase  1
is completed but Phase 2  of  this  programme  is  not  complete.  The  IHLM
reported that FMG grant funds have been utilised  to  employ  four  interns;
train supply chain management  employees;  and  convent  to  GRAP  reporting
system.

With respect to intergovernmental relations, the  IHLM  reported  that  good
relations  are  in  place.  The  IHLM  added  that  DBSA  has  supported  it
financially and by seconding personnel (Engineer  and  Planner);  Department
of Energy through Eskom is electrifying  Tshonya  (R20  million).  The  IHLM
further reported that Department of Rural Development  and  Agriculture  has
implemented various projects; and that Provincial COGTA  has  assisted  with
General Valuation that amounted to R 700 000.00. The  IHLM  added  that  its
IDP is aligned with the PDGP.

With respect to service delivery the IHLM’s focus is on refuse  removal  and
roads. The IHLM informed the Committee that refuse removal,  which  is  done
daily, is focused on peri-urban areas and performance  regarding  this  item
is  good.  The  IHLM  further  reported  that  the  challenge  is  the  non-
availability of suitable or legal land-fill  sites.  The  current  land-fill
sites are operating illegally and the IHLM is in the process of  identifying
suitable land for land-fill sites. The  other  constraint  reported  by  the
IHLM is that the refuse collection unit is driven by  technical  people  who
have no environmental management background.  With  respect  to  roads,  the
IHLM reported that the construction of 9 roads that has  costed  IHLM  R22.5
million is completed and was financed through  MIG  funding.  The  Committee
was told that the extent of backlogs is high that the  impact  made  by  the
construction of these new roads is  minimal.  Most  of  the  roads  are  not
maintained due to lack of funding.

With regard to compliance with the  IHLM  reported  that  the  supply  chain
management policy was developed and adopted by the  Council  in  July  2007.
The Council monitors the policy and exercises their oversight  role  through
monthly, quarterly, half yearly and annual reports. The IHLM added that  the
bid committee and BTO were established in terms of the MFMA. The  latter  is
headed by the CFO. The IHLM reported that  the  annual  financial  statement
and Section 71 reports of the  MFMA  had  been  submitted  to  the  relevant
offices. The IHLM added that the Audit Committee (AC) has  been  established
and is  fully  functional.  The  IHLM  submitted  that  the  Internal  Audit
function is shared the with O.R. Tambo District Municipality.

The IHLM reported that 72 percent of its operational expenditure budget  was
used to pay for salaries.  2  percent  was  used  to  pay  for  repairs  and
maintenance and 26 percent  was  spent  on  general  expenditure.  The  IHLM
concluded that it needs financial support because its revenue base  is  low.
The IHLM  added  that  it  has  developed  partnerships  with  international
partners  and  it  was  assisted  by  COGTA  and  the  O.R.  Tambo  District
Municipality. The municipality further reported that  much  focus  would  be
given to improve IDP participation and  to  contribute  to  Operation  Clean
Audit Campaign of COGTA.

Findings
    • The IHLM’s budget for the compensation of  employees  was  42  percent
      which was high.
    • The IHLM is not GRAP compliant.

The Committee recommends that:
    • The IHLM should prioritize its operational capital budget because  the
      poor  are  being  compromised  at  the  expense  of  compensation   of
      employees.
    • The DBSA, National Treasury, and Provincial Treasury  should  speed-up
      support to IHLM until such time the IHLM  can  be  able  to  implement
      GRAP.

3.7   The Engcobo Local Municipality
The Engcobo Local Municipality (ELM) reported that its budget has  grown  by
5.7 percent. The ELM said  that  the  salary  budget  has  increased  by  10
percent. The ELM reported that it is 98 percent capital grant dependent  and
89 percent operational grant dependent. The ELM  further  reported  that  42
percent of its operational budget was used to pay  for  salaries.  On  grant
spending the ELM reported that all grants were 100 percent spent.

With respect to internal  controls,  the  ELM  reported  that  the  internal
control unit was newly developed and the staff members to be placed  on  the
unit were being trained on internal control for the 2010/11 financial  year.
The ELM added that a fraud prevention policy is yet to be  developed.  As  a
result of an audit report which  is  a  disclaimer  of  opinion,  a  service
provider has been appointed to assist in it. The ELM further  reported  that
a complete audit action plan has been adopted by the Council and is  due  to
go to the audit committee; the audit committee was established in 2007;  the
audit unit had been established comprising of a 3  member  committee  shared
with the Chris Hani District Municipality. The  ELM  added  that  the  audit
committee had once addressed the council.

The ELM reported that, with respect to revenue collection, a  new  valuation
roll has been fully implemented. The ELM revealed  government  debtors  with
balances over 120 days as  follows:  Department  of  Agriculture  for  rates
totaling R286 875.33 and for services is R47 674.79;  Department  of  Public
Works rates totaling R23  620.00  and  for  services  R5  157.14.   The  ELM
reported that  business  and  residents  with  balances  over  120  days  as
follows: Residents are rates R1 086  536.00  and  for  services  is  R1  319
575.00; and business rates are R661 445.00 and for services is R810  582.50.
The ELM said the total amount owed by debtors was R4.5 million.

The ELM further reported  that,  for  the  purposes  of  giving  support  to
indigents,  indigent  policy  and  indigent  register,  which  is   reviewed
quarterly, are in place.  The ELM added that 107 beneficiaries are given  to
6 kilolitres of free water and waterborne sanitation  monthly.  Furthermore,
596 beneficiaries are given access to free 50 kilowatts of electricity.

With respect to compliance with the MFMA, the ELM reported that  the  supply
chain policy exists; all  bid  committees  with  capacitated  and  competent
members; the BTO has not be establish due to staff  shortages  and  capacity
constraints in the finance department; the  2008/09  AFS  was  submitted  30
days later than the legislated time; the ELM is not fully  GRAP  compliance;
section 71 reports of the MFMA were submitted latter that expected. The  ELM
further reported that it has good relations with sector departments and  its
IDP is aligned with the PGDP.

With respect to service delivery and capacity constraints, the ELM  reported
that refuse is collected from all businesses, residents and  hospitals.  The
ELM added that it is looking into upgrading its  landfill  site  and  has  a
permit. However, the  ELM  reported  that  there  are  some  constraints  in
relation  to  refuse  removal.  These  include  promulgation   of   by-laws;
ineffective law enforcement and negative attitude of the  community  towards
change. The ELM further reported that 11  540  households  have  been  given
access to electricity and an additional 1647 households are  awaiting  Eskom
final inspection before being given access to electricity. In addition,  the
ELM reported that 1977 households have infrastructure and are  to  be  given
access to electricity in the 2010/11 financial year. With respect  to  water
services and sanitation, the ELM  reported  that  it  is  a  water  services
provider.  With  respect  to  sanitation,  the  ELM  reported  that  7   645
households have sanitation; 27 215 households have  no  sanitation;  19  625
households  have  no  RDP  standard  water  and  15  595   households   have
Reconstruction and Development Programme (RDP) standard water.

With respect to roads, the ELM reported that it has huge backlogs on  access
roads and road classification has not yet  been  completed.  The  ELM  added
that in the 2009/10 financial year, a total of  R15  million  was  spent  on
access roads and, for 2010/11 financial year  the  ELM  has  budgeted  R17.2
million for transport infrastructure. The ELM reported that there  are  four
housing projects. The ELM reported that it  does  not  have  a  distribution
licence  for  rural  electrification  but  it  has  qualified   professional
employees.

Findings
    • The Committee observed that grant  spending  is  reported  to  be  100
      percent spent, and at the same time huge backlogs were  reported.  The
      Committee noted this discrepancy.
    • The ELM is not GRAP compliance and that is a violation  of  the  MFMA.
      Moreover, the BTO is not functional.
The Committee recommends that:
    • The ELM should try to address the  highlighted  backlogs  and  further
      strengthen its Public Participation Strategy.
    • The Committee recommends that  ELM  should  ensure  that  it  is  GRAP
      compliant
      as a matter of urgency and further capacitate the TBO.
    • The Departments of Public Works and Agriculture, and other  government
      departments should pay in  full  all  monies  that  they  owe  to  all
      municipalities for rates  and  services  rendered.  These  departments
      should pay these accounts in full within two months after the adoption
      of this report by the House.


3.8   The Makana Local Municipality
The Makana Local Municipality (MALM) reported that a total of R50.1  million
was received in the form of grants but only R44.8 million was  spent.  These
funds were for FMG, MSIG,  MIG  and  Neighbourhood  Development  Partnership
Grant. With respect to participation of sector departments in  IDP  process,
the MALM reported that an integrated IDP Process Plan and Budget Time  Table
were drawn annually, and thereafter, a  comprehensive  public  participation
programme take place under the leadership of the Executive Mayor.  The  MALM
added that in strengthening intergovernmental collaboration, it has  planned
to develop an Intergovernmental Relations Framework and establish  a  Makana
Intergovernmental Relations Forum in the 2010/11 financial year.

With respect to compliance  with  the  MFMA,  the  MALM  reported  that  the
Council  approved  Supply  Chain  Management  Policy  and  the   three   Bid
Committees  were  established.  Furthermore,  the  MALM  reported  that  BTO
exists; the 2009/10 AFS was in the  process  of  being  finalised;  Internal
Audits and Audit Committee exist but are  share  services  with  the  Cacadu
District Municipality (CDM). The MLM further reported that the alignment  of
the Budget to the PGDS is currently undertaken through the CDM.

With  respect  to  service  delivery  and  capacity  constraints,  the  MALM
reported that 80 of percent households have access to electricity;  however,
MALM, old infrastructure leading to  electrical  outages  and  losses.  With
regards to water, the MALM said that 98 percent of  Makana  households  have
access to basic water service and 85 percent of  households  are  living  in
informal  areas  have  access  to  basic  water  up  to  RDP  standard  with
individual water connections. With regard to sanitation  the  MALM  reported
that 70 percent of households have access to basic  sanitation  toilets  and
the bucket system has been eradicated in all formal areas.  The  MALM  added
that there is a challenge with regard to  the  provision  of  sanitation  in
rural areas. The MALM reported that refuse removal services are provided  to
15  178  properties  out  of  16  162  properties.  The  MALM   added   that
approximately 1 999 households (mainly in informal areas)  receive  communal
waste collection services.  However,  the  MLM  reported  that  it  has  old
equipment/vehicles that are used to offer  this  service.  With  respect  to
roads, the MALM reported that 170 kilometres of roads are gravel  and  there
is a programme of tarring major  taxi  routes  which  is  underway  (namely:
Project Faki'Tar).

With regard to budget performance, the MALM reported that it has  spent  100
percent of its total budget. The Committee was told that 38 percent  of  the
total budget was spent on salaries and 6 percent was spent  on  repairs  and
maintenance. The MALM further reported that it is 82  percent  dependent  on
capital grants and 20 percent dependent on operational grants.

Findings
    • The  MALM  does  not  have  qualified  personnel  in  the  electricity
      department.
    • Even thought the MALM  claimed  that  it  has  eradicated  the  bucket
      system, this only refers to urban areas and rural areas are neglected.

The Committee recommends that:
    • The MALM should ensure that professional electricians are employed  as
      a
      matter of urgency.
    • The MALM should strive to provide services to people who are either
      in rural communities and farming lands.


3.9   The Emalahleni Local Municipality
The Emalahleni Local Municipality (EMLM)  reported  that  it  has  spent  96
percent of its budget.  The  EMLM  further  reported  that  its  funding  of
capital is mainly through grants.  With respect to revenue  collection,  the
EMLM, said it is collecting less than 30 percent of  its  own  revenue.  The
EMLM further reported that 27.5 percent of it operating budget was spent  on
repairs and maintenance.

With respect to the MFMA compliance,  the  EMLM  reported  that  the  supply
chain management policy was implemented in 2007 and is reviewed  every  year
and approved by the Council. The EMLM added that all  three  bid  committees
are established. Furthermore, the Committee was informed that  the  BTO  was
established in 2009 and is supervised by the CFO. The EMLM  added  that  the
AFS was submitted on time. However, the EMLM  informed  the  Committee  that
there are two outstanding annual reports to be  submitted  to  the  National
Treasury. The EMLM further reported that  an  Internal  Audit  (IA)  exists;
Audit  Committee  services  are  shared  services  with  the  Lukhanji   and
Sakhisizwe Municipalities.  The EMLM said that the annual report was  tabled
before the Council and adopted.  Furthermore,  the  ELM  reported  that  all
grant funds were spent accordingly.

With respect to service delivery and capacity, the EMLM  reported  that  the
plan to address electrification backlog and  maintenance  of  infrastructure
in rural areas is in  good  progress  (phase  8).  However,  the  EMLM,  has
limited resources to accelerate the  progress  of  this  project.  The  EMLM
added that a bilateral meeting with all stakeholders (EMLM,  the  Department
of Mineral and Energy, Eskom  and  communities)  involved  was  convened  to
address  the  service  delivery  backlogs;   and   to   further   strengthen
communication between different role players. With respect to  provision  of
water and sanitation, the EMLM reported that  the  water  services  function
was transferred to itself in August 2009 with limited  resources.  The  EMLM
added that it is suppose to provide water and sanitation services to 32  314
households but only 29 352 (81 percent) households  have  access  to  water;
and only 13 108 (41 percent) of these  households  benefit  from  sanitation
services.

The EMLM reported that it has  experienced  some  capacity  constraints  and
these include: old infrastructure in Dordrecht  and  Indwe  Water  treatment
works; shortage of staff like water treatment plant operators  and  plumbers
and; drying up of Dordrecht Anderson dam due to draught. However,  the  EMLM
assured the Committee that a  number  of  interventions  have  been  put  in
place, namely: the Chris Hani  District  Municipality  (CHDM)  appointed  an
official responsible for water services; water trucks were purchased by  the
CHDM; old infrastructure has been refurbished; a tender has been  advertised
for a service provider to drill new  bore  holes;  the  organogram  will  be
populated; and a  three-year  plan  to  address  all  water  and  sanitation
backlogs has been drafted.

With respect to roads, the EMLM reported that the  classification  of  roads
is a challenge because there are no clear lines of responsibilities  between
district and municipal roads. The EMLM added that the majority of  municipal
roads are in a poor condition since 2007 disaster. The  EMLM  claimed  that,
due to budget constraints and shortage of big machinery,  it  is  unable  to
maintain all roads. The EMLM added that  the  only  source  of  funding  for
capital projects is MIG and it is not enough to address road  infrastructure
backlog. Furthermore, the EMLM reported that refuse removal is only done  in
urban areas due to shortage of staff,  vehicles,  and  as  a  result,  rural
communities are using illegal ways of disposing refuse.

Finding
    • The EMLM provides refuse collection in urban areas only and this force
      rural community to use illegal ways  of  disposing.  This  may  expose
      people to health risk factors.


The Committee recommends that:
    • The EMLM should refrain from  providing  services  to  selected  areas
      under its jurisdiction. Services should  be  provided  to  all  people
      regardless of where they reside including those living in rural areas.

3.10  The Nxuba Local Municipality
The Nxuba Local Municipality (NXLM) reported to the Committee  that  it  has
appointed technical staff to increase its capacity and  moreover,  the  DBSA
has deployed a technical expertise  to  increase  the  capacity  within  the
NXLM. Furthermore, the NXLM  reported  that  5  finance  interns  have  been
appointed  to  capacitate  the  BTO.  With  respect   to   intergovernmental
relations, the NXLM reported that it has  good  relations  with  all  sector
departments and parastatals. However, the NXLM reported  that  participation
by sector departments in the IDP is not as  expected  but  inputs  of  those
that participate are captured. With respect to  the  alignment  of  the  IDP
with the PGDP, the NXLM informed the Committee that the IDP is aligned  with
the PGDP.

With  respect  to  service  delivery  and  capacity  constraints,  the  NXLM
reported that 90 percent of Nxuba households  have  access  to  electricity.
With respect to the provision of water, the NXLM said that  its  bulk  water
provision is problematic with consequential differing level  of  service  in
different communities. The NXLM added that existing dams are inadequate  and
there is proposal for the construction of the new  dam,  the  Department  of
Water Affairs committed itself to construct  a  dam.   With  regard  to  the
provision of sanitation, the NXLM reported that bucket eradication  projects
were implemented until 2008 but could not be completed when it was  realised
that the capacity of the sewerage  treatment  works  will  not  be  able  to
handle the increased work load. The NXLM added that, due  to  this  capacity
constraint 20 percent of  residents  are  still  using  the  bucket  system.
However, environmental assessment studies are being conducted.

Furthermore, the NXLM reported that it collects refuse from all  households,
hospitals, schools and businesses except the  farm  areas.  The  NXLM  added
that its old refuse vehicles are characterized by  constant  breakdowns  and
are un-roadworthy.  With respect to backlogs, the NXLM said that  it  has  a
total backlog of approximately 150 kilometers  of  road  network;  and  3000
housing backlog.

The Committee was told that, in compliance with  the  MFMA,  all  three  bid
committees are functional but there are capacity  constraints  with  respect
to the evaluation committee; the BTO is functional;  AFS  was  submitted  to
the Auditor-General on time; section 71 reports of the MFMA  were  submitted
on  time;  Internal  Audit  unit  are  shared  with  the  Amathole  District
Municipality but the arrangement is dysfunctional; the audit  committee  has
been established and is  operational  with  four  members,  however  is  not
efficient due to the non existence of the Internal Audit;  the  NXLM  is  in
the process of converting  the  AFS  from  Institute  of  Municipal  Finance
Officers (IMFO) to GRAP in order to comply with the requirements of  Section
122 (3) of the MFMA;

With respect to capital grant dependency, the NXLM reported that 18  percent
of the total budget is for capital and is solely funded  through  MIG.   The
NXLM further reported that 52 percent of  operating  expenditure  is  funded
from grants and only 48 percent from own revenue and  this  is  due  to  low
revenue collection.  With regard to revenue collection  rates  and  debtors,
the NXLM reported that 70 percent of the  rates  funds  has  been  collected
which is not that much as most property owners in  the  valuation  roll  are
farmers of which have rebates.  The  NXLM  further  reported  that  salaries
amount to 48 percent of the operating budget. This percentage is high.

Finding
    • The Committee find that most farmers do not pay property rates.

The Committee recommends that:
    • The NXLM should ensure that it collects  revenue  for  property  rates
      from all
      those that are suppose to. Legal action  should  be  undertaken  where
      there is resistance.

3.11  The Chris Hani District Municipality
The Chris Hani District Municipality (CHDM) reported that it received  grant
funds for  six  grants:  MIG,  Regional  Bulk  Infrastructure  Grant,  Water
Services Operating Subsidy Grant, Rural  Transport  Services  Infrastructure
Grant, MSIG, and FMG. With respect to intergovernmental relation,  the  CHDM
reported that participation in IDP is improving  but  commitments  made  are
seldomly implemented at the required time. The CHDM  further  reported  that
the IDP is always aligned with the PGDP.

With respect to the MFMA compliance, the CHDM  reported  that  supply  chain
management policy is in place; the  BTO  exists  and  it  consists  of  five
sections (Revenue / Income, Expenditure,  Financial  Reporting  and  Budget,
System administration, and Supply Chain Management). The CHDM reported  that
AFS was submitted to AG on time, however the section 71  of  the  MFMA  were
not submitted on time. The CHDM reported that an Internal  Audit  and  Audit
Committee are established and  functional  and  that  the  former  has  four
people. The CHDM  added  that  the  Audit  Committee  is  shared  with  nine
municipalities. The CHDM reported that it has been a challenge  to  complete
annual reports on time due to audit reports not  being  completed  on  time.
With regard to the Internal  Audit  unit,  the  CHDM  reported  that  it  is
established and functional. However, the CHDM added that  certain  tasks  of
internal audit unit  are  outsourced  it  shares  its  resource  with  local
municipalities.

On service delivery, the CHDM reported that  there  are  water  backlogs  in
different areas that are mostly rural. The CHDM  further  reported  that  an
estimates amount of R4.2 billion is needed to  in  order  to  address  water
backlog. With regard to sanitation, the CHDM added that an estimate of  R680
million  is  needed  in  order  to  address  sanitation  backlog.  The  CHDM
commented that, with the only source of funding  being  MIG  and  RBIG,  the
2014 target cannot be achieved.  The CHDM further  reported  that  there  is
water crisis in Lukhanji Local Municipality,  the  latest  report  indicated
that there is water until October 2010 if there is no inflow.

With respect  to  growth  in  Budget  and  contributing  factors,  the  CHDM
reported that its capital  programs  are  100  percent  dependent  on  grant
funding and operation programs are 90.3 percent  dependent  on  grant.  With
respect to revenue collection, the CHDM reported that revenue collection  on
water and sanitation is happening at local municipalities. Furthermore,  the
CHDM reported that 42 percent of operating budget was spent on salaries  and
water services expenditure totalled R30.9 million.

Findings
    • The CHDM has invested R150 million which  should  have  been  used  to
      address backlogs.
    • The CHDM is not GRAP compliant and as a result it has  been  receiving
      disclaimers for three consecutive years.

The Committee recommends that:
    • The CHDM should redirect all invested funds towards addressing service
      delivery backlogs.
    • The Municipality, as a matter of urgency, should  ensure  that  it  is
      GRAP compliant. This is crucial for a  district  municipality  because
      local municipalities stand to benefit through their best practices.


3.12  The Ngqushwa Local Municipality
The  Ngqushwa  Local  Municipality  (NGLM)  reported  that  its  budget  has
increased by 25 percent from the  2008/07  financial  year  to  the  2009/10
financial year,  because  the  increase  in  the  equitable  share  and  the
increase in collection of property rates. The NGLM  reported  that  the  AFS
and section 71 reports are submitted on time to the National  Treasury.  The
NGLM further reported that it is 65 percent  capital  grant  dependent;  3.4
percent operational grants dependent; the employee-related costs  amount  to
47 percent of the operational budget and, repairs and maintenance costs  was
0.05 percent of the operational budget. The NGLM further reported  that  all
bid committees exist.

The NGLM reported that  intergovernmental  relations  meetings  takes  place
regularly and there is participation by ESKOM. However, the NGLM  complained
that there is huge challenge of non-participation by sector  departments  in
the IDP processes. The Committee was assured that the IDP  is  aligned  with
the Provincial Growth and Development Strategy but to a limited  extent  due
to the fact that the NGLM does not provide water and sanitation.

With respect to service delivery, the NGLM reported that it is not  a  water
service  authority  and  therefore  they  are  not  involved  in  water  and
sanitation matters. This function is  the  responsibility  of  the  Amathole
District Municipality. With respect to electrification,  the  NGLM  reported
that it is in the process of registering indigent people  on  the  database.
The NGLM explained that electrifying the area  within  its  jurisdiction  is
its function.

The  NGLM  reported  that   limited   funds   received   through   Municipal
Infrastructure   Grant   are   proportionally   allocated   on   the   roads
rehabilitation programme  (gravel  roads)  and  the  building  of  community
halls. The NGLM further reported that, due to poor maintenance and the  poor
condition of the roads that fall under the Department of  Roads  and  Public
Works, NGLM is forced to work  on  district  Roads.  This,  the  NGLM  said,
resulting in the focus being shifted away from their real responsibility  of
access roads and minor roads.

Finding
    • Evaluation of assets is the most contributing factor for the  NGLM  to
      not comply with GRAP. Inability to evaluate assets is the major  cause
      for the NGLM to be not GRAP compliant.

The Committee recommends that:
    • The NGLM should put more effort on asset evaluation;  this  after  all
      will ensure that it is GRAP compliant.
    • The Provincial Department of Roads and Public  Works  in  the  Eastern
      Cape should tar, repair and maintain  roads  in  and  surrounding  the
      Ngqushwa Local Municipality and  should  report  to  the  House  every
      quarter on the progress made in  the  2010/11  and  2011/12  financial
      years.


4.    Comments by Stakeholders
4.1   National and Provincial Treasury
The National  Treasury  told  the  Committee  that  municipalities  are  not
showing any signs of improving and as a result,  these  municipalities  keep
on receiving adverse and/or disclaimer audit  opinions.  The  Committee  was
further told that basic accounting skills  are  being  offered  to  CFO  but
there is no change in  the  Auditor  General’s  (AG)  report.  The  National
Treasury questioned the credibility of the figures that  were  presented  by
municipalities. The reason given for this was  that  presented  figures  did
not  match  the  figures  that  were  submitted  by  municipalities  to  the
Provincial and National Treasuries.

On the other hand, the Provincial Treasury commented that  the  majority  of
the presentations reflect a lot of information that is not captured  in  the
reports submitted to it by municipalities. Provincial  Treasury  added  that
training has been and is being provided to all municipalities.  Furthermore,
the Provincial Treasury informed the Committee that  municipalities  do  not
provide/keep documentation for perusal during the audit report process.

The  Provincial  and  National  Treasuries  assured   the   Committee   that
municipalities will be provided with programmes that seek  to  empower  them
to comply with GRAP. The  National  Treasury  informed  the  Committee  that
Provincial Treasury and AG are available  to  provide  financial  skills  to
municipalities but in most cases, municipalities  are  not  requesting  help
and help can not be forced to them.

4.2   Eskom
Eskom reported that they participate  in  the  IDPs  of  all  municipalities
because Eskom must provide municipal electrification  needs.  Eskom  further
reported that it is finding difficult to  address  electrification  backlogs
in the former Transkei area because there is no infrastructure.  Eskom  said
that infrastructure must be built first. With respect to other parts of  the
Province, Eskom said that they  are  assisting.  Eskom  further  raised  its
concerns  regarding  service  providers  who  do  not  submit  all  relevant
documentation as a result they are not paid on time.

4.3   Department of Water Affairs
The Provincial Department of Water Affairs reported that it is  continuously
inspecting rivers to  avoid  water  contamination  that  may  be  caused  by
spillages due to old infrastructure. The Department explained  that  samples
of water are taken to laboratories for testing.  The  Department  said  that
this is done through the Blue Drop  Assessments.  The  Department  of  Water
Affairs further reported that  regular  bilateral  meetings  are  held  with
municipalities.

4.4    National  Department  of  Cooperative   Governance   and   Provincial
Department of Local Government and Traditional Affairs
The National Department of Cooperative Governance (DCoG) proposed  a  hands-
on-approach to address the challenges that municipalities  are  faced  with.
The National Department reported that there is lack of fraud prevention  and
internal controls in municipalities.

The Provincial  Department  of  Local  Government  and  Traditional  Affairs
reported that  it  has  subsidized  municipality  for  audit  fees  and  for
compensation of employees’ fees, but the audit opinions are  not  improving.
As a result of this, the Provincial LoGTA said, a  financial  recovery  plan
is being developed by it. The Department of LoGTA added that there  is  over
reliance on consultants who add no value based in terms of the  AG  reports.
The Department of LoGTA further reported that  forensic  investigations  are
considered in all municipalities and these municipalities  will  be  visited
to discuss forensic fees. With respect to audit fees,  Department  of  LoGTA
explained that fees were paid on  behalf  of  the  municipalities  that  had
challenges.
4.5   The Development Bank of Southern Africa
The Development Bank of South  Africa  (DBSA)  reported  that,  through  the
Siyenza Manje programme, it has assisted municipalities by  seconding  staff
(qualified officials) to municipalities. The  DBSA  reported  that  seconded
staff are assisting municipalities to convert to GRAP. The DBSA assured  the
Committee and the municipalities that they  intend  to  provide  support  to
municipalities until  such  time  there  is  improvement  in  all  areas  of
corporate governance in municipalities.

4.6   Fiscal and Financial Commission
The Financial and Fiscal Commission (FFC) commented  that  it  is  reviewing
the  Local   Government   Equitable   Share   formula.   The   FFC   advised
municipalities to forward submissions to the South African Local  Government
Association. The FFC  commented  that  the  number  of  bailouts  should  be
controlled because bailing out should be followed by  the  plan  to  address
the challenges. With respect  to  municipalities  who  are  investing  their
equitable share funds, the FFC  commented  that  the  interest  portion  was
expected to be returned to government coffers  but  municipalities  are  now
allowed to use it on operational issues.

5.    Further Findings
The Select Committee on Appropriations, after careful consideration  of  the
service  delivery  and   financial   performance   of   the   above-selected
municipalities in the Eastern Cape, observed the following:
    • Municipalities are owed  monies  for  \property  rates  by  government
      departments. The biggest monies are owed by Provincial  Department  of
      Public Works;


    • The municipalities are neglecting their mandate and are performing the
      Provincial
      mandate without service level agreements in place;
    • The Audit Committee  of  all  municipalities  had  not  addressed  the
      Councils;
    • The majority of municipalities are not General  Recognized  Accounting
      Practices
      (GRAP) compliant and record keeping is very poor. Non-compliance  with
      GRAP is the main cause  of  the  negative  audit  opinions  that  were
      received by municipalities. The  evaluation  of  assets  is  the  most
      contributing factor for municipalities not to comply with GRAP;

    • Even  though  municipalities  have  established  BTOs,  they  are  not
      effective and/or
      adding value due to the capacity constraints;

    • Some municipalities are investing their equitable share.  Whilst  this
      money
      accumulates interest, the poor are  deprived  of  services  that  were
promised by
      the leadership of the country;

    • When it comes to providing sanitation,  the  municipalities  put  more
      focus mainly
      on towns and neglect rural areas. Municipalities provide services such
as refuse
      collection and eradication of bucket systems only in towns;

    • The financial figures  presented  do  not  match  those  submitted  to
      National and
      Provincial Treasuries;

6.    Further recommendations
The Select Committee on Appropriations, after careful consideration  of  the
service  delivery  and   financial   performance   of   the   above-selected
municipalities in the Eastern Cape, recommends that the National Council  of
Provinces considers the following:
6.1   The National and Provincial departments, especially the  National  and
Provincial
      Departments of Public Works, that  owe  municipalities  property  rate
fees should
      ensure that they pay them accordingly; and report to  the  House  that
they have
      paid all outstanding amounts and this report should  be  submitted  to
the House
      within three months after the adoption of this report by the House.


   2.  The  South  African  Local  Government  Association   should   advise
      municipalities
      not to perform provincial functions because this  compromises  service
delivery at
      a local sphere of government;

6.3   The Councils should strengthen their oversight roles;


6.4   The National Treasury  and  the  National  Department  of  Cooperative
Governance
      and Traditional Affairs should develop programmes aimed  at  assisting
      municipalities  (especially  low-capacity  municipalities)  with   the
      conversion from the Institute of Municipal  Finance  Officers  to  the
      Generally Recognized Accounting  Principles  reporting  systems.  This
      process should be fast-tracked so as to  realize  the  2014  Operation
      Clean Audit target;

6.5   The National Treasury and the  Development  Bank  of  Southern  Africa
      through its Siyenza Manje Programme should monitor  the  establishment
      of the  Budget  and  Treasury  Offices,  internal  audits,  and  audit
      committees in all  municipalities  and  further  capacitate  officials
      employed by these municipalities.


6.6   The National Treasury  and  Provincial  Treasury  should  monitor  how
municipalities
      spend the accumulated interests from the municipal investments;


   7. Municipalities should extend provision  of  services  to  every  rural
      areas under their jurisdiction  and  not  only  concentrate  in  urban
      areas;

   8. The South African Local Government Association should,  at  all  time,
      sensitize
      municipalities about the importance  of  observing  legislations  that
      govern Local Government;

6.9   The National and Provincial Department of Cooperative Governance,
Auditor
      General, Provincial and National Treasury should contribute to the
Municipal
      Turnaround Strategy by developing tools that are going to assist
municipalities to
      comply with all provisions of the Municipal Finance Management Act;

   9. The Department of Cooperative Governance and Provincial Department  of
      Local Government and Traditional Affairs together with the  Department
      of Rural Development and Land Reform should assist  municipalities  in
      servicing communities in rural areas  especially  because  almost  all
      municipalities are failing to  service  communities  living  in  rural
      areas. These two Departments should report to the House every  quarter
      on progress made in the 2010/11, 2011/12 and 2012/13 financial years;

  10. The Select Committee  on  Appropriations,  together  with  the  Select
      Committee on Co-operative Governance and Traditional  Affairs,  should
      do a joint follow-up visit to the municipalities in  the  Province  of
      North West to ascertain progress made by  sector  departments  as  per
      commitments they made during this oversight visit and that this follow-
      up visit be made three months after the adoption of this report; and

  11. As per provision of  Section  182  of  the  Constitution,  the  Public
      Protector   should   investigate   misappropriation   of   funds    by
      municipalities that were visited and report to Parliament within three
      months after the adoption of this report by the House.

   Report to be considered.

4. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
   Development on the Defence Amendment Bill, dated 10 November 2010:

   The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Development,  having
   considered the Defence Amendment Bill [B11B-2010]  (National  Assembly  –
   sec 75), referred to it, reports that it has agreed to the  Bill  without
   amendments.

   Report to be considered.

5. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
 Development on the Amendments to the Convention on Prohibitions or
 Restrictions on the use of Certain Conventional Weapons which may be
 deemed to be excessively Injurious or to have Indiscriminate effects
 (CCW), tabled in terms of section 231(2) of the Constitution of the
 Republic of South Africa, 1996, dated 10 November 2010:

 The Select Committee on Security and  Constitutional  Development,  having
 considered the request for approval by Parliament of the Amendments to the
 Convention  on  Prohibitions  or  Restrictions  on  the  use  of   Certain
 Conventional Weapons which may be deemed to be excessively Injurious or to
 have Indiscriminate effects, tabled in terms  of  section  231(2)  of  the
 Constitution, 1996, recommends that the National Council of Provinces,  in
 terms of section 231 (2) of the Constitution, approve the agreement.


Report to be considered.

1. Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
   Development on the Magistrates’ Courts Amendment Bill, dated 10 November
   2010:

   The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Development,  having
   considered the Magistrates’ Courts Amendment Bill  [B23B-2010]  (National
   Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, reports that it  has  agreed  to  the
   Bill without amendments.

   Report to be considered.

7. Report of the  Select  Committee  on  Women  Children  and  Persons  with
 Disabilities on the 2007/2008 and 2008/09 Annual Reports of the Commission
 on Gender Equality, dated 10 November 2010

 The Select Committee on Women  Children  and  Persons  with  Disabilities,
 having considered the subject of the Annual Reports 2007/08 and  2008/  09
 of the Commission on Gender Equality,  referred  to  it  by  the  National
 Council of Provinces on the 22 September 2010, reports as follows:


 The committee finds that due to the long passage of time that  has  lapsed
 between the  review  period  of  the  report  and  its  tabling,  and  new
 developments have occurred between those financial years.


 The information contained in the report is relevant, and could be used  as
 a  reference  document  to  interrogate  the   challenges   and   problems
 encountered by the Commission on Gender Equality.


 This would assist the committee in  their  engagements  with  the  2009/10
 annual report to analyse the extent  to  which  they  have  addressed  the
 ongoing ‘crisis’ within this institution.


 The committee further notes that the Commission  on  Gender  Equality  has
 been late in tabling annual reports and requests that this not be repeated
 in future.


 Report to be considered.

8. Report of the  Select  Committee  on  Women  Children  and  Persons  with
   Disabilities  on  the  2008/09  Annual  Reports  of  the  National  Youth
   Commission, dated 10 November 2010

   The Select Committee on Women Children  and  Persons  with  Disabilities,
   having considered the subject  of  the  Annual  Reports  2008/09  of  the
   National Youth Commission, referred to it  by  the  National  Council  of
   Provinces on 22 September 2010, reports as follows:


   The committee finds that due to the long passage of time that has  lapsed
   between the review period of the report and its tabling, new developments
   have occurred within the youth sector.


   The information contained in the report is relevant, and could be used as
   a  reference  document  to  interrogate  the  challenges   and   problems
   encountered by the National Youth  Commission.   This  would  assist  the
   committee  in  their  engagements  with  the   current   National   Youth
   Development Agency to analyse the extent to which they would  not  repeat
   the problems encountered by their predecessor.


   Furthermore, the committee notes that this entity no  longer  exists  and
   its services have been absorbed into the functions of the National  Youth
   Development Agency.


   Report to be considered.

                         THURSDAY, 11 NOVEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 11 November 2010:


          a) Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B 13B – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 14B – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

National Council of Provinces
The Chairperson

 1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:

        (a)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate, Mr F
             R Rambau, a regional magistrate at Polokwane, in terms of
             section 13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).

        (b)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate, Mr L
             Skrenya, a magistrate at Cala, in terms of section 13(3)(b) of
             the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

        (c)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate, Mr M
             K Chauke, an additional magistrate at Pretoria, in terms of
             section 13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).

        (d)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate, Mr W
             J M Prinsloo, a magistrate at Ermelo, in terms of section
             13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).

        (e)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate, Mr I
             W O M Morake, a magistrate at Lichtenburg, in terms of section
             13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).
        (f)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate, Ms A
             Maharaj, an additional magistrate at George, in terms of
             section 13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of
             1993).

        (g)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate, Mr N
             M Jassiem, an additional magistrate at Mitchells Plain, in
             terms of section 13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No
             90 of 1993).


    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report:

        (a)      Amendments to Money-Laundering and Terrorist-Financing
             Control Regulations, 2002, in terms of section 77 of the
             Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).


        (b)      Amendments to Schedule 1 (List of Accountable
             Institutions) of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001
             (Act No 38 of 2001).


        (c)      Amendments to Schedule 2 (List of Supervisory Bodies) of
             the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of
             2001).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
   Development on the progress report and the upliftment of the  provisional
   suspension from Office of Magistrate M K Chauke, dated 10 November 2010

Introduction

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the  progress  report  and  the  upliftment  of  the  provisional
suspension from office of  a  magistrate,  Mr  M  K  Chauke,  an  additional
Magistrate at Pretoria, Gauteng, tabled by  the  Minister  for  Justice  and
Constitutional Development, in terms of the Magistrates Act,  1993  (Act  no
90 of 1993), reports as follows:

Background

   1. On 8 November 2007 the Specialised Commercial Crime Court in  Pretoria
      convicted Mr Chauke, his wife and his son of contravening  section  37
      of the General Law Amendment Act, No. 62 of 1955.  On 16 November 2007
      they were all sentenced to 12 months  imprisonment,  suspended  for  a
      period of five years on condition that they are not again convicted of
      contravening section 37 of  Act  62  of  1955  during  the  period  of
      suspension.


   2. Mr Chauke’s appeal against his criminal conviction had been  set  down
      on the roll for 8 March 2010.

   3.  The  Minister,  on  the  advice  of   the   Magistrates   Commission,
      provisionally suspended Mr Chauke  from  office  with  effect  from  5
      February 2010. The suspension was recommended based on  three  charges
      of misconduct namely, the criminal conviction above, contravening  the
      Regulations for Judicial Officers  in  the  Lower  Courts,  1994,  and
      contravening the Code of Conduct for Magistrates.

   4. The suspension was confirmed by both Houses of Parliament on 1  and  4
      June 2010 respectively.

   5. Having heard both parties on appeal, the High Court delivered judgment
      on 15 June 2010. Mr Chauke’s criminal conviction and sentence were set
      aside.

   6. The Magistrates  Commission  commenced  with  the  misconduct  inquiry
      against  Mr  Chauke  in  respect  of  the  remaining  two  charges  of
      misconduct.  The basis of the  allegation  was  that  he,  during  the
      period October 2002 to July 2004, during  and  after  official  office
      hours, retained and forwarded  e-mails  to  other  persons  containing
      explicit pornographic material. This was done on and from  a  computer
      supplied to him  by  the  Department  of  Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development for the exclusive use of the  execution  of  his  official
      duties as a magistrate. It is also  alleged  that  he  used  the  said
      computer to access internet sites containing explicit pornographic  or
      obscene material.

   7. The Ethics Division studied the judgment on appeal in  respect  of  Mr
      Chauke’s criminal conviction and was of the view that  the  Commission
      would not be able to successfully prove misconduct  on  a  balance  of
      probabilities  in  respect  of  the  first  charge.  No  evidence  was
      therefore led in support of this count. The first count of  misconduct
      fell away.


   8. Having considered the evidence at  the  misconduct  inquiry  regarding
      count two, the Presiding Officer, on 5  July  2010,  found  Mr  Chauke
      guilty of misconduct in that he failed to act at all times in a manner
      which upholds and promotes the good name, dignity and  esteem  of  the
      office of magistrate and the administration of justice.  The Presiding
      Officer postponed the imposition of a sanction  for  a  period  of  12
      months on certain conditions in terms of regulation 26(17)(a)  of  the
      Regulations for Judicial Officers in the Lower Courts,  1994.  He  was
      found not guilty on count three.

   9. Since the criminal conviction of theft, which formed the basis  of  Mr
      Chauke’s provisional suspension, has been set aside by the High Court,
      Mr Chauke’s further provisional suspension would not be justified. The
      nature and seriousness of the charge of misconduct  on  which  he  was
      found guilty does not warrant his provisional  suspension  either  and
      the sentence imposed does not impact on his fitness to hold office.

  10. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development  concurs  with
      the  Magistrates  Commissions’  recommendation  and  has   accordingly
      uplifted Mr Chauke’s provisional suspension from office.

Conclusion

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the  progress  report  and  the  upliftment  of  the  provisional
suspension from office of magistrate Mr M K Chauke, tabled by  the  Minister
for Justice and Constitutional Development,  in  terms  of  the  Magistrates
Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), in Parliament on  5  November  2010,  reports
that it concurs with the Minister’s decision.



Report to be considered.

2.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
    Development on the progress report on the provisional  suspension  from
    Office of Magistrate C M Dumani, dated 10 November 2010

Introduction

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the progress report on the provisional suspension from office  of
a magistrate, Mr C M Dumani, a magistrate at Graaff Reinett, tabled  by  the
Minister for  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,  in  terms  of  the
Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

Background

   1.  The  Minister,  on  the  advice  of   the   Magistrates   Commission,
      provisionally suspended Mr Dumani from  office  with  effect  from  05
      February  2010.  The  suspension  was  confirmed  by  both  Houses  of
      Parliament on 1 and 4 June 2010 respectively.


   2. Mr Dumani was charged with four counts of misconduct.  He  denied  all
      the allegations against him.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  misconduct
      inquiry, he was found guilty of three of the four  charges  of  sexual
      harassment against female clerks  at  the  Graaff-Reinet  Magistrate’s
      Office.

   3. The presiding officer  at  the  misconduct  inquiry  on  24  May  2010
      recommended that Mr Dumani be removed from office in terms of  section
      13(4)(a)(i) of the Act.

   4.  The  matter  had  been  placed  on  the  agenda  of  the  Magistrates
      Commission’s next meeting to be held on 26  and  27  August  2010  for
      consideration in terms of regulation 26(22)  of  the  Regulations  for
      Judicial Officers  in  the  Lower  Courts,  1994,  read  with  section
      13(4)(a)(i) of the Magistrates Act, No. 90 of 1993.

Conclusion

   1. The Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,
      having considered the progress report on  the  provisional  suspension
      from office of magistrate, Mr C M Dumani reports that  it  will  await
      the recommendation from the Minister for  Justice  and  Constitutional
      Development before concluding the matter.



Report to be considered.



3.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
   Development on the progress report on  the  provisional  suspension  from
   Office of Magistrate D Jacobs, dated 10 November 2010

Introduction

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the progress report on the provisional suspension from office  of
a magistrate, Mr D Jacobs, a magistrate at Clocolan, Free State,  tabled  by
the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development,  in  terms  of  the
Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of 1993), reports as follows:

Background
      1.    The Minister, on  the  advice  of  the  Magistrates  Commission,
         provisionally suspended Mr Jacobs from office with effect from  30
         March 2010.  The  suspension  was  confirmed  by  both  Houses  of
         Parliament on 1 and 4 June 2010 respectively.


      2. On 25 May 2010 the Magistrates Commission charged Mr  Jacobs  with
         ten counts of  misconduct  and  served  a  notice  containing  the
         allegations against him  on  27  May  2010  in  terms  of  section
         13(3)(e) of the Act.

      3.  The  Magistrates  Commission  was  informed  that,  whilst  being
         provisionally suspended from office, Mr Jacobs on 16 July 2010 was
         arrested and appeared before the  Clocolan  District  Court  on  a
         charge of driving a vehicle under  the  influence  of  liquor.  He
         appeared in court on 19 July  2010.  The  Commission  investigated
         these allegations and intends to add further charges of misconduct
         against Mr Jacobs.


      4. The misconduct inquiry against Mr Jacobs commenced  on  06  August
         2010 and was postponed at his request to 22 and 23 September 2010,
         to enable him to instruct counsel.

Conclusion

      1. The Select Committee on Security and  Constitutional  Development,
         having  considered  the  progress  report   on   the   provisional
         suspension from office of magistrate Mr D Jacobs reports  that  it
         will await the recommendation from the Minister  for  Justice  and
         Constitutional Development before concluding the matter.



Report to be considered

4.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
   Development on the progress report on  the  provisional  suspension  from
   Office of Magistrate L B Maruwa, dated 10 November 2010

Introduction

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the progress report on the provisional suspension from office  of
a magistrate Mr L B Maruwa, an additional Magistrate  at  Daveyton  District
Court, Gauteng, tabled  by  the  Minister  for  Justice  and  Constitutional
Development, in terms of the Magistrates Act, 1993  (Act  no  90  of  1993),
reports as follows:

Background

   1. Mr Maruwa appeared on 24 August 2007 before the Springs Regional Court
      on eleven counts of  fraud.  On  29  September  2009,  Mr  Maruwa  was
      convicted of fraud on all eleven counts.

   2. The conviction of Mr Maruwa flowed from the fact that while  presiding
      over a case involving a traffic offence allegedly committed  fraud  by
      endorsing the court records to wrongly reflect:

              i.  that  the  court  wherein  he   presided,   was   properly
                 constituted in that the prosecutor in  his  capacity  as  a
                 prosecutor was present;
             ii.  that  the  prosecutor  put  charges  to  the  accused  who
                 committed the traffic offence;
            iii. that the prosecutor had no address on the merits;
             iv. that the prosecutor proved no previous convictions; and
              v. that the prosecutor had the opportunity to take part in the
                 subsequent enquiries in terms of section 170(1) of  Act  51
                 of 1977 for the failure of the accused to appear  in  court
                 in the listed traffic  offences  reflected  on  the  charge
                 sheet.


   3. The Springs Regional Court, on 09 November 2009, sentenced  Mr  Maruwa
      to a fine of R5 000.00 or 12 months imprisonment. Mr Maruwa  paid  the
      fine. He appealed against his criminal conviction and sentence. A date
      for the appeal to be heard has not yet been determined.

   4. On 11 December 2009 the Commission charged Mr Maruwa of eleven  counts
      of misconduct and served a  notice,  in  terms  of  section  13(3)(e),
      containing the allegations against him, on 05 March 2010.

   5.  The  Minister,  on  the  advice  of   the   Magistrates   Commission,
      provisionally suspended Mr Maruwa from  office  with  effect  from  03
      February  2010.  The  suspension  was  confirmed  by  both  Houses  of
      Parliament on 1 and 4 June 2010 respectively.

   6. The misconduct inquiry commenced on 04 June  2010  and  was  postponed
      sine die at the request of the defence, pending  the  outcome  of  the
      criminal matter on appeal.

Conclusion

   The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Development,  having
   considered the progress report on the provisional suspension from  office
   of magistrate Mr L B Maruwa reports that it will await the recommendation
   from the Minister  for  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development  before
   concluding the matter.


Report to be considered.
5.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
   Development on the progress report on  the  provisional  suspension  from
   Office of Magistrate M T Masinga, dated 10 November 2010

Introduction

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the progress report on the provisional suspension from office  of
a magistrate, Mr Masinga,  an  additional  Magistrate  at  Emlazi,  KwaZulu-
Natal, tabled by the Minister for Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,
in terms of the Magistrates Act, 1993  (Act  no  90  of  1993),  reports  as
follows:

Background

   1. Mr Masinga, on 19 March 2009,  appeared  in  the  Durban  Magistrates’
      Court on a charge of contravening section 17(a), read with section  7,
      of the Domestic Violence Act, No. 116 of 1998. It is alleged  that  he
      assaulted his wife with a blunt axe, and that he kicked her,  hit  her
      with open hands and threatened to kill  her.  He  also  assaulted  his
      daughters.


   2. The criminal proceedings were initially remanded to 14 April 2009.  Mr
      Masinga  was  granted  bail  of  R1  000.00.  The  criminal  case  was
      thereafter transferred to the Regional Court, Durban, where Mr Masinga
      appeared on additional charges of attempted murder and two  counts  of
      assault.

   3. The criminal case was postponed on various occasions at the request of
      the defence. The matter stands postponed to 3 September  2010  for  an
      application for the recusal of the presiding officer.
   4. On 8 February 2010 the Magistrates Commission charged Mr Masinga  with
      three counts of misconduct. A notice in  terms  of  section  13(3)(e),
      containing the allegations against him, was served on Mr Masinga.  The
      National Education Health and Allied Workers Union  (NEHAWU)  informed
      the Magistrates Commission in a letter received on 2 March  2010  that
      it acts on behalf of Mr Masinga. NEHAWU requested  the  Commission  to
      communicate directly with  them  regarding  the  disciplinary  matter.
      NEHAWU further informed the Commission that they were in  the  process
      of considering the  appointment  of  a  legal  representative  for  Mr
      Masinga.

   5. The misconduct inquiry had been set down to commence on 26 August 2010
      and, barring any postponements, recommendations  would  thereafter  be
      considered.

Conclusion

   1. The Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,
      having considered the progress report on  the  provisional  suspension
      from office of magistrate Mr M T Masinga reports that  it  will  await
      the conclusion of the misconduct inquiry and recommendation  from  the
      Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development before  concluding
      the matter.


Report to be considered.


6.     Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Security  and  Constitutional
   Development on the progress report and the upliftment of the  provisional
   suspension from Office of Magistrate W J M Prinsloo,  dated  10  November
   2010

Introduction
The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the progress report and the upliftment of provisional  suspension
from office of a  magistrate,  Mr  Prinsloo,  an  additional  Magistrate  at
Ermelo,  KwaZulu-Natal,   tabled   by   the   Minister   for   Justice   and
Constitutional Development, in terms of the Magistrates Act,  1993  (Act  no
90 of 1993), reports as follows:

Background

   1.  The  Minister,  on  the  advice  of   the   Magistrates   Commission,
      provisionally suspended Mr Prinsloo from office  with  effect  from  3
      February 2010, which  suspension  was  confirmed  by  both  Houses  of
      Parliament on 1 and 4 June 2010 respectively.


   2. The investigation instituted by  the  Commission  confirmed  that  ten
      complaints by a female  clerk  employed  at  the  Ermelo  Magistrate’s
      Office, Ms S C van Wyk, were filed against Mr Prinsloo. It is  alleged
      that Mr Prinsloo, during the period 18 April 2008 to 5 May 2008 on ten
      different  occasions  conducted   himself   in   an   unbecoming   and
      embarrassing manner by phoning  a  former  clerk  at  the  office  and
      leaving vulgar messages on her voicemail.

   3. The misconduct inquiry against Mr Prinsloo commenced on 29 April  2010
      and was finally concluded on 26 July 2010.  Mr  Prinsloo  admitted  to
      guilt on 10 charges of misconduct against him. The Presiding  Officer,
      having questioned him in terms of regulation 26(9) of the  Regulations
      for Judicial Officers in the Lower Courts,  1994,  found  Mr  Prinsloo
      guilty of misconduct as charged.

   4. Having considered all the evidence placed before  him  in  mitigation,
      the Presiding Officer found that Mr  Prinsloo’s  misconduct,  although
      very serious, did not justify a sanction of removal from  office.  The
      Presiding  Officer  ordered  that  Mr  Prinsloo   be   cautioned   and
      reprimanded by the Chairperson of the Magistrates Commission  and  the
      Cluster Head within a  month  from  the  imposition  of  sanction.  Mr
      Prinsloo was further ordered  to  tender  a  written  apology  to  the
      complainant within seven days thereafter. Arrangements were  made  for
      Mr Prinsloo to appear before the Chairperson and the Cluster  Head  on
      12 August 2010.

   5. The Presiding Officer did not recommend that Mr  Prinsloo  be  removed
      from office as contemplated in section 13 of the Magistrates Act,  No.
      90 of 1993.

   6. The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Development  concurs  with
      the  Magistrates  Commissions’  recommendation  and  has   accordingly
      uplifted Mr Prinsloo’s provisional suspension from office.

Conclusion

The Select Committee on  Security  and  Constitutional  Development,  having
considered the  progress  report  and  the  upliftment  of  the  provisional
suspension from office of magistrate Mr  W  J  M  Prinsloo,  tabled  by  the
Minister for  Justice  and  Constitutional  Development,  in  terms  of  the
Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act no 90 of  1993),  in  Parliament  on  5  November
2010, reports that it concurs with the Minister’s decision.



Report to be considered.


7.    Report of the Select Committee on Security and Constitutional
   Development on the Repeal of the Black Administration Act and Amendment
   of Certain Laws Amendment Bill, dated 10 November 2010:

   The Select Committee on Security and Constitutional  Development,  having
   considered the Repeal of the Black Administration Act  and  Amendment  of
   Certain Laws Amendment Bill [B37B-2010] (National  Assembly  –  sec  75),
   referred  to  it,  reports  that  it  has  agreed  to  the  Bill  without
   amendments.

   Report to be considered.

8.  Report  of  the  Select  Committee  on  Economic  Development   on   the
   Geosciences Amendment Bill [B12-2010]  (National  Assembly-  section  75,
   dated 10 November 2010.

   The Select Committee  on  Economic  Development,  having  considered  and
   examined the Geosciences Amendment Bill [B12– 2010] (National Assembly  –
   section 75),  referred  to  it,  and  classified  by  the  Joint  Tagging
   Mechanism as a section 75, recommends that the  Bill  be  passed  without
   proposed amendments.

   Report to be considered.



