---
title: 'National Assembly - 25 August 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-08-25
---

                          WEDNESDAY, 25 AUGUST 2010

                                    ____





                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

                                    ____

The House met at 15:05.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members  to  observe  a  moment  of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

                                  ECONOMICS
                                  Cluster 4

MINISTERS:

               Main obstacles to economic integration of SADC

    136. Mr B A Radebe (ANC) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:
      What are the main obstacles that he has identified to the economic
      integration of the Southern African Development Community?
                                  NO2658E


The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): Hon
Speaker and hon Bheki Radebe, South Africa has and continues to promote
deepening regional integration in Southern Africa as an essential component
of our wider international economic relations.

Our approach is founded on two arguments. Firstly, South Africa’s
stability, security and economic development cannot be assured if the
region continues to confront underdevelopment, instability, poverty and
also marginalisation.

Secondly, regional economic co-operation and integration offered an
opportunity for regional industries to overcome the limits of small
national markets and will achieve economies of scale and enhance
competitiveness as a platform to participate in the global economy. We do
need to acknowledge advances that have been achieved in the integration
agenda.

In 2008, under the Southern African Development Community,  Trade Protocol,
SADC achieved the status of a Free Trade Area wherein 80% of goods are
traded freely in the region. We are also continuing to work on the rules of
origin, regional standards and trade facilitation that could consolidate
the gains made in opening our regional trade.

However, in our view, the single most serious constraint to a more
equitable and balanced flow of trade in the region remains underdeveloped
production structures across SADC economies. In this context, South Africa
has and will continue to advance a work programme which focuses on regional
industrialisation and economic diversification.

Regional industrial policies that expand and diversify value-added
production are necessary prerequisites to ensure that SADC countries are
able to take advantage of market openings at the regional level. I thank
you.

Mr B A RADEBE: Thank you, Comrade Deputy Minister, for elaborating when
answering the question.

You have indicated that 80% of the goods flow freely within the SADC area,
but as a country, we know that there are lots of subsidised goods which are
dumped in the SADC countries. There are also lots of pirated goods which
are dumped in the SADC countries. At the end of the day this undermines the
growth of our SADC economy.

Is the department, or the countries involved in SADC, doing anything about
this, like, for example, training the border officers so that they are able
to screen for the goods which are dumped in the SADC region?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): Speaker,
I would like to thank the hon member very much for the supplementary
question.

Indeed, we have continued to experience challenges around subsidised goods,
not only on the continent, but all over the world. Hence, we are dealing
with the rules of origin.

But, in relation to pirated and counterfeit products, the Department of
Trade and Industry is going to launch an antipiracy campaign next month and
we are going to work with the Department of Home Affairs to engage the
South African Revenue Service, component of the Department of Finance, to
ensure that there is border control over goods that get to our markets via
our borders. A programme will be launched in September and all Members of
Parliament will be informed about it. I thank you.

Mr S J F MARAIS: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Deputy Minister, you mentioned the
decisions around SADC as a Free Trade Area. How far along is the government
with this, and when will you implement SADC as a Free Trade Area?

Together with that, can you tell us how government sees the role of the
SADC tribunal in cross-border asset disputes within SADC, such as the
current land claim dispute between Zimbabwe and South African agri-
investors? I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pako;o): Hon
Speaker, the hon member has asked me three questions in one.

I will first attend to the issue of the Free Trade Area. I think we all
know that the President was in Namibia recently, where the ministerial task
force reported on the summit on the developments of regional integration.
To us, regional integration cannot be imperative. Before we deal with
issues of industrialisation, before we can even look at issues of the
tribunal, it is very important for South Africa to concentrate on building
strong regional industries. I think issues of the tribunal will be
addressed as and when the report has been tabled.

On the issues of Zimbabwe, I think the President gave an adequate report of
what was discussed at the summit. I thank you.

Ms C M P KOTSI: Thank you, Speaker. Hon Deputy Minister, you have mentioned
how the free trade is going to take place. I want to raise the fact that
there are two bodies, the Southern African Customs Union, and also SADC,
running the economy. In terms of harmonisation and integration, how does
Sacu affect SADC as a whole? How would that affect the work that needs to
be done? We know that there are countries who signed the Electronic
Passport, ePass, with other countries. How does that integration affect
that relationship? I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): Thank
you, Speaker. Hon Kotsi, you have has raised a very important question
about how the ePass is affecting our regional economies. As you are aware,
South Africa has not signed this ePass. As a member of SADC, it is very
important for us to discuss industrial harmonisation. Hence the engagement
continues, in order for us to help the poorer countries to industrialise,
so as to avoid the situation where there is an over dependency on our
markets. There are frequent engagements on the matter.

At the last meeting Lesotho acceded that it is very important for us to
hold back on the issues of the ePass until we, as SADC countries, have
agreed on the matter.

We will engage the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, Comesa,
for instance, in order to have the entire continent, not only the region,
harmonising its trade. I thank you.

Mr A P VAN DER WESTHUIZEN: Thank you, Speaker. Hon Deputy Minister, you
have now dealt with the obstacles to the economic integration of SADC. If
we understand the obstacles so well, why has South Africa’s role in driving
the previously much-acclaimed New Partnership for Africa’s Development,
Nepad – which is another initiative of regional integration – lost so much
steam over the last two years? I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): Hon
Speaker, this is a normative statement; it’s not based on facts. We have
not yet lost steam. South Africa is keen on engagements. Hence, the
Minister of Trade and Industry has been engaging individual countries to
try and solve this matter. I thank you.

    Effect of job losses on department’s position regarding intended wage
                                   subsidy

    111. Mr A Louw (DA) asked the Minister of Labour:


       Whether the impact of job losses, especially amongst the youth, has
       had any effect on his department’s position on the intended wage
       subsidy mentioned by the Minister of Finance in his February 2010
       Budget Speech; if not, (a) why not and (b) what is the position in
       this regard; if so, what are the relevant details?
                             NO2631E

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Speaker, young people have been disproportionately
affected by the global crisis that broke out in 2008. Its effect is so
serious that, unless action is taken, the situation of youth unemployment
can become untenable and put social cohesion at risk. In some circles this
problem is often colloquially referred to as the greatest ticking time
bomb.

According to the latest Quarterly Labour Force Survey, the country’s
unemployment rate increased from 25,2% to 25,3% in the second quarter of
2010. This means that about 4,31 million people are officially out of work.
The situation is even more serious if one takes into account that some
unemployed people have simply given up trying to find work, and are
referred to as discouraged work seekers.

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s inaugural
economic survey of South Africa, which was released on 18 July 2010,
indicates that the country has the worst rate of unemployment amongst youth
between the ages of 15 and 24 when compared to all the countries surveyed.
Racial disparities further compounded the matter, with 53,4% of all young
black Africans between the ages of 15 and 24 being unemployed by the end of
2009. This is three times worse than the unemployment rate of 14,5% for
young white South Africans.

Young people who lack general or vocational education and work experience
are especially vulnerable to the crisis, and many young people who are
employed are overqualified for the jobs they perform.

As part of our intervention to alleviate youth unemployment, we introduced
apprentice learnerships and internship allowances as a means of subsidising
learners while they undergo training under the Basic Conditions of
Employment Act. The employers also received tax allowances under the Income
Tax Act administered by Sars. People who participated in the training of
unemployed people also received a daily allowance. These allowances have
since been transferred to the Department of Higher Education and Training
with the Skills Development Act functions.

To the last question, my answer is no, because the tax system falls under
Treasury, not under the Department of Labour. Thank you.

Mr I M OLLIS: Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister very much for his
words of encouragement for the youth.

However, the ANC’s youth wage subsidy seems to be a lot of talk and not a
lot of action. We are concerned about that action. When are we going to
take action and make that subsidy available? And how much will that subsidy
be per person?

Almost one million people have lost their jobs, and many of those are young
people. The ANC seems to have given them false hope with this scheme. Only
a few thousand people were retrained under the Training Lay-off Scheme, and
only a few were employed for very short periods of time under the Expanded
Public Works Programme. We believe the ANC has failed the youth of South
Africa in this way. They have been waiting since February when we heard
about it in the Budget Speech. When are we going to have that and how much
will it be per person? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Speaker, I hope, wish and pray that the Minister of
Finance, who presented the Budget in February, when he next does so, on
page 48 of his Budget Review, will write “the ANC”, because I’m trying to
see where the ANC’s name appears. I thought this was a way of incorporating
anybody. I’m sure you understand where the ANC stands about the number of
things, including myself as a member of the SACP.

Let me read to the hon member what the Minister of Finance – not the
Minister of Labour – said this year:

   The tax system can be used to encourage employment. The progressive
   structure of personal income tax and taxable allowances of up to R30 000
   at the start and completion of learnerships, already provides incentives
   that support job creation.

And this is on page 48 of the Budget Review 2010. You asked how much. It is
stated here. [Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Speaker, I would like to thank the hon Minister for the answer.

I think there were some alarming statistics revealed, hon Minister, with
regard to the rate of unemployment, especially amongst the youth.

What I would like to know is if the Minister of Labour believes that the
measures that are being put in place to ameliorate the parlous position
that the youth find themselves in, will achieve positive results in the
near future. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Speaker, I’m happy that the hon member asked me
that question because it is like asking me whether I have hopes of going to
heaven. My answer will be yes, because I must peddle hope all the time, my
brother! There is no way that I can say they will not bring about positive
results. Certainly, there will be positive results! [Applause.]

Mr D A KGANARE: Thank you, Speaker. Hon Minister, the problem of
unemployment is also exacerbated by employers who are very ruthless in the
manner in which they employ and exploit illegal immigrants. If you consider
restaurants, you will find that a lot of illegal immigrants have been
employed by the restaurant owners, who pay them peanuts. As a result, that
also contributes to the problems of this country. In this instance, the
culprits are really the employers.
So, what I would like to know is what your inspectors are doing to try to
get rid of these ruthless employers.

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Speaker, the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa, on page 7, the Bill of Rights, section 9, states that everyone is
equal before the law and has the right to equal protection and benefit of
the law.

If you look on page 10, section 23 at the section that deals with labour
rights – which I drafted with hon Mbhazima when he was still a member of
the ANC – you will find that it states that everyone has a right to fair
labour practices. Every worker has a right to form and join a trade union.

Therefore, I agree with you that employers who treat those who come from
other countries in the manner you have described, are wrong and are
violating the Constitution. All that we can do with such employers is to
throw the rule books at them. We prosecute them and there is nothing else
that we can do. We have to do so because they are promoting xenophobic
tendencies and that must not be allowed. [Applause.]

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Thank you, Speaker. Minister, following your response, we
all understand the problem regarding youth unemployment. The Budget book
has, in fact, stated all the obvious.

The question I want to ask concerns the work that has been done before by
the Department of Public Works. The department tried to capture data in
respect of all youth unemployment with a view to, as a holding arrangement,
putting the unemployed youth into the department to create jobs and skills.

The question is how many of those youth, whose data has been captured by
the Department of Public Works before, have already been processed in terms
of their skills and reskilling processing?

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Speaker, I doubt whether the Minister of Public
Works is sitting here. I will ask him as soon as we finish here as to how
many he has captured, then I will come back and answer the hon member.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: Is it appropriate that the
hon Minister of Labour ducks behind the Constitution, the Minister of
Public Works, heaven and somebody else – the Minister of Finance – in order
to answer his question? Wouldn’t it be more appropriate, sir, if, in actual
fact, he answered the question himself in his own words, rather than
appealing to all these other people to assist him?

The SPEAKER: I don’t know what that point is, hon member, but it is
certainly not a point of order.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Speaker, on a point of order: The hon Minister has
said that he is going to heaven, but does he know that they don’t allow
communists there? [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Speaker, all I know is that communists are allowed
in heaven because they are believers. Only atheists are not allowed in
heaven. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: On that happy note, with all of you going to heaven...

An HON MEMBER: They don’t want to go!

The SPEAKER: We move on. I have on my list that the next department will be
Trade and Industry. Apologies, hon Minister, you will still go to heaven.
Question 139 has been asked by hon Radebe to the Minister of Trade and
Industry, and the question will be responded to by the hon Deputy Minister.

 Positive outcomes for our economy of Global Business Forum DURING THE WORLD
                                     CUP

139.  Mr B A Radebe (ANC) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:
       What were the positive outcomes for our economy of the Global
       Business Forum that was held during the 2010 Fifa World Cup Soccer
       tournament?                                             NO2661E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): Hon
Speaker, since 1995 the Global Business Forum has convened the heads of
global business, chairmen, presidents and chief executive officers of the
world’s largest companies to engage on the dynamic frontiers of
international commerce.

From 26 to 28 June 2010, at a time when the eyes of the globe were on South
Africa for its historic moment in the world of sport, the Global Forum
gathered global leaders in Cape Town to focus on substantive issues and
opportunities in the developing world.

It was the first time the Global Forum – which was started by Fortune – was
hosted in Africa, and it was also the first time it was cohosted by Time
and CNN. For Cape Town, the experience was enhanced by including Time 100
honourees, the world’s most influential people from the highest ranks of
government, science and technology, business, sports, media, entertainment
and nongovernmental organisations. Their participation yielded rich
insights into the broader interdisciplinary context in which today’s global
companies are operating.

This year’s event was opened by the South African President, Jacob Zuma,
who addressed the forum live via satellite from the G20 summit in Toronto.
It attracted very high profile participants such as former United States
President Bill Clinton, Irish President Mary Robinson, social activist
Graça Machel and CBS Evening News anchor Katie Couric, as well as a range
of influential businesspeople, including DuPont chief executive officer,
Ellen J Kullman; Jim Walton, president of CNN Worldwide; Enrique Salem,
president and chief executive officer of Symantec; Royal Dutch Shell chief
executive officer, Peter Voser; Sports Illustrated group editor, Terry
McDonell; and Fortune managing editor, Andy Serwer. Archbishop Desmond Tutu
closed the historic event by offering a benediction and issuing a challenge
to participants to look at driving growth and investment in Africa and the
developing world.

This event was unique in that it was the main event taking place in South
Africa as opposed to being a regional breakaway, and allowed some of the
world’s most influential business decision-makers to visit the country for
the first time and see the opportunities that South Africa and the
continent offer. It also offered unprecedented and intimate networking with
South Africa’s top business luminaries including intimate dinners in the
private homes of South Africa’s most distinguished citizens. The event
received focus coverage by Time and so on, as well as the international
media.

With the Minister of Trade and Industry undertaking more than five
interviews in a two-hour session ... [Time expired.]

Mr B A RADEBE: Hon Speaker and Deputy Minister, I think we have to
acknowledge that the business forum was one the most successful ever held
in the world, and this gave an opportunity to the South African business
leaders and those of the largest companies in the world to network. Is the
department considering the creation of a formal and permanent relationship
between the stakeholders so that things like these annual events can be
diarised so as to expose Africa forever to these people? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): Speaker,
it is actually the role of government to ensure that such investment
business meetings occur annually. Based on the availability of a budget –
and I am looking at the Minister of Finance – I hope that when we speak to
him, he will allow us to host this event annually. I thank you.

The SPEAKER: I have on my list the following speakers: hon M E Mbili,
followed by hon A P van der Wes and the last question goes to hon C M P
Kotsi, in that order. Hon Mbili? He probably raised his hand and
disappeared before the answer was given. We go to the next speaker on my
list, the hon A P van der Wes.

Mr A P VAN DER WESTHUIZEN: Speaker and hon Deputy Minister, the theme of
this conference was “The New Global Opportunity”, and it focused on the
challenge for governments to create opportunities for economic growth and
activity. Yet it seems that some regions in South Africa offer more
opportunities for entrepreneurs than others. Why is it that a region such
as the Western Cape has recovered faster from the recession than all other
provinces? As you know, employment figures for the Western Cape have been
growing while those of all other regions have been shrinking during the
first half of this year. Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): Hon
Speaker, the hon member is ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): ...
asking me a common sense question. The regions in the country are not
equally benefiting from the economy of the country because of development.
If we narrow demand, the Western Cape attracts more tourists than any other
destination in South Africa ...

An HON MEMBER: Why?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): ...
because of the natural resources we possess in the Western Cape ...
[Interjections.] ... which we don’t have in the Free State, for instance.
So, it is a given. It is not because of the DA-led government that you are
doing something unique; it is by coincidence that you happen to lead it.

But, South Africa’s got the potential in all regions to attract more
investments. We are working on that as government, hence the Industrial
Policy Action Plan, Ipap 2, is very clear on our strategic approach. Thank
you very much. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: We thank the hon Deputy Minister. The previous speaker was hon
Van der Westhuizen and not Van der Wes. His name was cut off from my
screen. I extend my apologies.

Ms C M P KOTSI: Thank you, Speaker. Hon Deputy Minister, what long-term
investment from the manufacturing sector is likely to result from this
gathering, and has any approach been made to the government by any of the
investors in this regard? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): Thank
you, Speaker. Hon member, I think our Ipap 2 document elaborates on our
manufacturing strategy, especially our approach in the automobile sector.
Part of what we will do as a priority is to ensure that our textiles and
clothing are maximised, and we will attract more investment by going on
business delegations and requesting foreign direct investment in these
particular sectors. So, this is work in progress. I want to urge the hon
member to give us an opportunity to work on this programme and to evaluate
us at a later stage. I thank you.

     Contribution of transport to successful 2010 Fifa World Cup soccer
                                 tournament

   143. Mr N E Gcwabaza (ANC) asked the Minister of Transport:


       Whether he has made an assessment of the contribution of transport to
       the successful hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup Soccer tournament;
       if not, why not; if so, what lessons has he drawn from his
       assessment?                                 NO2666E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Thank you, hon Speaker. The full
assessment of the role that transport played in the wonderful success of
hosting the 2010 World Cup is a process which we are still completing. As
we speak today, there is a workshop, debriefing session, of the Department
of Transport, relevant agencies and all of the host cities which will
result in a comprehensive assessment. Of course, the assessment has been
ongoing, and was ongoing in the course of the hosting of the event itself.

First and foremost, I think the basic thing to say is that, despite a great
deal of scepticism before the hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup, transport
really came to the party. I think it contributed very actively to the
tremendous success of the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

We are using the World Cup as a catalyst and have refurbished and produced
new stations: King Shaka, Moses Mabhida, Century City here in Cape Town,
Doornfontein and many others.

Our airports are looking fantastic, particularly the big airports. OR Tambo
International Airport had a major refurbishment, Cape Town International
Airport as well and, of course, there is the brand new King Shaka airport.

Gautrain - the very first leg of Gautrain between Sandton and the airport –
is proving to be hugely popular and a great success. We look forward to the
completion of the other legs.

I think what is also very important is to say that the success was possible
because the state, in all three spheres, led the process, but success would
not have been possible without also the co-operation of our partners in the
private sector.

I would like also to take the opportunity to salute the role of the SA Bus
Owners Association, Saboua, which played a great role in assisting us and
worked very closely with government. Also, the minibus sector – we often
blame the minibus sector, sometimes with good reason, but I think they also
came to the party. Hopefully they made a lot of money out of the process,
but they also co-operated very effectively with us.

The BRT, Bus Rapid Transit, system’s Rea Vaya proved its worth in the
course of hosting the event in Johannesburg. The very first beginnings of a
BRT system here in Cape Town, with MyCiTi, has also begun to be rolled out.
There is the Gauteng Freeway Project and many other things.

Transport is not just about vehicles, it is also about mobility and access.
I think one of the wonderful things that happened during the World Cup was
that people discovered their cities and the possibility of using public
space democratically, nonracially, deracialising our public spaces and just
walking in our cities. For instance, the Cape Town Fan Walk was one of the
great successes of 2010, because people moved about their city. We also
need to regard that as part of transport.

Perhaps that is the real achievement. We need to ask not just what
transport contributed to the World Cup, but what the World Cup contributed
to transport. I think the big thing has been a change in attitude. We are
seeing members of the public who are not used to or have never used public
transport beginning to discover the realities, possibilities and the
democratic pleasure of travelling with a variety of South Africans in a
common form of transport.

These are some of the fantastic gains: the contribution that transport made
to hosting 2010, but also some of the things that hosting it has
contributed to transport, going forward in South Africa.

Mr N E GCWABAZA: Thank you, Speaker, thank you, hon Deputy Minister. Can
the Minister confirm that the lessons drawn from the successes of transport
in contributing successfully to the World Cup are also going to contribute
to the implementation of the National Transport Master Plan, Natplan, 2050,
going forward?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Speaker, NatMap is the National Transport
Master Plan. It consists of research with comprehensive data about traffic
flows and so on. It’s not really a programme for the transformation of
transport and public transport. It’s an information base. It has not yet
gone through Cabinet, nor has it in particular gone through the Department
of Transport.

The lessons drawn from the World Cup are certainly the lessons that we will
actively apply, because this great spirit and approval and public support
for public transport will wither unless we use the momentum that we’ve now
built in the course of the World Cup to really begin, for instance, to
implement effective public transport, but also to change, deracialise and
democratise our public spaces, our towns and cities.

It is not just the Department of Transport, but government and all spheres
of government that need to draw lessons and really move forward. Otherwise,
what was good about the 2010 hosting will be forgotten and we will fall
back into our old cynicism and our old separate ways.
Perhaps the key lesson was the importance of the municipal sphere. One of
the big challenges of this World Cup - unlike other World Cups – was that
we had nine host cities. Fifa was very sceptical about our ability to host
in nine separate cities and to move fans across quite a large country.

I think that the key contribution of cities – all of the nine host cities –
to planning, regulating and implementing effective public transport is an
important lesson. So, appropriate devolution is a very important component
of providing and maintaining decent public transport. That is a big lesson
that we have learnt.

The SPEAKER: We thank the hon Deputy Minister. I have a long list here, but
I will only take three more speakers. These are hon B E E Molewa, followed
by hon S B Farrow and the last speaker would be hon Lucas, in that order.

Hon Molewa. We seem to have lost the hon Molewa. We’ll then move on to hon
Farrow.

Mr S B FARROW: Thank you very much, Speaker. Nobody can doubt the
contribution that transport made to the successful hosting of the 2010 Fifa
World Cup. Over R13,6 billion was spent, excluding Gautrain, the airports
and the Gauteng Freeway Projects.

If one lesson can be learnt, Deputy Minister, it has to be the isolated
case of the unannounced and unplanned arrivals of aircraft at King Shaka on
7 July. My understanding of aircraft movements worldwide is that, prior to
departure, a flight plan is lodged with the airport control tower that, in
turn, then duly informs the destination or the airport of destination of
the estimated time of arrival, and slots are given, etc.

How did this happen then; that unscheduled aircraft landed there and were
given preference over scheduled aircraft, resulting in hundreds of fans not
seeing their teams play? Do we know who is responsible for this mess-up,
and will the department be conducting an investigation into it, to ensure
that, if we are going to have future events like we had now, that this will
not repeat itself?

Just as a matter of interest, have there been any claims from the fans in
regard to the loss ... [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Speaker, I would like to thank hon
Farrow. I was hoping that someone would ask this question. It is important
that we don’t just look at the good things, but also take note of some of
the challenges that we had in the course of hosting the World Cup.

Yes, indeed the problems at King Shaka International Airport were caused
not by unscheduled or nonscheduled flights that didn’t have flight plans,
but by a backlog that built up as a result of the semifinal being held
here, the evening before, in Cape Town. A whole host of VIP jets –
basically business-type jets – left Cape Town International Airport late,
and therefore arrived late at the other end, at King Shaka Airport. This
thing caused a problematic knock-on effect.

Basically, as the hon member correctly says, schedules or flight times were
allocated to these aircraft, but the VIPs involved failed to pitch up in
time and flights were delayed by a matter of an hour, two hours and so
forth. I think that the Air Traffic Navigation Services, ATNS, Airports
Company SA, ACSA, and the responsible authorities were faced with a
predicament: They could block those VIPs - some of them from Fifa, for
instance – from flying and attending, but that would have created an
international scandal, in that it would seem that we were not able to
provide transport to them.

We had hoped that we could then still be able to slot in these scheduled
aircraft – SAA, SA Airways, and others – flying from, for instance,
Johannesburg into the airport.

This problem was then compounded by the fact that, apart from leaving late
and therefore causing a backlog, there was also a defiance of instructions
from the airport to move the aircraft from King Shaka to the old Durban
International Airport. There was basically defiance in some cases.

Then there were attempts to shift some of those aircraft off onto another
section to create space in the airport, but the engineers advised us
against doing that because some parts of the very extensive King Shaka
International Airport have reinforced concrete that had not yet settled. It
apparently needs some six months.

So what we were using was fine, and had settled over a six months’, or
whatever it was, period. There were other parts which potentially could
have been used, but which might then have suffered structural damage if we
had moved aircraft onto them.

Also, the final problem was that the SA Air Force had declared no-fly zones
over the stadiums in the course of matches, and in the period preceding and
following matches as well. Because of the backlog, it then became
increasingly difficult to use King Shaka Airport. [Time expired.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Thank you, M Speaker. I must say, we all appreciate what was
done and the service rendered for the 2010 Fifa World Cup. I think it has
been highly appreciated. However, I must say that, after that, the
transport system in Durban Metro has gone right back to where it was prior
to the World Cup. And the question arises, when will the services be
restored to the standard we experienced during the Fifa World Cup, so that
all South Africans can benefit from it?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Well, I don’t expect to go to heaven and
I certainly don’t want to go to heaven if the hon Van der Merwe is going to
be there, but I certainly want ... [Laughter.] ... to struggle to create a
heaven here on earth, and that would include eThekwini. I would agree with
the hon member that the public transport situation in eThekwini, as in many
of our cities, is far from ideal.

It is one thing to provide an event-based transport system that tests your
system and tests your abilities. You learn many lessons from it, as I’ve
been trying to say. But it’s another thing to make sure that ordinary South
Africans from Monday to Friday, every week of the year, every month of the
year, have decent public transport. We can’t say that of any of our cities.
That becomes the big challenge. I think that we are well aware of it, and
we need to make sure that we build on the momentum that we’ve got. So, you
are absolutely right to be critical. Together, we all need to work to make
sure that, from our different corners, we ensure that South Africans have
the kind of accessibility and mobility that they deserve.

Mr D A KGANARE: Thank you, Speaker. Hon Deputy Minister, in terms of the
broad principles of the 2010 Transport Action Plan, you have said that you
will accelerate existing transport plans and maximise existing transport
infrastructure; improve public transport and promote its use; integrate
existing transport services and accelerate implementation of the
government’s economic and sustainable development policies.

Having taken all these into consideration and acknowledging the success of
the transport programme and the few logistical hitches in the air
transport, can the Minister explain to this House how his department is
going to integrate the Fifa transport programme to suit the needs of the
South African general travellers?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Speaker, I would like to thank hon
Kganare for reminding us of all the principles and also thank him for
congratulating us. But I don’t think it’s the department that should be
congratulated; I think all South Africans should be congratulated on the
success of the 2010 Fifa World Cup, and therefore also on contributing, in
one way or another, to supporting public transport systems, for instance.
That’s very important.

How do we take it forward? Well, that’s exactly what we need to do. As I
said earlier, one of the key things about much public transport, not all of
it, but much public transport, is that it’s delivered, or not delivered, as
the case might be, at the local level. Therefore, the integration of the
different modes, the planning of public transport, the financing of public
transport and the regulation of public transport need to be, as much as
possible, located in one place.

That is something we as government are very actively pursuing in terms of,
for instance, the National Land Transport Act, which envisages devolution,
and also the very important Public Transport Infrastructure Systems Grant,
which is a grant for cities. In the first place we were directing it
largely towards the host cities.

So, I think those are the ways in which we hope to begin to transform - and
we are beginning to transform public transport. It’s a long way to go. We
can’t change public transport unless we also change the horrible apartheid
space that we’ve still got in South Africa. We need to begin to change
that, and transport is a lever to do that.

But, unless the Minister of Human Settlement begins to create deracialised
cities; unless we begin to abolish dormitory townships and take work closer
to people and people closer to work, public transport will always limp in
South Africa.

So, it is a comprehensive effort that we require. We had a glimmer of what
is possible during the 2010 Fifa World Cup, but now we need to really
seriously implement all of these things. That requires all of us to work
together to do that.

   Particulars regarding (i) average salary and financial perks of Eskom’s
     executive committee members and (ii) salary increases for executive
                   committee members and ordinary workers

133.  Dr S M van Dyk (DA) asked the Minister of Public Enterprises:

       (1)  What were (a) the average salary and (b) any other financial
            perks of members of Eskom’s executive committee in the 2009-10
            financial year;


       (2)  whether she has approved the approximately 83% salary increase
            which Eskom’s executive committee has negotiated for itself
            this year; if not, why not; if so, (a) what is the financial
            impact of this, (b) on what is the approval of the salary
            increase based and (c) what are the further relevant details;


       (3)  whether Eskom offered its ordinary workers an 8,5% salary
            increase over the same period; if not, what is the position in
            this regard; if so,


       (4)  whether she approved this; if not, why not; if so, what are the
            relevant details?                            NO2654E

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Mr Speaker, a debate on executive
remuneration is raging internationally and locally, and it is a very
welcome debate.

It is well known that the Department of Public Enterprises has set up a
remuneration panel to review the salaries of senior executives and the
boards at the state-owned enterprises under our domain.

I am very happy to engage in this debate. But what I find disturbing in
engaging in this debate, is when people do sloppy arithmetic, just look at
figures and then throw things out into the public domain. I am referring to
the allegation that was put out into the public domain that an 83% salary
increase was enjoyed by senior executives last year. It was rectified by
Eskom. Even the media published those corrections, but it still comes up in
this House in the form of a question. I asked the questioner to please
provide me with the basis of the calculation, and all the questioner could
provide me with was a newspaper article which predates even the correction
made by Eskom.

Let me assure this House that there is no consideration of an 83% increase
for senior executives of Eskom for this year. That was the question that Dr
Van Dyk asked me. Let me further assure the House that there was not an 83%
increase for senior executives at Eskom.

Let me explain where the confusion arose. In the previous financial year,
no Eskom manager received a performance bonus. No bonus was paid out; it
was withheld. There were certain targets put for senior management to
achieve. Senior management achieved that target in December, and their
retrospective bonus was then paid out to them in relation to that target.
Therefore, when the figures were reported in the annual financial
statements, two performance bonuses were recorded for that one year: One
was the retrospective one and the other was for this year. What happened
was that commentators just seized those figures and used them to make their
calculation of an 83% increase. In actual fact, when you correct this and
allocate the bonuses to their proper years, etc, you will then be faced
with an 18,35% increase.

All senior executives, as is common elsewhere in all big corporations,
receive their remuneration on the basis of their salary, which includes
pension, medical aid, etc, and on the basis of a performance bonus. So, you
have to ask questions about how much the performance bonus has increased
from the previous year as well as how much the salary has increased from
the previous year. What tends to happen ... [Time expired.]

Dr S M VAN DYK: Thank you, Speaker. Minister, we got the information from
the media and the trade unions. So, what you are saying here in Parliament
is that the media and the trade unions are lying to the public. Be that as
it may, Minister, what are the financial perks, in terms of money, of the
executive members of Eskom?

Given the fact that Eskom cannot satisfy the energy needs of South Africans
and the fact that the taxpayer had to absorb a 25% increase in tariffs - as
I got the information - how can a R7 million remuneration package to the
executive members be justified? How can a huge increase of more than 60% to
ordinary workers over the past four years – which is almost 40% higher than
the consumer price index – be justified?

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Speaker, I really take exception to the
notion that I am saying the media is lying. I am saying that sloppy
arithmetic was done. Eskom then provided a rectification, which, Mr Van
Dyk, the media carried. The media carried that rectification. If you did
not pick it up or your researcher did not pick it up, don’t blame the
media.

Secondly, you want to know the average salary and the packages. The average
salary of members of Eskom’s executive in 2009-10 was R2 184 000, and
includes that of executive committee members who were not employed for the
full year. If the latter are excluded, then the average salary equals
R2 821 000. An average of R1 001 000 was paid in performance bonuses to
those executive committee members who served a full term, resulting in a
total average remuneration package of R3 822 000. A total amount of
R297 000 was paid in financial perks. Those financial perks refer to a
vehicle-operating fleet card, security at R19 000 per annum, an annual
membership of two professional institutes and a driver from the fleet pool.
That is the full extent of the package to the executives.

Let me add that every Eskom employee gets a 13th salary cheque and a
performance bonus. There is no Eskom employee who does not get a
performance bonus. So, the notion that senior managers are the only people
getting performance bonuses is completely misguided. As I have said before,
the actual increase that was granted to the top senior executive committee
members was 18,35%.

The unions negotiated, for this coming year, an increase of 9% together
with the R1 500 housing allowance, bearing in mind that the R9 000 does not
include the salary cheque or the performance bonus 13th cheque to which
workers will be entitled. Now, I do ... [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Thank you, Speaker. Minister, for a number of years,
Eskom has consistently performed poorly and lacks the foresight required to
meet its obligations as an electricity supplier. They showed their best
performance when they cried “unaffordable” when unions demanded a 9% salary
increase. Yet the same Eskom executive committee that cried “unaffordable”
to the unions gave themselves exorbitant salary increases during the past
financial year.
I heard what you said about the percentages, that is why I don’t mention
percentages.

While we welcome the Minister’s announcement that the salaries of Eskom
executives will be reviewed, what I want to know is whether the hon
Minister will put a curb on the salary increases, perks, and performance
bonuses that these executives give themselves and will also ensure that
ordinary workers are paid well by Eskom.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Mr Speaker, can I request that the hon
Meshoe provides me with what he considers to be exorbitant. This is because
it is no good hiding behind adjectives without giving exact figures. I say
this quite sincerely. There is a serious debate about what is an
appropriate executive remuneration policy for senior executives in this
country, both in the public and the private sector. We need to have that
debate, but that debate is not helped by throwing slogans around in which
you cannot justify the basis on which that was done.

When we talk about the performance of Eskom, let us bear in mind that it is
this very same government that has apologised that it placed Eskom under
undue stress by not allowing it to invest when it needed to invest in
power. This resulted in the power shortages that we have experienced over
the past time.

Let me also just say that, in this last year, Eskom received the following
awards: the Golden Key Award for Public Body of the Year, awarded by the
Human Rights Commission and the Open Democracy Advice Centre; the
international DuPont Annual Safety Award; the Komosa Award, as an award for
creating the greatest job opportunities; the Fossil Fuel Foundation Award;
the Best Deal of 2009 Award by the Global Trade Review magazine; and the
Most Ideal Employer in Engineering Award, which was a culmination of a
student survey conducted at 23 South African universities, and more than
26 000 students took part and voted Eskom as the most ideal employer in the
engineering field.

Let us stop harping on Eskom being this complete failure. Let us
acknowledge where failure took place and where government caused the
failure that actually chained Eskom’s hands. Let us look at what has
happened since 2008. What kind of rolling blackouts have there been? There
have not been any. They have been managed under extremely difficult
circumstances. In the two years ahead there will still be shortages in the
provision of power. So, let us start engaging in this debate in a sensible
way without just throwing out pejorative statements about their
performance. [Applause.]

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Minister, the issue I have is
a question about the principle of the rollover of the performance bonus. I
find it a bit strange that, if officials don’t perform in year one, the
bonus is carried over to year two.
The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Speaker, let me explain that. What is
not clearly understood is that executive remuneration gets determined in
October and not at the beginning of the financial year. So, when you have
your annual financial statements, they often reflect executive remuneration
that spans two years – the previous year and the year thereafter. That is
why the annual financial statement reflected it in that way, and that is
where you had the addition of a previous dispensation added into the other
year because it fell within that remuneration period.

The question was not that the executive did not perform, but that they
wanted them to perform better. In fact, what they did achieve – which was a
phenomenal achievement – was a R22 billion saving in operational costs.
That actually provided them with the base to be able to provide the
continuing energy provision for us in this last period of time. So, it was
a significant achievement in that way.

But I do agree with you. I don’t think it’s an absolute ideal state to be
separating these remunerations, but they just felt that they wanted to do
proper performance management and to actually hold those people to account
on the R22 billion.

Mr P VAN DALEN: Mr Speaker, is the Minister prepared to intervene to ensure
that the top structure of Eskom does not pay themselves these excessive
salaries? I will qualify excessive. I think excessive is three and four
times more than what the President earns. I think that is excessive, taking
into account that when government tries to rationalise these excessive
payments, they say you can’t take all the fringe benefits into account. But
when it comes to the normal person on the street, then all these things are
worked in and get into a percentage that says “we are close to that”. We
are fed up with that. Thank you, Minister.

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Mr Speaker, I am losing my patience.
Can I go and punch him? [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Yes, Minister, after the session. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Thank you. We will organise outside
here and we will see who wins on this one. I am asking for reasonableness.

You talk about excessive. Mr Van Dalen; you earn a salary here. To what
extent does that salary exceed the lowest basic salary in this Parliament?
I am not saying that the issue of executive pay is not something that needs
discussion in our country. It is one of the burning debates, one of the
most serious burning debates in our country. But it is not assisted when
these epithets are just flung out about excessive, exorbitant and whatever,
where I have taken pains to try and explain where this notion of exorbitant
and excessive was actually misguided and is bad arithmetic.

The intervention that I have made is that a remuneration panel is sitting
and they are about to report to me in the next two weeks on their review of
remuneration policies in the state-owned enterprises under the domain of
the Department of Public Enterprises. That is where my intervention will
go. I will look at their recommendations – those recommendations will be
shared with Parliament - and perhaps it will stimulate a debate that will
take us beyond just throwing insults and epithets and just presuming that,
because an executive manager earns a good salary, that then is something
disgraceful, immoral and out of order.

I think we need to have these kinds of debate. But I cannot intervene in
terms of saying to Eskom, “you may not pay these salaries”, because that
would undermine the corporate governance principles under which these
institutions operate. I can give guidelines.

However, bear in mind that we are also mindful of the salaries that are
paid to workers in these institutions. In Transnet and Eskom, which are two
of the biggest employers in this country, a great deal of attention is paid
to these kinds of salaries. You will find that Eskom and Transnet workers
are probably the best paid workers in the field in South Africa at the
moment. Thank you.

  Steps taken by department to market and promote Bloodhound Supersonic Car
                                    event
144.  Mrs X C Makasi (ANC) asked the Minister of Tourism:
       (a) What has his department done to market and promote the Bloodhound
       Supersonic Car event to break the land speed record and (b) how will
       this event benefit the people of the Northern Cape and the country as
       a whole?                         NO2667E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TOURISM: Chairperson, the response of the department
on the Bloodhound Supersonic Car event is as follows. Firstly, this is not
an event to which the national Department of Tourism or South African
Tourism has sent in a bid; it is exclusively a provincial event of the
department of finance, economic development and tourism in the Northern
Cape. We have been informed that the department had entered into an
agreement to host the event, and we welcome such initiatives by provincial
departments. Secondly, the second question does not apply because of the
response. Thank you.

Mrs M A A NJOBE: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Deputy Minister, although you
say it is an exclusively provincial event, I think that the national
department can probably take an interest and, if possible, assist in one
way or another. Therefore, I will ask my question. The Black Rock Desert in
the United States has become a landmark for testing experimental, fast land
vehicles. It was the site of the most recent successful attempt on the
world land-speed record.

My question, therefore, is: Will the Bloodhound Supersonic Car event occur
annually, or, rather, should I say: Would you encourage the province to
hold the event annually? Will your department make any effort to attract
other speed car races to the Northern Cape or would you encourage the
Northern Cape to attract other speed car races to the province? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TOURISM: Hon Chairperson, indeed the national
Department of Tourism is geared to assist every initiative that brings in
tourism to each province of the country. An initiative of this nature is,
of course, going to bring international relations into the country. The
first event that will take place in the Northern Cape will, of course,
bring in a lot of infrastructure into the area. Definitely, it will be in
our interest to encourage that it should be held most frequently. We cannot
guarantee that it will be annual. But, due to the infrastructure that would
have been put in place, it would be encouraged that it continues.

In each of the provinces they have identified niche markets and the
Northern Cape has also identified this as part of their extreme sports.
Therefore, it is one niche market that we wish to assist them to build
because it is also going to benefit the whole country. Thank you.

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Chairperson, I was relieved when I heard the Deputy
Minister saying that we would not, as the Department of Tourism, be funding
this event. It is apparently taking place on a dried-out desert lake in
Mier, which must be the most inaccessible and inhospitable place in the
entire country. But then, in answer to your next follow-up question,
Minister, you said that we would wish to assist these types of events.

Now, I’m not quite sure: Are we, as the Department of Tourism, assisting
this event or not? I would have thought that, since we’ve cut the SA
Tourism’s budget by R160 million over the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework, MTEF, period, this is the last thing we should be doing, having
spent R43 billion remarketing our country, and then cutting back our
advertising budget.

So, can you give us an idea of what the criteria are that the department is
adopting to actually fund these types of events or not? When do we go ahead
and do this? When do we leave it alone and concentrate on our core
business, which is marketing our country oversees?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TOURISM: Chairperson, as I’ve indicated earlier on,
the province has taken an initiative. For initiatives of this nature, when
provinces indicate the need for assistance – especially an immediate need –
it is only then that we consider the need that has been expressed.

As of now, when they were going about making their explorations until the
time they signed the agreement, there was no specific need indicated to the
department. However, from the information that they sent to us, we are
following up to ensure that the proper processes are followed. If there are
any financial implications, it is only then that we will be able to make
consideration. But, generally, the whole country is looking into how we can
co-ordinate the hosting of big events in the country, and that has to be co-
ordinated at a central level.

So, even at this point in time, all is not lost. We are looking at going
into the details of how far they have gone, and at what stage the event
preparations are. It is not necessarily linked to the budget cuts of SA
Tourism. Here we are looking at a province that is hosting an event whose
budget would not necessarily be located at the agency which is responsible
for marketing. Thank you.

         Departmental policy on repair of potholes on regional roads

   104. Mr E J Lucas (IFP) asked the Minister of Transport:


       Whether it is his department’s policy to treat the repair of potholes
       on regional roads as urgent; if not, why not; if so, how does his
       department deal with this issue?       NO2621E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: House Chairperson, I hope that the
Bloodhound Supersonic car doesn’t get onto any of our roads, Deputy
Minister. We have enough cowboys on the roads as it is.

Regarding the hon Lucas’ question, I assume by regional roads he means
provincial and subnational roads. Obviously they are not part of the
national department’s competence. But, of course, like all of South Africa,
we are deeply concerned about the condition of many of our roads,
particularly provincial and local roads. We are deeply concerned about the
potholes in them. For this reason, although it is not our level of
competence, we are working very closely with other spheres of government
and other entities responsible for roads.

For this reason, on 24 and 25 May this year, we had a major Road
Construction and Maintenance Summit, which was convened by the Department
of Transport. Some of the things and resolutions that emerged from this
conference were that, in terms of the maintenance of our national road
network - the road network that is looked after by the SA National Road
Agency Limited, Sanral - the condition of those roads is generally good to
excellent, and there is no maintenance backlog in terms of funding.

But there is a very, very significant maintenance backlog when it comes to
other roads. The national department, Sanral and other entities reckon it
is about a R70 billion backlog. I’ve heard figures from our colleagues in
the DA suggesting it might be even higher. The truth is that I do not think
any of us are really sure. But what we do know is that there is a very
significant backlog.

How do we practically begin to do something about this and not just talk
about it? Firstly, there needs to be much more efficient spending. Lots of
money that is allocated to other spheres of government notionally for road
maintenance and road construction doesn’t end up as tar. It ends up as all
kinds of other things and gets diverted in other directions. So, we need to
be much more efficient about this.

Then there is a tussle between expanding the road system and preserving
what we have. Politicians — all of us — like to cut ribbons on new roads.
Therefore, that is more often sexier than looking after the network we
have. To get the correct balance we sometimes do need to build new roads,
but we also need to look after what we have.

Apart from the national roads system, what is lacking in our country is a
basic asset management of roads. What is happening? When one doesn’t have a
proper asset management system in place, one doesn’t know what to
prioritise. So, one submits to the pressures that one hears. For example,
if there is a strong constituency in the bus or minibus sector, one is
pressurised into doing something and does it.

This is also linked to doing the right things. Sometimes it’s not the most
intelligent thing to repair the most destroyed road. Sometimes it’s better
to begin to address maintenance issues on a road that is beginning to
deteriorate because then one can, I think, get some 17 km compared to 1 km
for the same amount of money that you spend looking after something that
has become a dust road.

Critically, we have to begin to shift more freight loads off roads onto
rail. That is why we are working very closely with the Minister of Public
Enterprises and with our colleagues in Transnet to make sure that we really
begin to shape up much more effectively in terms of Transnet Freight Rail.
A lot of the damage being done to roads, which results in potholes, is
caused by very heavy loads travelling on roads that were not designed for
those levels of loads. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Thanks, Deputy Minister for the good reply. Whilst we
understand that our regional roads fall under the ambit and control of the
provincial government, we deliberately request the Minister to step in,
because not much has been done to repair these potholes.

We are also pleased to know that there is this summit that took place
because that is encouraging. We are really looking for a solution to this
problem. That is why we are putting this question forward.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, we obviously don’t want to
be unconstitutional, and we shouldn’t be. But, at the same time, we must
not shirk our responsibilities as the national department. This means
working co-operatively with our colleagues in all spheres of government and
assisting with, amongst other things which I did not mention, skills
issues.

Many things are often said about public entities. But one of the public
entities performing extremely well – sometimes too well, because I think we
are spending too much money on freeways - is Sanral. I think there would be
a general consensus on that. What we are increasingly asking Sanral to do
is not just to build roads – not that they do this physically themselves,
but they project-manage – but to also assist other spheres of government to
more effectively look after maintenance, transfer skills and assist with
tendering processes. So, we are looking at other mechanisms as well. But
your point is appreciated, and we absolutely agree with what you are
saying.

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Thank you, Chairman. As the Deputy Minister said,
potholes are prevalent throughout South Africa and cause endless damage to
vehicles and even the loss of lives. It has reached a point where civil
society such as insurance companies and farmers, for example, are now
fixing potholes in their respective areas. This is an indictment on
government and its inability to adequately deal with the backlog that the
Minister has mentioned. At the same time there appears to be confusion as
to whether pothole repairs are a national, provincial or even local
government competency.

Will the Minister advise whether he has determined an allocation of funds
from the recently announced dedicated road fund to other tiers of
government for these pothole repairs and whether he will ensure that there
are mechanisms put in place to ensure that funds are used as he has
mentioned? If so, what are these allocations, and has he considered the
creation of labour-intensive work opportunities from this exercise? Thank
you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairman, my thanks to the hon De
Freitas. I am not sure if insurance companies and farmers fit under the
category of civil society. Sometimes I think they are under uncivil
society.

But the point is noted. It is true that nongovernmental entities are
stepping in. There is nothing wrong with that. Nongovernmental entities are
also responsible for considerable damage, very often, and not insurance
companies, but it is in their interest to ensure that ...

I spent time with the Road Freight Association at the beginning of this
week. I spent quite a lot of time talking to them about their
responsibilities, to ensure that we work together to find ways of
maintaining our road infrastructure. It is in their long-term self-
interest.

Indeed, Minister Ndebele has a good track record of looking at Expanded
Public Works Programmes to ensure that there is maintenance of roads. When
he was the MEC of KwaZulu-Natal he had a wonderful programme – which is
still running – of households on stretches of road looking after particular
stretches. It is a wonderful model which we have replicated in a number of
other provinces. Certainly Expanded Public Works Programmes are the way to
go. These should not just be 60 days programmes, but a continuous
maintenance of stretches of roads all year round. This is a very good
approach because a lot of potholes are the result of the failure to do
basic maintenance along the verges of roads, for instance. We need to clear
road verges. We need to empty sewers, gutters and rainwater drains. If we
do not do that, water gets under the surface and causes a lot of the
damage. Those are basic things that do not require high levels of skill,
but they are absolutely important.

On the question of funding road maintenance, we are in discussion with the
National Treasury and the Minister of Finance around the matter. Minister
Ndebele has proposed some kind of ring-fenced road maintenance fund so that
money allocated to that is ring-fenced and does the job. That is a
complicated area; it is not straightforward. But we are certainly looking
energetically at some way of addressing it financially. Thank you.
Mr L S NGONYAMA: Thank you, Chair. Hon Minister, I have an issue with the
question of training and experience that you have referred to with regard
to maintenance teams. Has the department ever considered creating a
permanent team that will acquire that experience over time and be in a
position to do the job properly? Thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chair, as I was trying to say, we do have
such a team. I think there is a wonderful team in terms of road
construction and road maintenance located in Sanral. Sanral was originally
the section that dealt with roads in the old Department of Transport. It
was spun out of the department in the mid-1990s and became a stand-alone
agency. This is one of the positive and progressive examples. There is a
great deal of skill and ability in terms of tendering processes, project
management and looking after what is the unpopular thing, tolling and so
forth - which is also an important thing in terms of raising money. That is
located in Sanral.

As I said earlier in response to an earlier intervention, what we want to
do now is to try to make sure that the skill which is located at a national
level in Sanral, looking after 16 000 km of our national road network, also
begins to become a skill that gets transferred to other spheres of
government. Yes, indeed we do take the issue of skills seriously.

Mr S B FARROW: Thank you very much, Chairperson. On the whole issue of
potholes - this brings to mind the Minister of Public Works sitting next to
you there, Deputy Minister - has any research been done to establish some
sort of permanent team such as the one we recently experienced at the Ugu
District Municipality where they have set up units of entrepreneurs that go
around and fix potholes? I am just wondering whether anything has been done
about that because, firstly, it provides jobs and, secondly, we will be
trying to get the problems sorted.

But more importantly, when you talk about nongovernmental agencies that are
involved, like insurance companies and farmers, what indemnity do these
people have in case one of those pieces of tar flies out and hits somebody
in the face? There has to be something in terms of legality and
responsibility with regard to the type of work being undertaken outside of
the parameters of the Act. Could you answer this?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, to be quite honest, I am
unable to answer the second part of the question. I’m not sure what the
legalities are. It is obviously something we need to look at, especially if
we are asking for other partners to be involved in assisting us.

I have a word of caution regarding preserving the road network we have.
This relates to an earlier point I was making with regard to another
question. We must be careful that, as a democratic government, we are not
caught into preserving apartheid space and apartheid privileges. That is
another thing we need to throw into the mix. There are a lot of roads which
were built just to service a couple of farmers, for instance – lovely
tarred roads. There are other roads which were built to service the army
during the regional war in Southern Africa. We must not assume that we must
simply preserve all of that and not begin to democratise and change space.

Certainly, as the ANC government, we take the issue of potholes and
preserving the road network we have very seriously. But we mustn’t be
caught in a game of simply preserving the past with all its privileges and
skewed geographical realities. That is another challenge we need to place
into the picture when we are looking at the road network and everything to
do with spatiality and the transformation of the apartheid space, which is
still very much with us in South Africa.

       Consideration of sunset clause to terminate affirmative action

109.  Adv A de W Alberts (FF Plus) asked the Minister of Labour:

       Whether he is considering a sunset clause to terminate affirmative
       action (a) in general and (b) in respect of white people who have
       matriculated after 1994; if not, why not, in each case; if so, what
       are the relevant details in each case?
                             NO2628E

The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Sihlalo, ngelishwa lo ngumhluzi wamanqina. [Chair,
unfortunately this is a futile allegation.]

I am not considering a sunset clause to terminate affirmative action, both
generally and in respect of white people who’ve matriculated after 1994.

The main aim of the Employment Equity Act is to address imbalances in the
workplace by eliminating unfair discrimination and introducing affirmative
action measures for the equitable representation of the designated groups
at all occupational levels and categories. In addition, employers are
called upon to diversify their workplaces.

As reflected in the recently published 10th Commission for Employment
Equity Annual Report, there is still a massive underrepresentation of
designated groups in the workplace, particularly in the private sector. In
line with international trends, government still views affirmative action
as a necessary and an appropriate tool in addressing these imbalances and
disparities in the workplace. In the light of these prevailing
inequalities, any debate about a sunset clause to terminate affirmative
action is completely irrelevant and very premature.
Ke thina sixelelwe ukuba masilibambe lingatshoni. [We have been told to
intensify.]

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Dankie, Voorsitter. [Thank you, Chairperson.] Hon
Minister, I first want to say that, with that attitude, I can assure you
that you will not make it into heaven. [Laughter.]

Agb Voorsitter, dit is onbillik om voorheen benadeelde jeugdiges te wil
bevoordeel deur ’n nuwe benadeelde groep te skep. Die blanke matrikulante
van vanjaar was twee jaar oud toe die ANC in 1994 aan bewind gekom het.
Hulle het nie die voordele van apartheid nie. Hulle was nie deel van
apartheid nie. Inteendeel, dit is juis hulle wat sukkel om beurse te kry om
aan universiteite te studeer, want daar is nie geredelik beurse beskikbaar
vir blanke studente nie. As u gaan kyk na die samestelling van die studente
op universiteite, is daar basies nie meer ’n universiteit in Suid-Afrika
waar die meerderheid blank is nie. Swart studente is verreweg in die
meerderheid.

Minister, as u een rassegroep wil bevoordeel ten koste van ’n ander
rassegroep, dan is dit mos nou niks anders as rassisme nie. En ...

’n AGB LID: Dis so in die Grondwet!

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Dan is die Grondwet ’n rassistiese grondwet, as dit is
wat die agb Minister of Adjunkminister hier sê. Dan is dit ’n rassistiese
grondwet!

Nou wil ek vir die agb Minister vra of hy die Grondwet wil wysig om dit reg
te stel. Dink u nie dit is onbillik om daarmee voort te gaan nie?
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, it is unfair to want to favour previously disadvantaged
youths by creating a new group of people being disadvantaged. The white
matriculants of this year were two years old when the ANC came to power in
1994; they did not enjoy the fruits of apartheid. They had no part in
apartheid. On the contrary, they are actually the ones who are struggling
to obtain bursaries to study at universities, because there are not enough
bursaries readily available to white students. If one looks at the
composition of students at universities there is no longer a university in
South Africa where the majority of students are white. Black students are
by far in the majority.

Minister, if you want to favour one racial group to the exclusion of
another racial group, then it is nothing short of racism. And ...

An HON MEMBER: It says so in the Constitution!

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Then the Constitution is a racist Constitution, if that
is what the hon Minister or Deputy Minister is saying. Then it is a racist
Constitution!

Now I want to ask the hon Minister whether he wants to amend the
Constitution to rectify the issue. Don’t you think it is unjust to continue
with this issue?]

UMPHATHISWA WEZABASEBENZI: Andiyicingi nokuyicinga loo ndebelefele
uyidwabayo. [Kwahlekwa.] Bekumele ukuba abantu abamhlophe ngabona
bayingcangcazelelayo nabayivuzela izinkcwe inkqubo yokukhawulelana nabo
babengenamalungelo ngaphambili, kuba kwamanye amazwe ngabantu
abaligcuntswana abaye benzelelelwe ngolu hlobo thina senzelela ngalo uninzi
kweli lizwe. Besimelwe ke ngoko ukuba sisincamise, sisiphuze isandla soxolo
esisinikwa yi-ANC. Oyena mntu ungazi kungena ezulwini nguwe, kuba izulu
livulelwe bonke abantu, hayi abamhlophe, hayi abamnyana, hayi abatyheli.
UYesu uyabamkela bonke kwisango lezulu. [Kwahlekwa.] (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: I do not even think about your ineffectual
argument. [Laughter.] White people are supposed to be acknowledging and
embracing the programme of redressing the imbalances of the past because in
other countries only the minority groups are being catered for, unlike in
our country where we focus more on the majority. We were therefore supposed
to accept the olive branch the ANC is offering us. You are the one who will
not enter God’s Kingdom because God’s Kingdom is open to everybody, black
and white, and not the yellow ones. Jesus welcomes them all into the gates
of God’s Kingdom. [Laughter.]]

Mr I M OLLIS: Minister, if I can get your attention for just a minute. Your
friends in the FF Plus over there seem to only care about white people all
the time. The ANC, on the other hand, seems to be enriching a few black
glitterati. They are the ones who get all the contracts and take all the
cream of the BEE deals and leave young South Africans with nothing.

The DA, however, is concerned about all the unemployed people of South
Africa. [Applause.] When will the ANC drop this race-based redistribution
system and focus on the currently disadvantaged people of all race groups
in South Africa, Minister; the currently disadvantaged people?

UMPHATHISWA WEZEMISEBENZI: Umntu, malungu e-DA, ningabokumqhwabela ezombela
ingcwaba; yingozi loo nto. [Kwahlekwa.] I-ANC, ingekaphathi kwa ukuphatha,
yayinomqulu eyayiwubiza ngokuba nguReady to Govern. Wena ke ngeloo xesha
mhlawumbi wawusathukulul’ emgodini kweny’ indawo endingazi kuyibiza
ngegama. Ukuba unokufunda uReady to Govern, uza kuthi kuwe: (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: DA members, please stop cheering when someone is
heading for a downfall; that is very dangerous. [Laughter.] The ANC, even
before it assumed power, had a document called Ready to Govern. You were
not even born then. If you read Ready to Govern, it states:]

   We do not support giving positions to unqualified people simply on the
   grounds of race or gender.

Into emxinayo ke lo mhlekazi kukumimithekiswa ngamafutha okutyeba nemali
emenza athi nethe. Ixhala lakhe kukuba wafika umnt’ omnyama. Kwaye uza
kufika, mhlekazi, ngoba ilizwe eli lelethu xa sisonke. Musa ukuba nexhala
ke ndod’ akuthi, akukho apho uza kuya khona. Thina siyi-ANC, asinadabi
lokulwa abantu abamhlophe. Kodwa, ingcinezelo nocalu-calulo, inene umama
elele emangcwabeni apha eNY 5, sizakuzilwa. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[What bothers this man is that he is so overwhelmed by wealth and by being
filthy rich. His main concern is the arrival of a black person. Sir, the
black man will indeed arrive, because this country belongs to all of us.
You must not feel threatened, my brother; you are going nowhere. As the
ANC, we do not wage war against white people. But we will fight against
oppression and racism, and that I swear on my mother’s grave, which is in
NY 5. [Applause.]]

Mr E NYEKEMBA: Thank you very much, House Chairperson.

Mphathiswa, mandizibandakanye nawe kwelithi malibanjwe lingatshoni.
[Minister, let me join you in saying, let us intensify our efforts.]

Given the fact that affirmative action is one of the key sections in the
Employment Equity Act, an Act which came about as a result of the
Constitution of the Republic addressing the inequalities, in your response
you have indicated that the Commission on Employment Equity, in its 10th
report, revealed that there are inequalities in the workplace. How does the
Minister intend to address these inequalities? What measures does he intend
to put in place, because the Employment Equity Act has been in existence
for more than 10 years, as I speak now. Thank you.

UMPHATHISWA WEZEMISEBENZI: Kungekudala amalungu eKomiti ejongene neMicimbi
yeSebe lezaBasebenzi azakuhlangana nezilungiso kuMthetho woLungelelwaniso
ngokwaseNgqeshweni. Sifuna ukuqinisa phaya ngasemva kanye ukuze izohlwayo
zithi xhaxhe ukwenzela ukuba lo ungafuniyo ukuphumeza umthetho simbambe qha
qwaba. Uza kube ukhona; uza kube ulapha kweli lizwe. Andiyi ndawo mna apha.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF LABOUR: Very soon members of the Portfolio Committee on
Labour will meet to discuss the amendments to the Employment Equity Act. We
want to regulate there so as to ensure that the punitive measures are more
intense so that those who do not want to implement the Act are arrested.
You will be here, in this country. I am going nowhere.]

     Outcomes of audit into Sentech and measures taken to stabilise same

   142. Mr S E Kholwane (ANC) asked the Minister of Communications:


       What (a) are the outcomes of the audit into Sentech that was
       commissioned earlier this year and (b) measures has he taken to
       stabilise Sentech?                                      NO2665E

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: House Chair, the audit that the hon member
is referring to was commissioned in 2009. In February 2010, I released the
summary of the report together with its findings. Some of the outcomes of
the audit report include the following: Firstly, the task team found that
Sentech was in urgent need of a turnaround strategy and that its current
position was caused by, amongst other things, a new legal and regulatory
framework that had opened up the markets; secondly, a misaligned business
strategy in support of the national service delivery agenda; and thirdly,
the absence of a clear and comprehensive information and communications
technology, ICT, industry framework.

The task team also found that the definition of Sentech’s role lies at the
heart of the problem along with the strategies it pursued and its failure
to break into the telecommunications market.
In an endeavour to find a solution, the task team considered four options.
The first option was to reposition Sentech in terms of its core competence
as the broadcasting signal distributor. Secondly, Sentech was to leverage
its core competence to look for opportunities on the continent where it is
already doing business. The third option was for Sentech to continue with
its diversification strategy of growing the telecommunications business.
The fourth option was for Sentech to transfer its nonbroadcasting
electronic communications network services, ECNS, and nonbroadcasting
energy and combustion services, ECS, business to Infosat.

As a measure to stabilise Sentech, I have appointed a new board and a new
chairperson. Further, I hold monthly bilateral meetings with the board
where its strategic interventions to turn Sentech around are discussed.

Sentech has developed and submitted its corporate plan to the department.
The proposed corporate plan highlights the following: Firstly, the
identification of products or services that are not profitable and a
consideration to either modify or discontinue services or products;
secondly, the identification of product enhancement to increase
profitability; thirdly, the identification of new products through research
and development to fully utilise the group’s licences; and fourthly, the
reduction of nonessential cost expenditure and development of business
cases to support all capital expenditure.

The board has also instituted measures to restrict cash outflow by
implementing emergency controls such as additional supply-chain management
controls. The expenditure and turnaround committees have also been
established. Additional control and supply-chain management include, among
other things, database clean-up, updating the policy regarding supplier
criteria and negotiating directly with suppliers instead of using supplier
agents.

The expenditure committee’s role is to ensure that all commitments and
current expenditure are supported by valid contracts and provide value for
money services or goods. It also ensures that supply-chain management
processes have been followed and expenditure is matched by revenue. Daily
own cash balances are monitored to ensure sufficient cash availability. The
turnaround committee’s role is to assist with initiatives to update all
relevant policies, procedures and processes to alleviate cash flow strain.

Furthermore, the board ... [Time expired.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Minister, I really did extend
the time by one minute to twenty minutes. So, could those who deal with
responses in our offices please check on the timing of the questions’
responses.
Mr S E KHOLWANE: Thank you, Chair. Hon Minister, thanks for your decisive
leadership in appointing the new board for Sentech. However, one is
interested in knowing, given what we have said, how Sentech is going to
succeed, given the fact that no chief executive officer, CEO, has been
appointed to date.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chair, as I have indicated in my response,
I meet Sentech for a bilateral meeting every month, and they have informed
me that they are just about to complete the appointment of a CEO. There is
an acting CEO; it is not a crisis. There is an acting CEO at present
because after the departure of the CEO, the chief operations officer, COO,
was appointed to that post but has since resigned. But I am informed by
Sentech that they are in the process of short-listing, and recommendations
on the appointment of a CEO will soon land on my desk. I thank you.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Chairperson, first of all, just to say that the hon
Minister should actually have purchased a red BMW because we can call him
the firefighter Minister.

As far as the Sentech issue is concerned, can I just say that it is very
perturbing that, eight months into the new year, an audit report that was
finalised last year has still not seen the light of day in its entirety. We
have a Minister who had the findings and who briefed the committee on it,
but we need to have the entire document. So, when will the Minister publish
this audit report? Or is it one of those documents that would not have
passed the censorship test if we had the Protection of Information Bill in
place by now? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chair, perhaps that might be the case. I
have indicated, when that report was given to me, that I do not intend
making it public. You must recall that that was not a forensic report, but
a report by a task team which I had established. I indicated in my maiden
Budget Vote last year that I intend establishing a task team that will
investigate what we all perceived to be issues of governance and
administration within Sentech and the South African Broadcasting
Corporation.

The report that ensued from there confirmed things that we were actually
worried about. But it was not a forensic audit or a forensic report: We
wanted to act as speedily as possible without having any witch-hunt against
anybody or harassing people, while ensuring that it enables us to take
decisions that we wanted to take in order to change leadership at Sentech,
which is what I did. I acted decisively, based on that report. But, because
of the nature of that report, there is no way in which it could have been
made public. Of course, perhaps it is quite true that it was open to legal
challenge. We didn’t want that; we wanted a guide, something, an instrument
that would allow us to take action to resolve the problems at Sentech.
Thank you.

Ms L D MAZIBUKO: Mr Chairman, the leaked findings of the ministerial task
team report, which hon Kilian has alluded to and which deals with the
crisis that is currently plaguing Sentech, indicated that this is a public
enterprise that’s in free fall, which, and I quote, “is in urgent need of a
turnaround strategy”.

It is for this reason, Mr Chairman, that we in the DA look forward to next
week’s report-back session when Sentech will have an opportunity to brief
the portfolio committee on this turnaround plan and on the restructuring of
the executive management. Surely the time has come for this task team
report to be released in full. My question to the Minister is, how can the
parliamentary portfolio committee be expected to conduct oversight,
particularly given the recent resignation of the acting CEO and the
allegations which have been levelled against the former chief financial
officer, CFO? How can Parliament be expected to conduct effective oversight
if it doesn’t have sight of this crucial report?

If the Minister won’t release the report – and I hear he was very
circuitous in his answer about wanting to get to the root of the problems –
can he elaborate more clearly what the problem is? What does the department
have to hide that would prevent Parliament from being an effective overseer
of this entity? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Chair, I am sure that the hon member will
get all the answers that she needs when Sentech gets the opportunity to
present itself in the following week or so. I have no doubt that the hon
member will be satisfied with the ongoing positive work that is being done
by the board in the attempt to turn Sentech around. I am confident that the
board is in good hands and that Sentech is on its way to recovery.

I have indicated that I at present have no intention to release the report,
as it is not a forensic report. It does not give the confidence that it can
withstand the scrutiny of a courtroom. For instance, people who are
mentioned in the report could go to court and challenge it. But it was a
sufficient basis for me upon which to act in order to try to turn Sentech
around. Thank you.

  Steps taken to promote awareness of legislation that seeks to protect the
                             poor and illiterate

  108. Rev K R J Meshoe (ACDP) asked the Minister of Trade and Industry:


       What steps has he taken to promote awareness of legislation such as
       the National Credit Act, Act 34 of 2005, and the Consumer Protection
       Act, Act 68 of 2008, that seeks to protect the rights of the poor and
       illiterate who sign contracts without due regard to its “small
       print”?               NO2627E

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): Chair,
in view of the fact that you said we need to be brief, I will summarise my
response.

The Consumer Protection Act was passed in 2008 and will be enforced in
October 2010. The Office of Consumer Protection, which is in the Department
of Trade and Industry, has implemented different activities, such as
awareness campaigns, media capacity-building, a return and refund campaign,
and business visits to ensure that people understand the National Credit
Act and the Consumer Protection Act.

The National Credit Regulator has promoted awareness through workshops,
brochures and annual assessment of the effectiveness of awareness
programmes. I think the hon member will understand that almost 2 000
workshops have been conducted around the country. I thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you Deputy Minister for
your answer. Many of our people have lost valuable assets such as houses
and cars because they were made to sign contracts they either did not fully
understand or did not know the seriousness of what is commonly known as the
small print in the contract.

This so-called small print has been a source of pain and frustration for
many consumers who overlooked important information that was deliberately
hidden from them in the small print. How will the Minister promote and
provide further consumer education to people with a limited ability to read
and comprehend contracts written in a language other than their mother
tongue, to ensure that they do not become victims of small print in
contracts that they have to sign? I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo):
Chairperson, I tend to agree with hon Meshoe. In the recent past people
have lost valuable assets because of what is termed “small print” or “fine
print”. In all business transactions that occurred in the past, sellers
used to disregard the fact that they needed to explain to people what they
were about to sign. In the past, many people actually signed away their
rights. That is how businesses used to operate.

The National Credit Act actually protects the consumers. It is their legal
right to obtain an explanation – in their mother tongue – about the
implications of the fine print of the decision they are about to take. In
the event that somebody has experienced such misfortune, I suggest that
they be sent to the Department of Trade and Industry, DTI, so that we can
deal with the cases as and when they come before us. I thank you.

Mr A P VAN DER WESTHUIZEN: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Deputy Minister, as
you can see in the question, the Consumer Protection Act was passed more
than two years ago. One of the ways in which the Act seeks to protect
consumers is through the establishment of a consumer commission.

While the commission has not yet been established, posts were recently
advertised and the combined remuneration of the posts of the commissioner
and deputy commissioner exceeds R2,2 million. How can this amount be
justified at a time when government is claiming to be unable to meet the
salary demands of disgruntled public servants? I thank you.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo):
Chairperson, it is a pity that the hon member is being opportunistic by
raising the issue of the strike when referring to the work of a commission.
We all know that the lifespan of a commission is short-lived and that it
warrants certain specific expertise to conduct its work, which is very
hectic in most instances.

If we compare the budget of that commission with the budgets of all other
commissions which were ever established before, and consider its scope of
work, then I think you are being unfair, to say the least, when you claim
that this is a lot of money. I thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: [Interjections.] You are going to burn in heaven.
Chair, my issue, directed at the Minister, is specifically about what is
referred to in section 22 of the Consumer Protection Act. My issue concerns
the use of plain language and is not about the size of the words – in other
words, the small print – it is about the use of plain language.

What is it that the department is doing about this issue to make sure that
the contracts are in a language that is generally understandable? We can
take it even further and consider the very Bills and Acts debated here in
Parliament. It is a very serious issue. Coming up with plain language is
what is really pertinent.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): Hon
Ngonyama, I think you heard that I agreed with hon Meshoe about the fine
print. But, we need to be clear as to what we are talking about. Concerning
plain language, it is the business people who, when doing their business
transactions, do not explain in what we term plain language. The law
dictates that they explain, hence I say that if there is a specific case
where plain language was not used to explain, it needs to come to us so
that we can deal with it according to the Consumer Protection Act.

It is when people are not given an explanation as to what they are about to
sign, that we need to act. The Consumer Protection Act actually protects
consumers’ rights. If there is a case where it was not explained to people
in plain language, then that case needs to come forward so that we can deal
with it. I thank you.

Mr S J F MARAIS: Chairperson and Deputy Minister, both the Consumer
Protection Act and the National Credit Act have possible unforeseen and/or
unintended consequences. I want to use an example. The used vehicle
industry not only contributes to economic development but also offers an
opportunity to lower-income citizens to acquire cars.

Until now, cheaper used cars could have been sold on the voetstoots
principle, but, in terms of the Act, the buyer can now return the vehicle
after six months, even if it was not properly maintained. What measures and
remedies are available to protect the interest of the sellers of goods and
services and the grantors of credit?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): Chair,
it was a new question. Can the hon member repeat it for me slowly please?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member, can you please repeat
it?

Mr S J F MARAIS: Yes, I can. As I have said, both the Consumer Protection
Act and the National Credit Act have possible unforeseen and/or unintended
consequences. I used the example of the second-hand or used car industry,
where a vehicle can be returned after six months even if it was not
properly maintained. What measures and remedies are available to protect
the interest of the sellers of goods and services and the grantors of
credit?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): Chair,
we always strike a balance between the interests of people who are selling
goods and services and that of the consumers. Our department cannot only
protect the interests of the sellers at the expense of the rights of the
consumers. In the event that any part of legislation has unintended
consequences, we need to stipulate which part of the legislation is
subjecting a seller to unintended consequences. That part will then be
subjected to a discussion. I thank you.

  Particulars regarding (i) registration of land returned to claimants and
                    (ii) security of tenure of residents

105.  Mr R N Cebekhulu (IFP) asked the Minister of Rural Development and
       Land Reform:

       (1)  Whether land returned to claimants in the rural areas is
            registered to the amakhosi (chiefs) and/or to specific persons;
            if not, what is the position in this regard; if so, what are
            the relevant details;


       (2)  what security of tenure does persons who reside in these areas
            have?                                             NO2624E

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon House Chair, the
question has two parts. The answer for part one of Question 105 is no. The
land is registered to legal entities such as communal property associations
and/or trusts.

The answer to the second part of the question is that security of tenure of
persons in these areas is made possible under the provisions of the
Informal Land Rights Act and, in the case of KwaZulu-Natal, the Ingonyama
Trust. Thank you, Chairperson.

Mr R N CEBEKHULU: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, I just want to
follow up on the issue of areas where, when farms were bought and people
had the right to go back, you would find that the people simply went into
those areas. Who actually has the right to be there? Mostly, in the state
land, people simply just flocked there and occupied the space. Thank you.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon Minister, I hope you got the
question? [Interjections.] Oh, is it just a comment?

Mr R N CEBEKHULU: Yes, it is just a comment.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you, hon member.
Mrs A STEYN: Thank you, Chairperson. Hon Minister, you have alluded to the
Ingonyama Trust, but there are also other CPAs and trusts that we know – I
think there are more than 3 000 – were registered. My question is, in light
of this predominance of the collective approach to land reform in South
Africa, what mechanisms have been put in place by the department to ensure
that individual members in these trusts receive security of land rights? I
ask this because there is so much infighting that no one has any security.
Thank you, Chairperson.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon House Chair, the
conflicts are caused by many reasons. It’s not so much the security in the
sense of the system; it may be social insecurity in the sense of conflicts
which are caused by various factors. For example, people often come
together from various areas. They were never a community. If they were a
community, it was one or two generations ago and now they are brought back
together because of the restitution. Now, the CPA tries to bring them
together as communities.

The second aspect of this is that, when they come back, they come back to
areas where they were before, and these were communal areas. CPAs create
communal areas within communal areas. That alone constitutes a source of
conflict. There are many other things, but those are the key reasons for
the conflicts. It’s not so much that there is no security of tenure,
because the outer boundary title is one and all of them belong there. These
are matters that need to be managed by us, particularly looking at the
efficacy of the law itself. Thank you, Chair.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I have two names from Cope. Only one
can ask a follow-up question. [Interjections.] [Laughter.]

Mr D A KGANARE: Chairperson, after observing all the people who want to go
to heaven, I think it’s going to be a very dangerous place and I don’t want
to go there. [Laughter.]

Minister, in view of the high rate of rural unemployment, feminisation of
poverty and food insecurity, what is the department doing to assist women
who are still perceived as minors in the rural areas to have security of
tenure, despite what the law says?

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon House Chair, well,
we have a couple of programmes there. Firstly, the comprehensive Rural
Development Programmes, RDP, projects are dominated by women so far.
Secondly, now, as we speak, we are going to launch the National Rural Youth
Service Corps with 12 000 young people, and 50% of them are women from all
rural wards across the country. From each rural ward, we have taken four
people, one of whom is a disabled person.

Chair, I would like to take this opportunity to request the hon members to
assist us, because we are looking for about 3 000 disabled people to take
part in this programme. At the moment, we have only 300 people from only
rural wards. Thank you, Chairperson.

Ms P P XABA: Hon Chairperson, can the Minister outline how he intends
dealing with the current land tenure system, and what proposal he has for
the future? Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member at the back, please
switch off the mike. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Chair, in the budget
policy speech to the House, we proposed a three-tier system on land tenure
reform and that will be tabled before the House. We have debated this with
farmers and have said that this is the best way to go. Under the
circumstances prevailing now, and given the history of the leakage of land
that would have been returned by government to those from whom it was
acquired, moving forward, the land — which belongs to the state and the
public entities — will be leased rather than sold. To protect the
acquisitions and gains we are making in terms of land reform, the tenure
system will be leasehold. But in terms of privately owned property, it will
be freehold and, as we have said, we will retain that with limited extent.

The extent to which a commercial farming entity will be limited, that is,
whether it will be a large-scale, medium-scale or small-scale commercial
farming entity, will firstly depend on the commodity that is found in the
entity. Secondly, it will be determined through debate in the Green Paper.

The last tier concerns foreign landownership. Again, that is privately-
owned, whether domestic or international. Thus, we say that it will emerge
and also be affected and its extent limited by this Act. Additionally, they
will have to comply with particular conditions and obligations with respect
to their compliance with the land reform regime that will come into place.
Thank you, Chair.

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr G LEKGETHO: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates how to develop and create more internships and
   learnerships for our youth so as to give them the skills and experience
   to compete successfully in the job market.

Thank you.

Dr D T GEORGE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following motion on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the latest GDP growth data released by Statistics
   SA and proposes immediate measures that can be implemented to improve
   economic growth in the near future.

Thank you.

Mr S B FARROW: Chair, I hereby give notice that I shall move the following
motion on behalf of the DA:

    That the House debates the issue of the increased number of level
    crossing accidents taking place in our country and comes up with
    possible solutions to eliminate this problem.

Thank you.

Mr V V MAGAGULA: House Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

    That the House debates moral regeneration as a vehicle for building
   communities grounded on positive values, a caring society and the
   pursuit of lasting peace and prosperity in the country.


Thank you.

Mr V G SMITH: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That this House debates inmate labour and its contribution to skills
   transfer, resocialising and reintegration of ex-offenders into the
   broader society, as well as its contribution towards making the
   Department of Correctional Services self-sufficient.

Thank you.

Mr T BOTHA: Hon Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That House debates the horrific loss of life caused by minibus-taxi
   drivers all over the country lacking the advanced skills and training
   necessary for the job.

      CONGRATULATIONS TO SABINE LEHMANN OF TABLE MOUNTAIN CABLEWAY AND
     NONKULULEKO GOBODO, FIRST BLACK CA ON ACHIEVEMENTS IN THEIR FIELDS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon House Chairperson, I move without
notice:
   That the House —

      1) notes that two South African businesswomen, Sabine Lehmann, CEO of
         Table Mountain Cableway Company and Nonkululeko Gobodo, CEO of
         Gobodo Incorporated, have been awarded prestigious awards for their
         outstanding work in their respective fields;

      2) recognises that Sabine Lehmann won CEO Magazine’s 2010 Most
         Influential Woman in Business and Government award in the tourism
         and leisure category;

      3) further recognises that Nonkululeko Gobodo was awarded the 2010
         Woman of Substance Award by the African Women Chartered Accountants
         (AWCA) recently, was South Africa’s first black woman to qualify as
         a Chartered Accountant (CA) in 1987 and has been an inspiration and
         leading voice in the country’s auditing and advisory industry for
         the past two decades; and

      4) congratulates both Sabine Lehmann and Nonkululeko Gobodo for
         excelling in their respective careers and for being good role
         models to young women and girls in South Africa.

Agreed to.


The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Hon member at the back, we are now
on motions without notice, not notices of motion. Are you on it?
 CONGRATULATIONS TO MISS FAITH MUTHAMBI ON BEING APPOINTED MEMBER OF COUNCIL
                           AT UNIVERSITY OF VENDA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Hon Chair, I move without notice:

   That this House —

      1) congratulates Miss Faith Muthambi, a member of this honourable
         House, for joining the Deputy President at the University of Venda
         as a member of council;

      2) notes that Miss Muthambi is only 36 years of age and was appointed
         as a member of the university council with effect from 12 July
         2010.

HON MEMBERS: Malibongwe! [Praise!] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you.

Prof L B G NDABANDABA: Chair, to proceed ... that the House —

      3) needs to acknowledge that this is an achievement for the young
         people of this country and the women of our glorious movement, the
         ANC;

      4) further acknowledges that Miss Muthambi is the first and youngest
         external member to serve in such a high, decision-making body of
         the University of Venda, and

        5) congratulates her and wishes her the best for the future.

I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I rise on a point of order, sir: The hon
Ndabandaba has just proposed a quite remarkable and very pleasant motion
without notice, but I am afraid what he has done, sir, is indicate to the
House, yet again, that there is no discipline on the side of the ANC. He
will know, and certainly, the Chief Whip of the Majority Party will know,
that a motion without notice goes through the Whippery first of all, and
consequently, I need to say that we cannot support that motion.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Chief Whip?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We agree. I think there was a
breakdown somewhere. The motion was supposed to be circulated. We agree
that this is out of order.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Thank you. The motion will therefore
not be tabled today. We will have to wait for the next time.

    TAXI ACCIDENT AT BAKENSKOP LEVEL CROSSING IN BLACKHEATH IN WHICH TEN
                       CHILDREN DIED AND FIVE INJURED

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Chair, I move without notice:

   That the House—

      1) notes with great sadness that ten children died and five were
         seriously injured when a train hit a taxi at a level crossing at
         Bakenskop outside Cape Town in the early hours of this morning;


      2) further notes that the number of accidents of this nature has
         steadily increased over the past few months;

      3) recognises that safety measures relating to level crossings need
         to be implemented as a matter of urgency to prevent tragic
         accidents of this nature occurring in the future;

      4) further recognises that further rules and regulations need to be
         implemented on our roads to reduce the number of accidents;

      5) thanks the paramedics who assisted at the scene of this accident
         for their efficient service; and
      6) conveys its deepest condolences and sympathies to the families of
         the children.

Agreed to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): Is it an objection, hon Deputy
Minister?

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: It is just a brief amendment. Obviously,
one supports the motion that has been placed before us.

When we came into the House, the death toll had risen to 10, and so, we
should amend the motion to that effect. We should also note that in this
case, all of the safety barriers and things were in place, and this was
just reckless driving. We do not need to put that into the motion, but I
was listening to the DA MEC Carlisle, who was on the spot. Basically, in
this case, the safety barriers, and so on, were in place. The booms were
down, and this driver just recklessly went around all of that. So, I think
that, in supporting the motion, one should just amend some of it, if that
is possible. However, if that is not possible, certainly one should support
it.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I will leave it with the parties.
The Deputy Minister has asked that the motion as proposed be supported with
a few amendments. Is it agreed to by all parties?

Motion, as amended, agreed to.

                     CASTER SEMENYA’S VICTORY IN BERLIN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House —

      1) congratulates world-renowned athlete Caster Semenya for once again
         making South Africa proud after making a triumphant return to the
         Olympic Stadium in Berlin, where she cruised to victory in the
         women’s 800 metres;


      2) notes that Semenya’s victory is a triumph against all odds,
         considering the 11-month lapse when she was forced to miss many
         athletics competitions while waiting for the results of her gender
         tests; and

      3) wishes Caster all the best in all her upcoming athletics
         competitions, including her Diamond League debut in Brussels on
         Friday.

Agreed to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): I would just like to go back to the
previous motion, hon Ian Davidson. I am advised by the NA Table staff that,
if there are any amendments added to a motion that has already been
circulated to parties and agreed to, such amendments can only be accepted
when the motion is withdrawn, redrafted, recirculated and has come back to
the House. I am not sure, because the Deputy Minister has a request that
those light amendments be added. I see the hand of the Deputy Minister.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chair, in that case I withdraw.
Obviously, it is important that this Parliament, all of us collectively,
express our deep concern and condolences around this matter. I do not want
to keep us from doing that. If it is not possible to amend it, then
certainly, we should not delay passing this motion.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, on a point of order: I thank the hon Cronin for
his attitude but it is certainly possible if this House agrees to amend the
figure eight to ten. That certainly will satisfy him. At least it makes the
statement factually correct.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr K O Bapela): If that is the case, I think it is
in order. However, the Rules are something else. According to the Rules, we
cannot do it here. We have to redraft it and bring it back.
[Interjections.]

There is another view. We now have another interpretation of the Rules and
I do not know what is happening. The NA Table staff says that if it is just
a number that is being proposed to be amended, we can allow it. However, if
it is substance, then we cannot allow it. [Interjections.]

It is a number? So we agree that a number is added as an amendment, that
there are no objections and that we agree to the motion.

Agreed to.

      LAUNCH OF THE AFRICA CENTRE FOR CLIMATE AND EARTH SYSTEMS SCIENCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Chairperson, I move without
notice:

   That the House —

      1) notes the launch of the Africa Centre for Climate and Earth Systems
         Science, which will provide regional decision-makers with reliable
         climate information, enabling them to balance developmental needs
         with responses to threats posed by environmental change;

      2) further notes that Access is a consortium of research institutions
         and agencies that have signed up to contribute to a whole greater
         than the sum of their parts including the Universities of the
         Witwatersrand, Cape Town, Western Cape, Pretoria, Stellenbosch,
         KwaZulu-Natal and Rhodes, along with the SA Weather Service, SA
         Biodiversity Institute, Agricultural Research Council, Geosciences
         Research Council, SA Environmental Observation Network, and the
         hosts of the centre, the Council for Scientific and Industrial
         Research (CSIR), while the secretariat will be set up at the Centre
         for High Performance Computing at the CSIR Campus in Rosebank,
         Johannesburg; and

      3) welcomes the collaboration amongst our research institutions which
         have already implemented a research programme with several projects
         focused on a number of earth system issues, a services programme
         that will develop a series of products for use by service providers
         and an educational programme that includes a bursary, winter school
         and a national master’s degree programme.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 17:21.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Request for Assembly to recommend candidate for National Lotteries
    Board

     1) A letter dated 17 August 2010 has been received from the Minister
        of Trade and Industry, requesting the relevant Assembly committee
        to recommend a candidate who complies with sections 3(1)(c) and
        3(2) of the Lotteries Act, No 57 of 1997, for appointment as a
        member of the National Lotteries Board.
        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry for
        consideration.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Independent Auditors and the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements are referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Annual Financial Statements of the Corporation for Public
             Deposits for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements for 2009-10.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Land and
             Agricultural Development Bank of South Africa (Land Bank ) for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Consolidated Financial Statements for 2009-10 [RP95-2010].

     2) The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Broadband Infraco (Pty)
             Limited for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP170-2010].
1. Membership of Assembly

     1) The vacancy which occurred in the National Assembly owing to the
        resignation of Rev H M Dandala with effect from 15 July 2010, has
        been filled with effect from 15 July 2010 by the nomination of Mr M
        G P Lekota.
4.    Membership of Committees

     1) The following changes have been made to the membership of
        Committees:


        Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development


        Appointed:          Fritz, Mr A (Alt)      DA


        Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform


        Discharged:    Balindlela, Ms N      COPE


        Appointed:     Carter, Ms D          COPE


        Ad Hoc Committee on Protection of Information Bill


        Discharged:    Coetzee, Mr T         DA


        Appointed:     Smuts, Mr D           DA


        Appointed:          Coetzee, Mr T (Alt)    DA
        Appointed:          Swart, Mr S            ACDP


TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Acting Minister of Energy

    (a)     Amendments to Articles VI and XIV.A of the Statute of the
        International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), tabled in terms of
        section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Amendments to Articles VI and
        XIV.A of the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency
        (IAEA).

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     The Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate on
        Domestic Violence for the period July – December 2009, tabled in
        terms of subsection (4)(a) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act
        No 116 of 1998).



