---
title: 'National Assembly - 28 October 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: OCTOBER
month_slug: Oct
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-10-28
---

THURSDAY, 28 OCTOBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:02.

The Deputy Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS - see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr A M FIGLAN: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the insufficient provision of basic services in
   many informal settlements throughout the country and comes up with
   solutions to improve the delivery of services to these settlements.

Ms S P RWEXANA: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the shocking revelations of the alarming rise in
   maternal deaths in South Africa and consequently urges government to meet
   its priority commitment set down in the Millennium Development Goals.

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates measures by which prioritisation of rail projects
   are determined and comes up with means by which the determination of
   priority projects can be improved to take into account the needs of the
   country.

Mr I VADI: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the establishment of a parliamentary radio and
   television channel.

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates cyber crime as a new-generation crime, which has a
   negative effect on the economy of the country, and the role of the SA
   Police Service to combat it.

Ms T E LISHIVHA: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the celebration of 150 years since the arrival of
   Indians in South Africa and the significant role they have played in
   shaping South Africa.

Mr M MNQASELA: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the effect of late registration of births on the
   accuracy of the National Population Register and whether the government
   is doing enough to protect the identity details of its citizens, and to
   come up with solutions to improve the situation.

Dr H C VAN SCHALKWYK: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the lack of professional ethics in the Public
   Service, and comes up with recommendations on how a climate of ethics can
   be cultivated throughout the Public Service.

Mr M WATERS: Deputy Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the quality control of food in South Africa and
   comes up with solutions to improve consumer protection and consequently
   the health of all South Africans.

    BANYANA BANYANA TO REPRESENT SOUTH AFRICA AT 2010 CAF AFRICAN WOMEN’S
                            FOOTBALL CHAMPIONSHIP

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -


     1) notes that Banyana Banyana will represent South Africa at the 2010
        CAF African Women’s football championship, which will be held in
        Ekurhuleni, from 31 October to 14 November; and


     2) wishes Banyana Banyana well in their upcoming matches and calls on
        all South Africans to rally behind them and give them the support
        they need to make it to the finals.

Agreed to.

               PHOTOGRAPHER JOÃO SILVA INJURED IN AFGHANISTAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs S V KALYAN: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -


     1) notes that acclaimed photographer João Silva was seriously injured
        in a mine explosion whilst covering the war in Afghanistan;


     2) further notes that Silva is associated with the Bang-Bang Club, a
        group of photographers who covered the political violence in South
        Africa leading up to the first democratic elections in 1994;


     3) acknowledges Silva’s bravery and dedication to his profession as he
        continued to take photographs whilst injured; and


     4) sympathises with Silva and his family during these difficult times
        and wishes him a speedy recovery.

Agreed to.

       JOHANNESBURG SOCIAL HOUSING COMPANY WINS SCROLL OF HONOUR AWARD

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -

   (1)      notes that the Johannesburg Social Housing Company an entity of
        the City of Johannesburg, recently won the United Nations 2010
        Scroll of Honour Award for providing innovative rental housing
        products – a panel of judges unanimously selected Joshco from
        organisations around the world;


   (2)      futher notes that this international award recognises the
        holistic approach to providing human settlement and service
        delivery to communities; and


     1) congratulates Joshco for winning the United Nations 2010 Scroll of
        Honour Award.

Agreed to.

                MENTAWAI ISLANDS IN INDONESIA HIT BY TSUNAMI

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs S V KALYAN: Deputy Speaker, I move without notice:
   That the House -


   (1)      notes that the Mentawai Islands, Indonesia, were hit by a
        tsunami on late Monday evening, 25 October 2010, triggered by an
        earthquake off the coast of West Sumatra;


   (2)      further notes that most recent reports state that an estimated
        112 people lost their lives and 152 were missing;

   (3)      acknowledges that this tragedy struck amidst the volcanic
        eruption of Mt Merapi on Tuesday, 26 October 2010, that left 24
        people dead and thousands fleeing for their lives;

   (4)      sympathises with the Indonesian government and general populace
        during this time of hardship and grief; and

     5) calls upon the international community to assist in any way
        possible.

Agreed to.

    ESTABLISHMENT OF AD HOC JOINT COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER CODE OF JUDICIAL
  CONDUCT AND REGULATIONS ON JUDGES’ DISCLOSURE OF REGISTRABLE INTERESTS IN
                  TERMS OF JUDICIAL SERVICE COMMISSION ACT

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That an ad hoc joint committee be established in terms of Joint Rule 138,
   with the concurrence of the National Council of Provinces, the committee
   to –

     1) consider the Code of Judicial Conduct and the Regulations on Judges’
        Disclosure of Registrable Interests tabled on 20 October 2010 in
        terms of the Judicial Service Commission Act (Act 9 of 1994);


     2) conduct public hearings in accordance with the provisions of the
        Act;


     3) consist of 9 members of the National Council of Provinces and 14
        members of the National Assembly, as follows: ANC 8, DA 2, Cope 1,
        IFP 1 and other parties 2;


     4) exercise those powers in Joint Rule 32 that may assist it in
        carrying out its task; and


      5) report to the House by 16 November 2010.

Agreed to.

  SUSPENSION OF RULE 214(6)(C) REGARDING AD HOC COMMITTEE ON PROTECTION OF
                           INFORMATION LEGISLATION

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:


   That the House –

        1) notwithstanding –


          a) Rule 214(6)(c), which provides that an ad hoc committee ceases
             to exist if it has not completed its task by the date set for
             the completion of its task; and


          b) a resolution adopted by the House on 11 May 2010 that the Ad
             hoc Committee on Protection of Information Legislation had to
             report by 30 September 2010;

        2) condones the continued existence of the ad hoc committee; and


        3) extends the deadline by which it has to report to 16 November
           2010.
Agreed to.

                MEDIUM-TERM BUDGET POLICY STATEMENT WELCOMED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P E ADAMS (ANC): Madam Deputy Speaker, the ANC parliamentary caucus
welcomes government’s 2010 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement. We further
congratulate the SA Revenue Service on its exceptional performance in
revenue collection, which will go a long way in ensuring that government
realises its commitments to the people.

The statement has put a strong focus and emphasis on the robustness of the
South African economy within the context of the prevailing financial market
economic crisis. The South African economy is on a recovery path – doing
much better than other developing and developed countries.

The statement has also put, at the centre of our recovery path, the
countercyclical fiscal policy measures, that we have followed in the past
years which, to a large extent, made it possible for the South African
economy to sustain infrastructure spending on the social infrastructure
security net.

We welcome various measures proposed in the statement to encourage
participation of independent power producers in the energy sector to
complement efforts by Eskom to meet the expanded increase in household and
industrial power consumption. This will, among other things, enhance our
economic growth, create jobs and enhance measures to fight and combat fraud
and corruption. The measures are in line with the ANC’s commitment to
intensify the fight against the cancer of crime and corruption,
particularly in the public sector. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

         EIGHT TOWNS IN FREE STATE FACING ELECTRICITY DISCONNECTION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D C ROSS (DA): Hon Deputy Speaker, the DA has written to the Public
Protector about eight towns in the Free State that face electricity
disconnection on 23 November 2010 as a consequence of the failure by the
ANC administration that runs these municipalities to pay their bills.

In addition, Eskom has issued two public-participation notifications to
discuss the possible termination of the electricity supply to the Ngwathe
and Mohokare Municipalities in the northern Free State. The notification
indicates that both municipalities owe Eskom more than R32 million each.

In an unprecedented move, Eskom now expects interested parties, ratepayer
groups and the like, to make presentations to the retail manager of Eskom,
citing why the power should or should not be terminated. This, we believe,
is a massive red herring. The fact is, the fault here does not lie with the
ordinary citizens, but with the ANC municipalities which have chronically
failed to pay the electricity bills.

I have made it clear to the Public Protector that the position of ordinary
citizens must be considered and respected. Ordinary South Africans cannot
be held responsible for the maladministration of these dysfunctional
municipalities. Thank you. [Applause.]

                    NEW GROWTH PATH TO BOOST JOB CREATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof B TUROK (ANC): Deputy Speaker, we welcome the New Growth Path
announced by the Cabinet this week whose principal aim is to boost job
creation, and we hope that our journalists tried to understand what was
being said and did less speculation.

The proposal constitutes an important milestone in economic policy-making
in a country which still has powerful interest groups such as business and
labour, which are powerful components of the mass movement of the
historically dispossessed. The New Growth Path is an attempt to find common
ground, so that the country’s economy can advance more rapidly. It
recognises the necessity of a strong leading role by the state with an
equally important role by business.

A central idea is that we need to mobilise the whole country to transform
what remains of the apartheid legacy, and I hope the House supports that
idea. [Applause.]

   APPOINTMENTS TO NATIONAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY’S PROVINCIAL ADVISORY
                                   BOARDS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI (IFP): Deputy Speaker, it has come to the attention
of the IFP that the selection process for appointment to the National Youth
Development Agency’s provincial advisory boards has been hijacked and
manipulated by the ANC Youth League to such an extend that of the 63
positions filled, 62 have gone to ANC Youth League comrades.

Many of the worthy applicants from different political organisations and
youth formations, who were successful during the interview process, were
rejected for appointment in favour of weaker ANC applicants.

The NYDA intends to implement and monitor youth development interventions
to reduce youth unemployment and promote social cohesion across cultural,
racial and political divides, but we are now witnessing an illegal takeover
of the NYDA by the ANC Youth League. The NYDA’s core mandate has been
subverted and now will serve only the interests of the ANC Youth League.

The IFP believes that this is yet another example of abuse of power by the
ANC and the ANC Youth League, which places our democracy at stake. In the
interests of all South Africa’s youth, the IFP Youth Brigade will explore
all avenues to have these appointments nullified. We have also written a
letter to the Minister in the Presidency, the hon Collins Chabane, to look
into the matter urgently and to nullify those appointments without delay.

Finally, I call on this honourable House to launch an urgent investigation
into this matter. I thank you. [Applause.]

                  CHILDREN KILLED IN ALEXANDRA CAR ACCIDENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N M KGANYAGO (UDM): Deputy Speaker, the UDM extends its condolences to
the families of the two children who passed away and to the others who were
injured when an allegedly drunken 16-year-old ploughed into a group of
pedestrians in Alexandra with a vehicle which was taken without permission.
How do we calculate the loss to the families and to the rest of society
when two young people are suddenly removed so tragically?

This incident is just one of many such incidents. Our people, and
especially our young ones, are dying in unprecedented numbers as a result
of so-called accidents. Ninety-nine percent of the time there is no
accident, but rather an incident involving reckless or incompetent
behaviour on the road.

South Africa loses thousands of people every year on our roads. No other
comparable country has such a high incidence of death and injury on their
roads. Something is inherently flawed in the manner in which we as South
Africans in general behave on the roads. Have we really sunken to such
lawlessness that we simply cannot change our ways, even if we keep losing
our loved ones?

We are again approaching the busiest season on our roads, and the UDM
appeals to government and civil society alike to recommit themselves to
road safety. We owe it to the victims, such as 17-year-old Mpho Nyembe,
whose memorial service was held yesterday. I thank you. [Applause.]

                   PREPARATIONS FOR THIRD NATIONAL CENSUS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr D D VAN ROOYEN (ANC): Deputy Speaker, Statistics SA has announced the
date of the third national census since the advent of democracy in South
Africa. Statistics SA will deploy 120 officials, dressed in yellow bibs,
across the country to document all people, including illegal immigrants and
the homeless, from 10 October to 31 October 2011. As part of these
preparations for the census, Statistics SA is currently conducting
countrywide “dress rehearsals” between 10 October and 31 October 2010.

The real census of 2011 will consist of three questionnaires; one for
households, one for institutions and one for people in transit. The census
is vital, as it also enables the government to cross-check administrative
systems that register events such as births and deaths, and it provides the
basis for other important surveys that inform decision-making at government
level, such as the labour force survey, the demographic and health survey
and the general household survey.

Therefore, as the ANC we urge all South Africans to stand up and be
counted. Be part of the South Africa we know and be part of South Africa
our home. Thank you. [Applause.]

                        LAND REDISTRIBUTION PURCHASES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M SWART (DA): Madam Deputy Speaker, the Department of Rural Development
and Land Reform informed the Standing Committee on Appropriations that the
previous director-general of the department had officially authorised
junior officials of the department to enter into negotiations with farmers
to purchase their farms in terms of the land restitution programme.

It appears that there has been some 4 000 such transactions, although the
final audit is yet to be concluded. The monetary value of these
transactions is also not yet known, but is estimated to be in the region of
R7 billion - this for a department with an annual budget of only R6,8
billion. Already the department has had to make provision for R12 billion
in respect of court cases lost against farmers for nonpayment of signed
agreements.

One can only guess when the government will be able to pay the additional 4
000 contracts entered into. The additional R2 billion in terms of Maritime
& Transport Business Solutions yesterday for the 7 000 additional
restitution cases is welcomed, but it is only a drop in the ocean.

The previous director-general also informed the committee that market
valuations by valuators were sometimes done as much as three times to get
valuations satisfactory to farmers in order to reach agreements. The
consultants were paid for each valuation. For the one-year period 1 April
2009 to 31 March 2010 the department paid these valuators an amount of R180
million. We are also aware of many corrupt valuators.

Complaints are often heard about the slow pace of land restitution and
reform. The problem is clearly not unwillingness by the farmers to sell the
land or the principle of willing-buyer, willing seller. It is simply a case
of poor management and planning by the department. [Applause.]

                         QUALITY HOUSING SETTLEMENTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs G M BORMAN (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, the ANC-led government is
committed to accelerating the delivery of housing within the context of
sustainable human settlements; to provide quality housing within human
settlements to turn homes into assets; to create a single, efficient formal
housing market; and to abolish apartheid spatial planning, thereby
restructuring and integrating human settlements.

Therefore, we welcome the announcement made by the Minister of Human
Settlements that the department is rolling out a project to eradicate all
informal settlements. A total of 8 700 human settlement projects are
currently under way across the country. The Minister has committed his
department to building dignified homes for people.
The ANC-led government is dedicated to accelerate the delivery of housing
within the context of sustainable human settlements. The ANC-led government
will turn the tide of housing delivery in the country. Together we can do
more! [Applause.]

                 FATAL ATTACKS ON FAMILIES IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof C T MSIMANG (IFP): Madam Deputy Speaker, the IFP is shocked and
saddened to hear of another deadly attack on a family in KwaZulu-Natal
early this morning.

Four people, including a six-month-old baby, were found dead in a remote
homestead outside Mariannhill in KwaZulu-Natal on Thursday, police said. In
addition, a nine-year-old boy, Simphiwe Buthelezi, and his 52-year-old
grandmother, Thoko Sibiya, were shot dead in their home in Nongoma in
northern KwaZulu-Natal on Thursday evening. The woman was with her two nine-
year-old grandsons when they were attacked by unknown men. The grandmother
and her grandson were killed, but the other grandson managed to escape
unharmed. They were killed barely hours after six people, including two
young boys, were killed at two homes at Shongweni Dam outside Durban.

The IFP calls on the local residents, community policing forum
representatives, the police and traditional leaders to work together to
find the ruthless criminals who are responsible for these hyenas’ crimes.
We also call on them to bring an end to senseless killings. The brutal
murders must be stopped.

The pre-eminent responsibility of any government is the safety of its
citizens, especially the safety of its children and the elderly. When one
hears about such brazenly deadly attacks, one cannot but feel a sense of
betrayal that government is failing in its duty to protect its citizens.
Thank you.

                   ECONOMIC POLICY AND THE NEW GROWTH PATH

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr P D DEXTER (Cope): Deputy Speaker, while Cope acknowledges some of the
good news that the Minister of Finance has reported in the National Trade
Policy Background Papers, such as a decrease in the deficit, an increase in
tax revenues, and especially some of the steps around tender corruption and
fraud and so on, the overall view is that this is disappointing. The
Minister has continued to follow the same policy continuity that we have
seen all along and it begs the question: Where is the new growth path?

In some sense what we heard was really mutton dressed up as lamb. There are
good intentions that we really welcome – the view of creating five million
new jobs, keeping inflation in check and so on. This continues to be a call
of the ruling party but, as the Minister has pointed out, and Cope has
stated all along, things like the value of the rand are determined neither
by the wishes of Members of Parliament, nor by that of the ruling party.
The key issues of investor confidence and promoting and supporting
entrepreneurs, especially in small and medium enterprises, were simply paid
lip service, and even some of the targets in the so-called new growth path
were just smoke and mirrors.

In short, it seems as if it is more of the same and not enough of anything
new. The achievements of the past few months in the economy flow off the
back of global trends, increased investment into developing countries and
the slow, but important global recovery. The government may claim credit
for some things, but not for what is happening globally. It must, however,
take responsibility for the lack of vision and leadership that seems to
characterise it. [Applause.]

           YOUNG EMERGING COMMERCIAL FARMERS AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M I MALALE (ANC): Hon Deputy Speaker, the ANC government has acquired a
portion of Leeuwfontein Farm. It covers an area of about 342 hectares and
is situated near Bronkhorstspruit in the Metsweding district. This farm was
then leased to Mr Mafuleka for five years. Mafuleka is one of only a few
young emerging commercial farmers.

In addition to granting this lease, the Department of Rural Development and
Land Reform approved funding of over R1 million to cover essential overhead
expenses.

Mr Mafuleka’s efforts are already reaping fruit. The first crop of pears is
flourishing and is due to be harvested soon. Plans are also in the pipeline
to plant cabbage, baby marrows and spinach for the local market and local
vendors. He has also employed 11 workers, all of whom are women. Five of
them are earmarked to be employed permanently.

This initiative is part of the ANC government’s proactive land action
strategy which aims to accelerate the land restitution process and ensure
maximum productive use of the acquired land.

The ANC hopes that this project will serve as a sustainable model for the
future and will further enable more young historically disadvantaged people
to follow their dreams of becoming commercial farmers. Thank you.
[Applause.]

             ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, RIGHTS AND SUSTAINABILITY

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mrs S V KALYAN (DA): Deputy Speaker, realising environmental rights in our
Constitution requires greater focus going forward.

Our sustainability as a country underpins the majority of the Millennium
Development Goals, the MDGs. A population that lives in a healthy
environment is more likely to be productive, healthy and make use of
opportunities. But, according to a report of Statistics SA, it is very
likely that the Millennium Development Goal with regard to environmental
sustainability will not be met on time.

Environmental challenges are not unique to South Africa, but, as South
African legislators, this is where we have the ability to intervene. We
need to take stock of the World Wildlife Fund’s latest living planet report
released this month, which reveals that the world’s ecological footprint
exceeds the earth’s biocapacity by 50%. That means it will take one and a
half years for the earth to produce the resources humanity consumes in a
single year.

The question of what has become of South Africa’s National Framework for
Sustainable Development needs to be asked, the framework being an outcome
of the 2002 World Summit in Johannesburg. Which department is driving this?


Owing to the nature of environmental protection and sustainability, it
cannot just be the work of the Environmental Affairs department. It
concerns practically all departments, and I trust therefore that it is
getting the attention of the National Planning Commission. [Applause.]

                         ABET PROGRAMME IN POLOKWANE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs F F MUSHWANA (ANC): Deputy Speaker, employees are learning to read and
write in Polokwane. The Limpopo department of agriculture has embarked on a
drive to encourage all its illiterate employees, most of whom are general
workers such as cleaners, gardeners and tea makers, to learn how to read.

It has registered employees for the Adult Basic Education and Training
programme. This programme has proved to be a success and, since its
inception four years ago, 132 out of the 200 employees have registered for
Abet programmes. Most of them are illiterate. It is really amazing to see
how this initiative has changed their lives as many of them can now sign
their names instead of making a cross. Some can read forms that are written
in English. This year already 34 people have received their Level 4
certificates.

This programme forms part of the ANC government’s commitment of ensuring
that South Africa is completely liberated from illiteracy by 2014 through
our Kha Ri Gude Mass Literacy Campaign. It should be emulated by other
rural communities right around the country. I thank you. [Applause.]

                  THREATS TO SUPPLY OF SAFE DRINKING WATER

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T BOTHA (Cope): Chair, the Department of Water Affairs is presiding over
a catastrophe. It has failed dismally to maintain and upgrade
infrastructure. Serious problems with grave health and economic
implications are looming. The country is sitting on a ticking bomb.

The Moqhaka Municipality reported a thousand cases of diarrhoea. At least
350 people were treated in hospital because they drank either untreatable
or untreated water.

Last week a staggering 500 children were sent home after 100 people who
allegedly drank contaminated water became sick. The town is now relying on
local farmers in Kroonstad for its water supply. Kroonstad could soon be
without electricity because it has an unsettled bill with Eskom running
into millions of rands.

What is happening in the Free State is happening in other parts of the
country too. A clear trend is emerging. The system of municipal services is
breaking down. Commentators are fearful about what would happen if a
mainline sewer pipe, stretched to breaking point, were to explode. The
situation in Gauteng, the Free State, Mpumalanga and elsewhere is dire.
What are the problems? They are inadequate infrastructure, a countrywide
lack of technical skills, incompetence, poor leadership, and delays in
creating new infrastructure.

The goal of the department of ensuring that the country’s drinking water is
safe, accessible and affordable will remain a distant hope. A major
disaster is looming. If Cabinet fails to act right now the responsibility
of water provision in the water and sanitation sphere will rest solely with
this government. I thank you. [Applause.]

                 LACK OF SKILLS IN HOUSING GOVERNANCE SECTOR

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M FIGLAN (DA): Enkosi. [Thank you.] Madam Deputy Speaker, the
establishment of viable and sustainable human settlements is critical in
achieving human dignity for our people and in creating opportunities for
individual citizens to be productive and healthy.

The Department of Human Settlements is tasked with the co-ordination of
building sustainable human settlements. Despite some positive moves to root
out corruption in this field, it is faced with a severe lack of skills in
the housing governance sector.
During the 2009-10 financial year, the department invoked sections 26 and
27 of the Division of Revenue Act by directing funds from the Eastern Cape
and the North West. It transferred R52 million from the North West to the
Northern Cape, whilst R270 million was transferred from the Eastern Cape to
Gauteng, the Free State and Mpumalanga. This occurred because the two
provinces, the Eastern Cape and the North West, lacked the necessary skills
and capacity to deliver the houses that they were expected to deliver.

House-building skills are something that the ANC government needs to take
very seriously. If the ANC cannot deliver the houses which have been
budgeted for, then it cannot be considered to be a party that lives up to
its promises to the poor. I thank you. [Applause.]

                  CHILDREN KILLED IN ALEXANDRA CAR ACCIDENT
                   ECONOMIC POLICY AND THE NEW GROWTH PATH

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Deputy Speaker, this side of government
would like to associate ourselves with the statement made by the hon member
of the UDM, and express first and foremost our condolences for the families
of the two students who were tragically killed in Alexandra. We also agree
with him that many of these so-called motor accidents are not accidents at
all, but incidents in which driver behaviour in particular is responsible.
I don’t know if the hon member is aware that Minister Ndebele was involved
in a road block arrangement outside East London in which 450 cars were
stopped as part of October Transport Month. Two hundred and fifty-eight of
those cars had drivers who were contravening the law in one way or the
other. More than half of the drivers were under the influence, hadn’t
fastened their seat belts, etc. That, therefore, underlines the point that
the hon member of the UDM was making. It is driver conduct, overwhelmingly,
that we need to address.

Where I do depart a little from him is that we must be careful of not
becoming so cynical that we think we can’t do anything. Some of the
statistics are beginning to show that, as a result of incessant campaigns
by all of us, not just by the ruling party or government, we are beginning
to make a dent in the very high and unacceptable levels of incidents, road
fatalities and serious injuries on our roads. It is very important to be
very firm and to continue to send this strong message about the need to
drive safely, carefully and responsibly on our roads.

The kind of cynicism that sometimes prevails and which was exemplified by
the hon member from Cope about the New Growth Path is an example of the way
in which we undermine ourselves generally and not have a sense of hope
about a caring society. It is particularly cynical when it comes from the
hon Dexter and his giving us a lecture about lack of leadership in
government. It is very rich when it comes from a party called Cope.
[Applause.]

   APPOINTMENTS TO NATIONAL YOUTH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY’S PROVINCIAL ADVISORY
                                   BOARDS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs T V Tobias-Pakolo): Deputy
Speaker, I can’t help but laugh at the suggestion that there is an
organisation called Cope. I suspect there isn’t one. [Interjections.] Can I
speak, please?

I want to respond to the submission made by the IFP member, the hon P
Lebenya-Ntanzi. Firstly, I appreciate the role she played when the
legislation on the establishment of the National Youth Development Agency
was legislated by Parliament. At that time she made a meaningful
contribution.

However, I feel disappointed by the type of input she made today, to
actually defeat the intentions of the establishment of that legislation
which was aimed at ensuring that youth development is put high on the
agenda of government. This Parliament cannot take the blame for the ANC
Youth League having the majority of youth in this country. We cannot take
the blame for it being an organisation that leads the majority of young
people in South Africa.
I am saying this because there is no need for us to play to the gallery by
bringing politics into the legislature. Our responsibility as government is
to ensure that youth development is important on the agenda. Therefore, the
appointments to the Youth Development Agency boards is the prerogative of
the Presidency. Therefore, I think the Presidency has followed due process
in the appointments to such boards. In the event that a member or any other
party feels aggrieved, I think they need to know where and who to approach
and not play to the gallery by bringing up these matters here.

Secondly, I need to speak about the issue of investor confidence. I think
the hon member would appreciate the fact that our government is addressing
structural imbalances by trying to create jobs in the market. That is why
we are talking about the value of the rand. We are the ones who spoke about
the appreciation of the rand, and we are the ones who spoke about the
currency wars currently taking place. Yesterday the Minister spoke about
quantitative easing; trying to caution those governments that seek to pump
money into the economy to undermine job creation and continue jobless
growth. I think we need to appreciate that.

This government has a responsibility of investment promotion, hence the
Industrial Policy Action Plan, Ipap 2, as a strategy. [Interjections.] Give
me a chance; give me a break. Hence, Ipap 2 has been put before us and we
as this Parliament have adopted it as a strategy to focus on growth.
Therefore, we have provided incentive schemes for foreign direct
investments, including reducing taxes on companies prepared to invest in
South Africa. We, at least, need to appreciate that fact because it is a
fact on the table. I thank you. [Applause.]

                   ECONOMIC POLICY AND THE NEW GROWTH PATH

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Hon Deputy Speaker, we welcome the
statement made by the hon Turok on the New Growth Path. The New Growth Path
is intended to significantly increase the number of jobs in the economy and
to reduce the carbon emissions in the economy. We have identified
opportunities in 10 areas. We have prioritised six of these. They are
infrastructure investment; the green economy; the agricultural value chain;
mining and mineral beneficiation; manufacturing activities identified in
Ipap 2; and tourism.

Hon Dexter, government is indeed giving leadership. It is setting out a
compelling vision. It has come out with concrete targets, with identified
resources and with clear policies. It is very important that we move beyond
a point-scoring mentality and a spirit of pessimism. We have shown an
enormous capacity as a country to achieve what we set out to do when we are
focused. We now call for a national focus on jobs.

The New Growth Path will require strong partnerships between the state and
the private sector and with organised labour. Each will need to contribute
to inclusive growth and to the jobs that we have identified. It calls for
shared solidarity and a willingness to work together. We intend to provide
further briefings to this House and to the portfolio committee. Thank you.
[Applause.]

                   PREPARATIONS FOR THIRD NATIONAL CENSUS
             ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, RIGHTS AND SUSTAINABILITY
                         ABET PROGRAMME IN POLOKWANE
                THREATS TO THE SUPPLY OF SAFE DRINKING WATER

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I would like
to welcome the statement by the hon member from the ANC concerning the
census that will be conducted in 2011. I think it is vitally important that
we encourage our citizens to participate in the census. I am hopeful that
as we hold meetings with the public, all our constituency offices will
ensure that we communicate about the work that is being done and will be
done as part of the census.

I would also like to direct the hon member Kalyan to study the contents of
Outcome 10 of the 12 outcomes that have been adopted by government as our
priority focal point. Outcome 10 deals with the matters that the hon Kalyan
correctly raised around the environment and the accessibility of the
environment, its sustainability and strategies both in terms of research
and development, as well as in terms of other areas that would assist us in
enhancing the protection of our environment.

Outcome 10 contains the details of what government will do. It is an
important priority and one that we will pursue vigorously. As the hon
Kalyan said, that work will involve departments across the board, including
Environmental Affairs, Energy, Science and Technology, and so on.

Finally, we are certainly pleased to hear the report from the hon Mushwana
concerning the efforts of the Department of Basic Education to advance mass
literacy in South Africa and ensure that opportunities for adult education
go beyond basic education and to a post basic level of access. We certainly
congratulate the Department of Basic Education on the work that is being
achieved through the Kha Ri Gude Mass Literacy Campaign, as well as the
adult basic education and training, Abet, programmes that are under way.

With respect to Water Affairs, again, I would not say that we are on the
verge of a catastrophe. I think there are many challenges to be addressed.
The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs has been very upfront about
alerting us to the challenges with respect to water resources. She
responded that her department is putting in place the necessary measures in
order to address the challenges with respect to clean water and sustainable
resources.

We are a water-scarce country and one that has not always provided access
for all its citizens to quality water resources. In the past 16 years, I
think this government has certainly led the way in ensuring that more and
more people have access to water. Through the efforts of the Department of
Water and Environmental Affairs we will continue to ensure that those who
continue to lack such resources are catered for, and where there are gaps,
that we certainly address this. I thank you. [Applause.]

                        LAND REDISTRIBUTION PURCHASES
           YOUNG EMERGING COMMERCIAL FARMERS AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Deputy Speaker, the hon
member from the DA was correct in what he said concerning the land claims
and exposure to government. We acknowledge that we have done verification
of the outstanding land claims. We have the conclusion of that work.

The second thing that we acknowledge is that perhaps we could have managed
and planned better. I think the hon members should acknowledge the pressure
of time. This has been a massive programme of government: trying to address
a very emotive issue, with no previous experience. Now we understand that
the challenge is in the processing. When you gazette, the farmer stops the
development, we sign, make an offer and agree.

There is much goodwill amongst the farmers out there in terms of their
understanding of the challenges facing government - the inability of the
fiscus to deal with this. We are trying to engage with them to try to make
them understand further, because the court orders are not in the interests
of the state as a whole.

The reason I am acknowledging this is because we did not think it was
supposed to be made into a political issue. We thought maybe it was just a
matter of national interest, and that all of us, both the opposition and
our side in the ANC, should acknowledge that we have an equal
responsibility to ensure that the stability we are experiencing right now
in our country should remain as it is.

Secondly, I wish to acknowledge and thank the hon member from the ANC who
spoke about the farmer from Bronkhorstspruit. We think that is the way to
go. We have created a fund. This year we have R900 million to try to work
out a strategy of recapitalisation and development. This is part of the
programme. There will be more of these. We hope that the hon members will
appreciate that those terms were made to stabilise the country, not only
for the ANC, but for the betterment of the country as a whole, including
the hon members of the DA. I thank you. [Applause.]

            LOCAL GOVERNMENT: MUNICIPAL ELECTORAL AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members and
colleagues, the right of all eligible citizens to vote was a major tenet of
our struggle for freedom. It stands as one of the cornerstones of this
country’s democracy, now firmly entrenched in our Constitution. This young
democracy is proud to have held four successful national elections and, as
we know, we are currently preparing to have local government elections in
2011.

As a caring government, we believe strongly in the right of all citizens,
including those who may be physically challenged, to use their vote to
choose the leaders they want to choose. Therefore, when the Independent
Electoral Commission, the IEC, identified certain aspects of the Local
Government: Municipal Electoral Act of 2000 which needed to be amended to
cater for the needs of all citizens, we felt that this needed to be
addressed before the 2011 local government elections. The proposed
amendments contained in the Bill resulted from consultations convened by
the IEC with various stakeholders, more particularly, the political
parties.

Let me briefly outline some of the proposals in the Bill, which aim to
amend the Local Government: Municipal Electoral Act of 2000. Firstly, the
IEC saw the need for an election timetable.

Secondly, the Bill provides for the submission of an undertaking binding
the party, its representatives, members and supporters to a code, as well
as to a declaration that none of the candidates is disqualified from
standing for elections. It also makes sure that the candidates submit a
certified ID. If the party omits certain documents, the commission must
notify the party in writing by no later than the relevant date and time
stated on the election timetable. If there are still no documents
forthcoming, the commission has the right to remove the name of the
candidate from the party list. It also has the right to remove the name of
a candidate who is not registered as a voter on the municipal segment of
the voters’ roll. Again, the commission must inform the party of such
removal.

Thirdly, it has a new provision regulating central payment of the
prescribed deposit by parties contesting the election. It says that a party
contesting elections in more than one municipality must deposit the
relevant amount at the commission’s head office through a bank-guaranteed
cheque, detailing each municipality that the deposit applies to.

Fourthly, it gives powers to presiding officers to redemarcate the boundary
of a voting station, because sometimes the voting station is too small and
the queues are too long. So, it empowers the presiding officer to do that
to ensure proper control and security at the voting stations. Obviously,
this would be done after consulting with the party agents and the security
people that are there.

Fifthly, it provides that if voting takes place in more than one room,
there should be two party agents in each room. In the case of a ward
election, if it is an independent candidate, there must be one party agent
in each room.

Sixthly, it empowers presiding officers to assist physically challenged
voters, including those who are blind or who are unable to hear. For the
first time, it also allows special votes for those who, on voting day, are
unable to cast their votes at the voting station or in the district in
which they are registered.

Lastly, it empowers the commission to apply to the Electoral Court for an
extension of the period to determine and declare results of the election if
it is unable to do so within the specified seven-day period.
These amendments, we hope, will facilitate efficient preparations for the
local government elections in 2011. It is my hope that, as these amendments
will go a long way towards ensuring a smooth local government election in
2011, the House will actually support them.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the chairperson of the portfolio
committee, hon Ben Martins, for steering the work of the committee in such
an excellent way. I would also like to thank all the members of the
portfolio committee for their guidance and support during the deliberations
on these proposed amendments. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M M MAUNYE: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers,
comrades, hon members, today’s debate is about deepening democracy and the
pivotal role that the ANC has played in bringing into reality the ability
of all South Africans to elect a representative local government of their
choice.

This amending Bill is the result of a political process that we, as the
ANC, have brought about. It is one in which all political parties, informed
by their experiences of local government elections, have come together in
order to effect changes to ensure a better functioning local government
election process in 2011.

Throughout its 98 years of existence, the ANC has fought for the voice of
the people to be translated into a national democratic society whose values
and principles are to be found in the guiding policy document, the Freedom
Charter, of 1955; one of whose principal clauses states: “The people shall
govern”.

With this amending Bill we seek, therefore, to deepen democracy in that the
clauses we seek to amend will benefit the masses of our people by enabling
them to access and enjoy their right to vote in their choice of local
government, and in a manner that is easier and more efficient.

This year we celebrate the first decade of being able to democratically
elect a local government that represents the people’s choice, enhancing the
principal value of “The people shall govern”. As we move towards the third
democratic local government elections in 2011 we have, today, the
opportunity to ensure that we stand strengthened by the system and
functions that will govern these elections.

South Africa’s system of local government is one of the youngest and most
democratic in the world. The first democratic local government elections
held in December 2000 enabled South Africans to vote for public
representatives and parties within a transformed local government.

With this amending Bill we have the opportunity to qualitatively improve
the participation of registered voters in the process of influencing
decision-making by electing candidates who will represent the aspirations
of the masses of our people in the allocation of resources and the
identification of local government needs and priorities. We have, through
this amending Bill, the opportunity to enhance the participation of our
people at the centre of development, not merely as beneficiaries, but as
drivers of transformation.

This amending Bill provides for the opportunity to strengthen the system of
electing public representatives, drawing on the lessons derived from our
collective experience of the need for a more effective and accountable
manner in which we elect our public representatives to local government.

There are those who will suggest that this Bill is a mere technicality; it
is not. This amending Bill is a product of the national Political Party
Liaison Committee process in which robust discussions have taken place. The
mere fact that this Bill deals with critically important matters such as
party agents and their representation at voting stations, which is the
lifeblood of political-party intervention at this level of the election
process, informs us that we are dealing with issues of power and regulation
of power with regard to electing party and public representatives.

The first 10 years of democratic local government have registered
remarkable achievements at the front line of change in improving the lives
of our people. We have, indeed, achieved a great deal, and although much
more needs to be done, many communities around the country have seen
positive change in the past 10 years.

One of the component parts in the theory of the national democratic
revolution is the creation of a democratic state; the establishment of
democratic institutions that derive their authority from the people;
regular elections; and continuing popular participation in the process of
governance, giving expression to the statements in the Freedom Charter that
“All people shall be entitled to take part in the administration of the
country,” and that “Every man and woman shall have the right to vote for
and stand as a candidate for all bodies which make laws”.

For this amending Bill to be operationalised it requires two important
institutions of democracy to support its spirit and intention. These are
the Independent Electoral Commission, the IEC, whose duties are, among
other things, to manage elections of national, provincial and municipal
legislative bodies in accordance with national legislation and to ensure
that those elections are free and fair. The second one is the SA Local
Government Association, Salga, since local government elections are
dependent upon the infrastructure that exists.

The reality is that, from time to time, we shall have to bring to this
House amendments to the principal Act. Assessments and evaluations of each
election inform us of strengths and weaknesses and the need for amendments.

Another institution that plays a pivotal role in the local government
democracy and electoral process is the Municipal Demarcation Board. It has
recently completed its work and finalised the demarcation of ward
boundaries for the 2011 local government elections. Municipal wards are
crucial units of our democracy, because they serve as the core of ward-
based development, apart from being regarded as units that hold the
electorate accountable to the people.

The Bill has been considered thoroughly by the portfolio committee, which
has received inputs from the IEC and the Department of Home Affairs. It,
however, transpired that Salga was not provided with the opportunity to
make inputs prior to the introduction of the Bill to Parliament, as
required in terms of section 154(2) of the Constitution. This has been
addressed among the IEC, the department and Salga.

One issue that was raised by the Minister is the issue of the redemarcation
of the boundary for the voting station where the queues are long, a
technical aspect which will be elaborated on by the hon Thibedi. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs A T LOVEMORE: Acting Speaker, today I will be addressing the broader
environment of which this Bill forms part – that of electoral reform. I
will briefly address the issues that should, in fact, have formed part of
this Bill and which did not.

In 2002 an electoral task team was established to draft legislation for the
next national and provincial elections. The provisions of the final
Constitution did not extend beyond the elections held in 1999, and there
was no electoral system prescribed for the 2004 and subsequent elections.
Therefore, there was and still is something of a legislative vacuum in this
regard and much scope for the reform of the electoral system in South
Africa.

The report of the electoral task team which was chaired by the late Dr
Frederik van Zyl Slabbert was released in January 2003. To date, the
majority of the recommendations contained in that report have not been
implemented. The report referred primarily to national and provincial
elections. However, all of the values and much of the content are equally
applicable to local government elections. The DA electoral system policy
mirrors the majority conclusions of Dr van Zyl Slabbert and his team.
However, the majority party has not subscribed to the recommendations. We
certainly hope that they will consider doing so.

Four core values that guided the work of the task team were fairness,
inclusiveness, simplicity, and accountability. My focus this afternoon will
be on fairness and accountability.

Fairness means that every eligible voter must be able to vote and that
every vote carries equal value. The body that is elected must fairly
reflect the wishes of the voters. This is the case in South Africa with one
very important exception - the President, the premiers and the mayors are
not chosen by the electorate, but are deployed by the ruling party, and
often also removed when their level of favour within the party declines.

The DA believes that voters must directly elect the public representatives
who will head a specific sphere of government - the person who will be
ultimately responsible for providing political leadership. We call, thus,
for future municipal electoral legislation to include the direct election,
by the people, of the mayor of their town or municipality.

The Independent Electoral Commission’s own 2009 survey showed that 27% of
voters found voting stations difficult to access, particularly for the
disabled and the elderly. Almost five million voters struggled to access
their voting venues. If fairness means that every eligible voter must be
able to vote, then accessibility to voting stations must receive urgent
attention.

Accountability demands full understanding of the power of the vote. In
April of this year, Dr Mamphela Ramphele began her campaign for extended
voter education. She said, and I quote:

   The quality of political education has not served voters well. Most South
   Africans are new to democracy and the exercise of their vote. Much more
   effort is needed in educating them about democracy, but the IEC has
   unfortunately not focused enough attention on the principle of choice in
   voter education.


   Our schools have also not utilised the life orientation programme in the
   curriculum to educate about democracy. New voters are not provided with
   enough opportunities to understand the role of citizens as sovereigns to
   hold public officials accountable. Affirming the power of the individual
   vote to signal pleasure or displeasure with the performance of public
   officials needs to be at the core of our political education programmes.

Dr Brigalia Bam told the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs recently that
the commission does not intend to extend its education programme to include
the use of a vote to vote out a government that is not delivering. This is
disappointing. It will be up to civil society and to the parties that truly
believe in democracy to spread this message.

What certainly can and should be legislated is the electoral task team’s
majority recommendation of a mix of a constituency-based and proportional
system for all levels of government and not only at the local government
level.

Dr van Zyl Slabbert’s team found that approximately 40% of voters felt that
the current system - the PR: proportional representation system - does not
help voters hold individual representatives accountable. The electoral
system should put a face to a party, somebody who has responsibility for a
designated area, who is identifiable and accessible between elections, and
who is directly accountable to the voters. Lack of accountability was seen
as a weak point in a system with which voters were otherwise generally
satisfied.

The task team’s majority finding that a constituency-based electoral system
should be implemented at all levels of government is fully endorsed by the
DA. However, it was rejected by the ANC. The ANC owes the public serious
consideration of the value of accountability in the crafting of future
electoral legislation. The value of accountability is only achieved at
local government level. Electoral reform must address this. I thank you.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs Z B BALINDLELA: House Chairperson, experience is the best teacher. The
principal Act of 2007 obviously had certain shortcomings which became
evident over time. This Bill addresses those shortcomings and the Minister
has enunciated some of them.

A good example is the drawing up of a pro forma timetable for the local
government elections and giving attention to the fact that all candidates
on the list are indeed eligible to stand for elections. The amended law
will authorise the removal, from the party list, the names of candidates
who did not submit the required documentation within the prescribed period
of time.

The Bill also makes provision for the central payments of deposits by a
party, using a bank-guaranteed cheque when it is contesting an election in
more than one municipality on the same day. All of the matters I have
mentioned so far have been of a technical nature. Clearly, they are an
advancement on what we have had before.

The amendment of section 21 of Act 27 of 2000 will now empower presiding
officers to alter boundaries of voting stations, if necessary, and after
consultation with party agents and the members of the security services who
are on duty.

The next two amendments are outwardly very good. However, they both have
the potential for being corrupted. There is nothing wrong with a presiding
officer or a voting officer assisting a voter when requested by a voter in
terms of section 1, or when a voter is unable to read. However, this must
be done to the satisfaction of all the agents to ensure fairness and
impartiality.

The provision which is made for special votes to allow a voter, who is
unable to cast his or her vote at the voting station on voting day, to
apply to cast a special vote within that voting district is also
acceptable. This provision has to be monitored because it could have the
potential for corruption. This request is often made to avoid standing in
queues.

Cope has no fundamental problem in enhancing the powers and functions of
the Electoral Commission to apply to the Electoral Court for extension in
declaring the results of an election where it cannot do so within the seven-
day period required by section 5 of the Electoral Commission Act of 1996.
The reasons the commission advances must be solid and have the support of
political parties.

On the second day after voting, through a written notice, objections can be
lodged by a person who has an interest in the elections. Such a person must
provide detailed reasons for the objection and point to the aspect of the
election which was deficient.

The reasons for the amendments are acceptable to us in Cope. We only trust
that no unintended consequences will arise to undermine the good reasons.
The commission should undertake adequate training so that everyone
understands the full implications of the amendments that are in front of us
- including community education and the members - of the voting. Therefore,
Cope will support the Bill as amended by the portfolio committee, hoping
that the Constitution will play an important role in whatever we do. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Ms H N MAKHUBA: Chairperson, the Independent Electoral Commission of the
Republic of South Africa is required to be an independent body and subject
only to the Constitution and the law. It has to be impartial and should
exercise its powers to perform and function without fear, favour and
prejudice.

One of its core functions is to manage elections. The amendment of the
Local Government: Municipal Electoral Act seeks, among other things, to
amend provisions relating to the nomination of candidates; to empower
presiding officers to alter boundaries of voting stations; to clarify the
rights and responsibilities relating to assistance to certain voters; and
to provide for special votes and the procedure related thereto.

The IFP would like to make mention of the amendment to section 21 of the
Act. This amendment makes provision for the empowerment of the presiding
officers, after consultation with the party agents and members of the
security services who are present, to redetermine and redemarcate the
boundary of a voting station at any time, if it is necessary to do so, in
order to ensure proper control and security at voting stations.

Whilst the IFP welcomes this amendment, we would like to stress that we
believe the consultation process in this regard, between the presiding
officers and the party agents, will be of the utmost importance. We must
ensure that presiding officers do not act unilaterally in making decisions
on the demarcation of the voting stations. We must ensure that all party
agents are involved in the process. If not, this process will, without
doubt, lead to unnecessary tension and could jeopardise the voting process
and credibility of the results.

Furthermore, we welcome the fact that the amending Bill now states, in
black and white, exactly how many party agents are allowed at each voting
station. The amended section 39 of this Act now states that no more than
two party agents are allowed per voting station or, if voting takes place
in more that one room or a separately enclosed area, two agents in respect
of each room are allowed, and one party agent for the independent
candidate.

The IFP believes that this is a step in the right direction and that it
will go a long way in ensuring that there is equal and fair representation
of party agents at voting stations. There have been too many instances in
the past where we have seen one party’s agents flooding voting stations,
which gives that party an unfair advantage. This amendment seeks to put a
stop to this practice and we therefore welcome the amendment.

The 2011 local government elections are just around the corner and they
will, as always, be hotly contested elections. We believe that these
amendments will go a long way to ensure that the playing fields are level
at all local government voting stations. It will strengthen monitoring and
oversight at the local polls.

The IFP hopes that amendments to this Bill will strengthen the Independent
Electoral Commission of the Republic of South Africa’s ability to perform
its function without fear, favour and prejudice. The IFP therefore supports
the amendments to this Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Chairperson, the Bill before us deals with the very
sensitive matter of electoral law. We must always remain vigilant when it
comes to amendments to electoral law as it deals with an intrinsic
democratic right. For most South Africans, the right to vote is the most
tangible expression of the freedom we attained in 1994. Unfortunately,
whenever amendments are made, there is the real danger that the authors of
such legislation purposefully or unwittingly introduce measures that will
compromise the electoral process.

With that in mind, the UDM would like to raise the following issues as
potential areas of concern.

Clause 4 of the Bill introduces section 17(a) with the aim of allowing for
the central payment of deposits by a party that is participating in the
election in more than one municipality. On the surface such an arrangement
would simplify administration for political parties who choose to deal with
the matter in that way. However, what it does do is to transfer an
additional administrative burden onto the electoral authorities. It is
likely to result in some very complicated book-keeping and potential
disputes regarding whether payments were made and correctly made.

The concern with clause 6, which provides for two or more agents per voting
station if the commission allows voting to take place in more than one room
at that voting station, is that it legitimises an unhealthy situation.
There is no guarantee that there will be sufficient voting agents where
voting is allowed in more than one room. Allowing voting in such a manner
is a risk to the integrity of the voting process.

Our biggest concern lies with the amendment in clause 8 that relates to
special votes. Whilst we do not disagree with the need to provide
mechanisms for citizens to exercise their right to vote in circumstances
that prevent them from voting on election day, we have, however, on
numerous occasions received reports from our party agents that cast strong
suspicions on the manner in which special votes are exercised in practice.
For political parties and their agents, these special votes are very
difficult to monitor in any reliable way. Such uncertainty casts a shadow
over the integrity of the results.

Notwithstanding these concerns, the UDM supports the Bill and calls upon
the Independent Electoral Commission to implement these changes with
impartiality and fairness. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Before I call the next
speaker, I want to appeal to hon members to regulate their conversations.
The volume is too high now. I want to say this: I think we are dealing with
one of the most important aspects of democracy - elections. The aspects
that we are debating now are crucial to the voters that don’t really know
what to do with them. If we don’t know how to advise them because we
haven’t heard ourselves, then we are going to create conflict out there.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, die VF Plus ondersteun die
wysigingswetsontwerp.

Ek dink die kern van hierdie wysigingswetsontwerp is geleë in klousule 8
vanweë die feit dat daar nou ook op plaaslike regeringsvlak spesiale stemme
toegelaat word. Ons verwelkom dit, want ons moet onthou dat, in die vorige
verkiesing, dit veral nadelig was vir lede van die polisie, byvoorbeeld,
wanneer hulle diens moes gaan doen het by ander stemburo’s as waar hulle
geregistreer is. In sulke gevalle het ons hulle eintlik effektief hul
grondwetlike, demokratiese reg ontsê. Nou kan die lede van die SA
Polisiediens en die ander veiligheidsdienste wat diens doen op daardie dag
ten einde te verseker dat ons ’n demokratiese verkiesing het, ook hul stem
uitbring, waar hulle dit voorheen ontsê was.

Ek het destyds vrae gevra en ons het ook by die Onafhanklike
Verkiesingskommissie, OVK, gevra dat dit verander word, so ons verwelkom
dit.

Ek wil tog ’n beroep doen op die OVK om meer aandag te skenk aan die
versekering dat hul voorsittende beamptes by die stemburo’s beter opgelei
word in aspekte van die wet. Hulle moet dit op die punte van hulle vingers
ken, want dit is waar baie probleme ontstaan. ‘n Mens sien dat daar mense
in beheer van die stemburo’s is, maar hulle ken nie die wet nie.

Die DA het verwys na die verslag van die Van Zyl Slabbert-kommissie. Ek wil
vandag vir u sê dat die standpunt van die VF Plus daaroor is dat daar baie
meer navorsing gedoen moet word as ons die kiesstelsel van Suid-Afrika wil
verander. Ek dink dit is ’n mite om te dink dat die blote verandering van
die kiesstelsel verkose verteenwoordigers meer verantwoordbaar en meer
aanspreeklik teenoor die kiesers sal maak.
’n Tipiese voorbeeld is die wyksraadslede. Waar kan jy ’n beter bedeling
kry waar die raadslid meer in kontak met sy kiesers is as ’n wyksraadslid?
Maar hulle doen nie hulle werk nie. Daar is ander meganismes om te verseker
dat ’n raadslid meer aanspreeklik is teenoor sy kiesers.

As ons teruggaan na ’n kiesafdeling-kiesstelsel – en dit is totaal
onaanvaarbaar, Voorsitter – dan sê ek vir u die ANC kry onmiddellik ’n 78%
tot 80% meerderheid in hierdie Parlement. Dit is totaal onaanvaarbaar en ek
kan maar vir u sê dat, om ’n kiesstelsel te verander, ’n wye veld van
studie is; daar is baie elemente. Ek kan vir u 10 punte noem van die
kriteria wat behoort te geld vir ’n goeie kiesstelsel.

Ons is nog ’n jong demokrasie en ons moet nie die fout maak deur te dink
dat ons dit kan verander en daardeur sekere minderheidsgroepe uitsluit, en
dan dink dat ons die demokrasie bevorder nie.

So, in hierdie stadium is die standpunt van die VF Plus dat die huidige
proporsionele kiesstelsel sal geld. Ek weet die voorstelle van dr Van Zyl
Slabbert en sy komitee – of die meerderheidsverslag wat toe nie aanvaar is
nie – is ’n gemengde stelsel, maar dit is nie by uitstek ’n oplossing nie.
Ons moet mooi daaroor dink en meer navorsing doen. Ek dank u. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, the FF Plus supports the amending
Bill.

I believe the essence of this amending Bill lies in clause 8, owing to the
fact that special votes will now also be allowed at local government level.
We welcome this because we have to keep in mind that with the previous
elections it was especially members of the police who were disadvantaged,
for instance, when they had to perform duty at polling stations other than
at the one where they are registered. In cases like this we have
effectively deprived them of their constitutional, democratic right. Now
members of the SA Police Service and the other security services, who are
on duty on that day to ensure that our elections are democratic, are also
able to cast their votes, whereas before they were denied this.

At that time I did ask questions and we also approached the Independent
Electoral Commission, IEC, for this to be changed, so we welcome this.

I do, however, want to appeal to the IEC to devote more attention to
ensuring that their presiding officers at the polling stations are better
trained with regard to aspects of the law. They should have the law at
their fingertips, because this is where most of the problems stem from.
There are people who are in charge of the polling stations, but they are
not familiar with the law.

The DA mentioned the report by the Van Zyl Slabbert Commission. Today I
would like say to you that it is the opinion of the FF Plus that in this
regard more extensive research will have to be done if we want to change
the electoral system of South Africa. I think it is a myth to think that by
merely changing the electoral system, the elected representatives would
become more answerable and more accountable to the voters.

A typical example is the ward councillors. Where would you find a better
dispensation where the councillor has more contact with his electorate than
a ward councillor? But they don’t do their work. There are other mechanisms
that could ensure that a councillor is more accountable to his electorate.

If we go back to a constituency electoral system - and this is totally
unacceptable, Chairperson - then I can assure you the ANC would immediately
have a 78% to 80% majority in this Parliament. This is totally unacceptable
and I may as well tell you that to change an electoral system entails a
vast field of study; there are many elements to it. I can mention 10 points
regarding the criteria that should apply for an effective electoral system
to exist.

We are still a young democracy and we shouldn’t make the mistake of
thinking that we can change it, and thereby exclude certain minority
groups, and then think that we are promoting democracy.

Therefore, at this stage it is the point of view of the FF Plus that the
current proportional electoral system should remain in force. I know the
recommendations by Dr Van Zyl Slabbert and his committee - or the majority
report which was not accepted as it turned out - called for a mixed system,
but it is not a solution par excellence. We have to think about it
carefully and do more research. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr M MNQASELA: Chairperson, Minister and hon members, the DA has some
reservations with regard to the Bill. However, I need to point out that
this Bill is a very good one. It has some very good intentions in terms of
bringing about certainty in the voting process.

We welcome the proposed gazetting of the electoral timetable. One of the
basic principles of legality is certainty, and the electoral timetable
gazetted and available to all role-players will achieve just that.
Certainty in the notoriously uncertain environment of politics is rare.

Akuthenjwana xa kusiyiwa kulonyulo. [People do not trust each other prior
to elections.]

We welcome the amendment of section 55 of the local government election
legislation which makes provision for special votes. For the first time in
the South African democratic dispensation, we have a special voting day on
which people other than those like me can vote.

Akuthenjwana xa kusiyiwa kulonyulo. ... [People do not trust each other
prior to elections.] ... security personnel as well as the IEC officials
... abantu abadala ... [... the elderly ...]

We will be very much part of ensuring that the special votes are carried
out in a manner that is transparent, open and accommodates everybody.

Municipal government is the sphere of government that is very close to the
people. These are the individuals who are elected directly to represent the
people in the area in which they reside.

Kwaye yenye yezinto esiyibulelayo leyo yokuba sibenooceba abathi bonyulwe
ngendlela eyakuthi isincedise ekukhawuleziseni ukuhambisa iinkonzo
kwiindawo esihlala kuzo. Kuyeke ukuqhuma ngenxa yokutshiswa kwamatayari
koomaLimpompo, Gauteng, njl njl. [Uwele-wele.] Siza kuqinisekisa into
yokuba ... (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[It is one of the things that we are thankful for, to have councillors who
are elected in such a way that service delivery in our communities will be
accelerated. This will put an end to violent protests in areas like
Limpopo, Gauteng, etc, which result in great pollution due to setting tyres
on fire. [Interjections.] We will ensure that ...]

This is the first process of the first-past-the-post electoral system which
I think we need to support it in the SADC region.

It is essential that as many people as possible participate in the election
of their representatives as it is only at municipal level where people
elect their people and know the people they are electing, unlike ...

... kungafani nabanye bethu abalapha abangaziwa nokuba bakhona kwiinqila
zabo. [... some of us here who are not even known to their constituents.]

The number of voters has been declining over time and I think we need to
encourage more and more people to register and cast their votes whenever
the opportunity arises, so that power is returned to the people where it
belongs, not to politicians.

The IEC has indicated that they will be conducting voter registration next
year in February and March. I think that process is very important. We as
the DA are going to participate on the ground and encourage as many people
as possible to register ... ezilalini, ezilokishini, njl njl. Okokugqibela
ke Sihlalo, kukucacisa nje ... [... in the villages, townships, etc.
Lastly, Chair, just to clarify ...]

... one of the concerns we had in the process is that the presiding
officers must not be given too much power. That is unnecessary. On election
day there must be proper consultation with the party agents.

Sizakubacela ke abantu bethu ukuba bagade khon’ukuze singaqhatheki.
Okukugqibela ... [We appeal to our members to keep a very close eye so that
we are not cheated. Lastly ...]

... the national party liaison committee was never properly consulted on
the matter and, for the next Bill similar to this one, we need the
consultation to be done through a much better process. And, on that note,
we declare our support for this Bill and wish the Minister good luck. Thank
you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Before I call the next
speaker, I want to say that I was informed that this is the speaker’s
maiden speech. I think we need to demonstrate that we are good listeners
and good sympathisers. [Applause.]

Mr J D THIBEDI: Chairperson, Minister Dlamini-Zuma, hon members, comrades
and friends, through gallant struggles guided by the application of
strategy and tactics over time in different stages of our political
struggle, we finally, in essence, ushered in a multiparty constitutional
democracy in 1994. This opened the door for our people to take their future
into their own hands.

We have chosen a combination of proportional and ward-based elections at
local government level. The Constitution dictates that the object of local
government is to provide democratic and accountable government for local
communities and to ensure the provision of services to those communities in
a sustainable manner, among other things.

Government by the people is the essence of constitutional democracy, which
in principle is underpinned by the maxim: “The voice of the majority shall
prevail, and the voice of the minority shall be heard.” In this regard,
while the majority enjoys the prominence, the minority views are not
disregarded.

Our Constitution assures the protection of the rights of individuals,
groups and communities by entrenching these rights in the Bill of Rights.
Indeed, the rights entrenched in the Bill of Rights should be accessed.

In this regard, section 7(2) of the Constitution provides that: “The state
must respect, protect, promote and fulfil the rights in the Bill of
Rights.” It is therefore incumbent upon Parliament, as the legislative arm
of the state, to pass legislation that is in keeping with the spirit and
purpose of the Constitution. Therefore, legislation that is passed should
not only withstand constitutional muster, but should also give expression
to the rights entrenched in the Bill of Rights.

We must therefore take the forthcoming local government elections as
presenting us with an important challenge to ensure that this sphere of
government performs optimally with regard to all our socioeconomic
programmes directed at the further improvement of the quality of life of
all our people.

We have to work to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of our system
of local government. Accordingly, we have to prepare the incoming
councillors to understand their tasks and to enable them to properly
discharge their legislative and executive responsibilities. This Bill is in
line with the ideal to ensure that each of the districts and metropolitan
municipalities have the necessary managerial, professional and technical
staff to enable them to implement the required developmental programmes.

This has to ensure that our system of co-operative governance also
functions optimally and thus creates the conditions for the provincial and
national governments to work closely with our municipalities to improve
their capacity to implement their programmes.

In the same vein, the 2004 ANC election manifesto made a commitment to
promoting better co-operation among national, provincial and local
government in an integrated manner. This amending Bill is within these
broad principles.

Clause 3 of this Bill provides for central payment for parties contesting
elections in more than one municipality on the same day. This clause amends
the principal Act which does not allow for payment of deposits for
candidates contesting an election to be paid centrally. This has been an
administrative problem which created unnecessary restrictions for parties,
whereas we do not want restrictions that can technically disqualify
parties.

Clause 5 of the Bill gives powers to the presiding officer, after
consultation with party agents and members of the security services, to
redetermine and redemarcate the boundary of a voting station if necessary.
It has not been possible under the principal Act to strengthen security and
have flexible control. The issue of the voting boundaries is very important
and here we want to promote access to this participatory democracy and
ensure efficiency and access.

This Bill amends section 39 of the principal Act in cases where a voting
station accommodates a big number of voters so that the voting process can
be divided into streams in separate rooms. In this regard, the IEC may
allow more than two agents for parties. This is indeed a very progressive
amendment.

Clause 7 of the Bill entrenches another constitutionally fundamental right
with regard to physically challenged persons. In this regard, the presiding
officer may assist the voter that requires assistance due to physical
disability, including blindness or other visual impairment, in order for
him or her to cast his or her vote. Section 48 of the principal Act
prohibits such specific assistance with the category of voters who are
blind or have other visual impairments. This amendment is directly in line
with the Constitution.

In clause 8 the Bill creates specific provisions for special votes. It
allows any voter who is unable to vote on voting day to apply in a
prescribed manner and be allowed, prior to voting day, to cast a special
vote within that voting district. We must rally behind this amendment
because it entrenches the fundamental right of franchise. It must be noted
that section 55 of the principal Act, which is being amended, does not
allow for any special votes. According to the principal Act, voting must
occur on voting day and in the voting district where a voter is registered.


Clause 9 provides that if the commission is unable to determine and declare
the result of an election within seven days as required by the Electoral
Commission Act, it may, within that period, apply to the Electoral Court
for an extension of the period and must furnish good reasons for doing so.

Clause 10, in essence, permits an interested party to lodge an objection
material to the result of an election with the commission concerning
various stipulated grievances. The Bill enhances an effective and fair
process by way of entrenching the democratic right to object. In the same
vein, the principal Act is a little bit rigid and narrow in this particular
respect.

In conclusion, this Bill seeks to deepen participatory democracy to ensure
that electorates, parties and independent candidates are accommodated. It
further promotes transparency and accountability which is entrenched in our
Constitution.

Indeed, this has a direct bearing on the local and municipal level of
governance. This Bill promotes access of parties and individuals to all
levels of the organs of popular people’s power in order to enhance the
objectives of nation-building and the deepening of democracy.

We must rally behind this Bill to ensure its successful implementation. One
thing for sure is that we agree on the importance of the local and
municipal levels of governance in bringing representative democracy closer
to our people.

In this regard, as the ANC we support the Local Government: Municipal
Electoral Amendment Bill, 27B of 2010. We hope and appreciate everything
the other parties have said in supporting this particular Bill. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I would like to thank all the
participants in this debate for their support for the Bill. However, I
would like to respond to a few comments that were made. I would like to
start with a comment made by the hon Groenewald. I completely agree with
him that presiding officers need to be properly trained to understand the
detail of the law, so I think the Independent Electoral Commission will
make sure that that happens.

I also agree with him that the recommendations that everybody from the DA
is talking about are not necessarily the best recommendations for
democracy. I do think he is right; we might just take you on, and you will
disappear. He is right that the ANC will get much more than it gets now if
we go the route that we are proposing, and smaller parties will disappear.
Then you will turn around like you did with the floor-crossing and say that
the ANC introduced this, and that it is antidemocracy. I think I really
agree with the hon Groenewald on that.

I would also like to say to the hon Kganyago that I am sure that the IEC
will ensure that the special votes are carried out in a manner that has
integrity and fairness, and that there will be no problems. Hon Balindlela,
I am not quite sure what you mean when you say that you hope that there
will be no unintended consequences. The only unintended consequence that I
can see is probably the further disintegration of Cope. [Laughter.] Other
than that, I see no other unintended consequence.

Then coming to the hon Mnqasela, I think ... akekho umuntu ozonixhopha.
Ningahle ningawatholi lawa mavoti eniwafunayo kodwa nizobe ningaxhoshwanga
kodwa abantu abavotayo abazobe benganifuni. [Ihlombe.] [... no person will
cheat you. You might not succeed in getting the votes that you want - not
because the process has been fraudulent, but because the voters do not want
you. [Applause.]]

Coming to the hon Lovemore, I just want to say that I agree with her when
it comes to making sure that accessibility of the voting stations is
ensured, and I hope that the IEC will make sure that the voting stations
are accessible to all the voters. There I completely agree with you, but I
think the IEC is wise not to take your advice on carrying out voter
education that says that voters must take out the ruling party, because
that is not their prerogative, and they then would not be doing what their
mandate says they should do. I think they are wise to have said they will
not do that.

When it comes to the mixture of constituencies and proportional
representation, I think the ruling party did agree to that in local
government, because that is where you need it most, and it is there, so I
don’t know what the complaint is about. When it comes to the national
sphere, I do think that you can’t just look at one aspect and say it will
give more accountability. For all the other aspects that you mentioned,
such as inclusiveness and inclusivity, when you then debate, you exclude
that part which is very important.

The electoral law, as it stands in terms of proportional representation, is
actually very good for inclusivity, and that is why we have so many parties
here. If we didn’t have it, we wouldn’t have so many parties. Maybe we
would have had three at most, and the others would disappear.

Secondly, the Constitution says there should be equality and we are
building a nonracial, nonsexist South Africa. Part of the reason why the
ruling party is able to fulfil its mandate when it comes to that aspect of
gender equality is because of the proportional representation system, and I
think it is important to keep to that. It is not only about gender; it is
about youth, people with disabilities and so on. The electoral law is able
to include them in our Parliament, precisely because it is using the
proportional representation system.

It is also important that parliamentarians do not become captive of a
particular lobby group that funds their election, because if we start going
constituency by constituency, many people will end up being funded, as we
see in big democracies: funding by this organisation and that organisation,
and they end up becoming captive of a particular lobby group.

I think there is no problem with what the ruling party has accepted and, of
course, recommendations are recommendations – they are either accepted or
not accepted. There is nothing that says that when something has been
recommended, the ruling party is under an obligation to accept it, but I
can assure you that the ruling party has examined the recommendations,
applied its mind and has come to the conclusion it did very wisely. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 15:54.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS
ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills - correction

     (1)    In the ATC of 27 October 2010, the Basic Education Laws
         Amendment Bill [B 36 – 2010] (National Assembly – proposed sec 76)
         was incorrectly introduced as B 26 – 2010. The correct number of
         the Bill is B 36 – 2010.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces


1.    The Minister of Finance

     (a)    Consolidated Financial Information for the year ended 31 March
        2010 [RP 265-2010].

     (b)    Report and Financial Statements of the Reconstruction and
        Development Programme (RDP) Fund for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 264-2010].

2.    The Minister of Police
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Private Security
        Industry Regulatory Authority for 2009-2010, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 205-2010].


3.    The Minister of Higher Education and Training

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Services Sector
        Education and Training Authority (Services-Seta) for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 114-2010].


        Please note:   The above report and accompanying documents were
                    submitted to Parliament by 30 September 2010.


National Assembly

1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the State of
        the Public Service for 2010 [RP 262-2010].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.  The  Budgetary  Review  and  Recommendation  Report  of  the   Portfolio
   Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform on the performance of  the
   Department of Rural Development and Land Reform for  the  financial  year
   2009/10, dated 26 October 2010

   The Portfolio Committee on Rural  Development  and  Land  Reform,  having
   considered  the  2009/10  Annual  Report  of  the  Department  of   Rural
   Development and Land Reform together with that  of  the  Ingonyama  Trust
   Board and the Commission  on  Restitution  of  Land  Rights,  reports  as
   follows:

1.    Introduction

The Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act, 2009  (Act  No.
9 of 2009) requires that the National Assembly  conduct  annual  assessments
of the performance of each national department with regards  to  the  medium
term  estimates  of  expenditure,  strategic   priorities   and   measurable
objectives as tabled in the National Assembly. In line with the Money  Bills
Act 9 of 2009 and the constitutional obligations for Parliament  to  conduct
oversight over the executive, the Portfolio Committee on  Rural  Development
and Land  Reform  (the  committee)  considered  the  Annual  Report  of  the
Department of Rural Development and Land Reform  (the  department)  for  the
2009/10 financial year.

The committee received briefings on the annual reports  of  the  department,
the Kwazulu-Natal Ingonyama  Trust  (the  Ingonyama  Trust  Board)  and  the
Commission on Restitution of Land Rights for  the  2009/10  financial  year.
This report, therefore, provides the committee’s assessment of  the  service
delivery performance of the DRDLR, Ingonyama Trust Board and the  Commission
on Restitution of Land Rights for the 2009/10 financial year. An  assessment
of the performance of the department and related public entities  was  based
on of the following:
 ← The mandate and  strategic  priorities  of  the  department  as  per  the
   Interim Strategic Plan.
 ← Financial and non financial performance of the department  for  the  year
   under review.
 ← Expenditure reports of  the  department  as  published  by  the  National
   Treasury in terms of Section 32 of the Public  Financial  Management  Act
   (PFMA).
 ← Report of the Auditor-General of South Africa.
 ← Other reference documents such as the State of the  Nation  Address,  the
   Budget Speech, and reports of the committee on public accounts.

2.    Mandate and strategic priorities of the Department

The Department of Rural Development and Land Reform, formerly known  as  the
Department of Land Affairs, is one of the national  departments  established
after the 2009 national  elections.  Its  mandate  was  extended  to  ensure
implementation of Outcome 7 of the Medium Term Strategic  Framework  (MTSF);
which seeks to ensure the creation of  vibrant,  equitable  and  sustainable
rural  communities  and  ensuring  sustainable  food  security.  Outcome   7
constitutes the  basis  on  which  the  performance  of  the  department  is
measured.

The department revised its  vision  and  mission  during  the  restructuring
processes in order to  align  itself  with  the  new  mandate.  The  vision,
according to the  Interim  Strategic  Plan (2009-2012)  is  “to  create  and
maintain an equitable and sustainable land dispensation  as  a  catalyst  in
rural development that ensures rural livelihoods, decent work and  continued
social and economic advancement of all South Africans”. The mission  is  “to
provide enhanced land rights to all South Africans with particular  emphasis
on black people in rural human settlements that would  result  in  increased
food production, food security and improved quality of life”.

In  line  with  the  above-mentioned  outcome  7,  the  department  set  the
following main outputs over the Medium  Term  Expenditure  Framework  (MTEF)
period: sustainable land reform, food security for  all,  rural  development
and sustainable livelihoods, and job creation as well as skills training.


The department set itself the following key priorities for the 2009/10
financial year:

 ← Fast-tracking  land  redistribution  in  order  to  meet  the  government
   target  to  redistribute  30%  of  white-owned   agricultural   land   to
   historically disadvantaged South Africans.
 ← Finalising  outstanding  claims.  It  set  the  target  of  settling  all
   outstanding claims by 2011.
 ← Speeding up the  formulation  of  policy  and  legislation  in  order  to
   regulate access to, and ownership of, land by foreigners.
 ← Finalise the Land Use Management Bill for integrated spatial planning.
 ←  Linking  land  and  agrarian  reform  to  the  broader  integrated   and
   sustainable rural development strategy.
 ←   Providing   adequate   post-settlement   support   to    land    reform
   beneficiaries.
 ← Implementing the Communal Land Rights Act, No of 11 of  2004  (CLARA)  in
   order to unleash development potential in the former homeland areas.
 ← Identifying, acquiring and releasing  appropriate  land  for  sustainable
   human settlements in support of the  initiatives  of  the  Department  of
   Human Settlement.
 ← Develop programmes for the empowerment of women,  children,  people  with
   disabilities and those living with HIV and AIDS, and older persons within
   the context of the mandate of the department.

Table 1 (below) highlights  programmes  and  measurable  objectives  of  the
DRDLR. These programmes were formulated to ensure that  the  performance  of
the department  is  geared  towards  the  accomplishment  of  the  strategic
priorities outlined above.
Table1:     Measurable objectives per programme
|Programme     |Measurable objectives                                    |
|Administration|Creation of an enabling environment for improved service |
|              |delivery through leadership alignment and appropriate    |
|              |organization culture and architecture.                   |
|Surveys and   |Provision of accurate, up-to-date and accessible maps and|
|Mapping       |other geo-spatial information imagery and an integrated  |
|              |spatial reference framework to enhance planning and      |
|              |monitoring of land reform, national infrastructure and   |
|              |sustainable development, nationally and regionally.      |
|Cadastral     |Approval, maintenance and archiving of cadastral survey  |
|Survey        |documents submitted by land surveyors, facilitating the  |
|Management    |regulation of cadastral surveys and supply of cadastral  |
|              |information, in order to support and facilitate economic |
|              |development, with specific emphasis on land tenure reform|
|              |and rural development.                                   |
|Restitution   |Resolve restitution claims within the target period      |
|              |through negotiated settlements that restore land rights  |
|              |or award alternative forms of equitable redress to       |
|              |claimants.                                               |
|Land and      |Ensure that sustainable benefits of economic growth      |
|Tenure Reform |accrue to previously disadvantaged communities, groups   |
|              |and individuals.                                         |
|Spatial       |Provision of legislative, institutional and technical    |
|Planning and  |skills support to regulate and guide settlement          |
|Information   |development, land use and spatial information management.|
|Deeds         |To provide a high-quality deeds registration system      |
|Registries    |whereby secure titles are registered and speedy and      |
|              |accurate information is provided.                        |


The  department  also  created  the  following  branches  to  implement  the
Comprehensive Rural Development Programme (CRDP):

 • The Geo-spatial services, Technology Development and Disaster  Management
   (GTD): To provide up to date and  accessible  disaster  risk  assessment,
   disaster mitigation and management as well as capacity  building  of  the
   rural communities under disaster management.
 • The Social, Technical, Rural Livelihoods and  Institutional  Facilitation
   (STRIF): To create an enabling institutional environment for  sustainable
   rural development.
 • The Rural Infrastructure Development (RID): To facilitate,  initiate  and
   coordinate the development of social, economic, ICT  and  public  amenity
   infrastructure.

3.    Strategic and operational plans of the department (2009-2012)

The strategic plan sets out a path for the implementation of the  priorities
of the department. During the period under review, the department  developed
two strategic plans, that is the Interim strategic plan  2009  –  2012  (the
focus of this report), and the Strategic Plan 2010 – 2013.  The  realignment
of the strategic priorities and objectives of the department  in  line  with
the  new  mandate  of  the  department,  especially  the   CRDP   component,
determined the drafting of the 2010 – 2013 Strategic Plan.

An analysis of the strategic objectives of the  department  focuses  on  the
following  strategic  areas:  redistribution  of  30%  of  the  white  owned
agricultural land by 2014, finalisation of all outstanding land  restitution
claims, and the CRDP.

 • Redistribution: A shift of focus from quantitative targets to qualitative
   ones was welcomed by the committee, and is  important.  To  increase  the
   pace of land redistribution, the department  should  find  mechanisms  to
   ensure that the land acquisition is at an affordable rate.  A  number  of
   interventions to find alternative forms of land acquisition, as  well  as
   underpinning these with specific purposes  were  proposed,  for  example,
   categorisation of land reform beneficiaries. In view of the actual budget
   allocation, the department adjusted its  targets  for  delivery  of  land
   redistribution. This suggests a need to continuously explore  alternative
   means for acquisition of land in a cost effective manner, rather than the
   current market driven approach. It is on this basis that  the  department
   sought to  review  the  willing-buyer,  willing  seller  model  for  land
   redistribution.


 • Restitution: The Commission on Restitution of Land Rights has settled 95%
   of the total 79,696 land  claims  lodged  since  1998.   Figure  1  below
   suggests that it may have been less demanding to  settle  claims  through
   cash compensation. The majority of claims settled were cash  compensation
   as opposed to land restoration where little land  was  restored  to  land
   claimants. The overall picture is that the commission has processed  more
   urban than rural claims. A bulk of  the  outstanding  claims  are  mostly
   rural and are of a complex nature, involving  national  strategic  assets
   such as national parks, forestry land, commercial  farms  linked  foreign
   export markets, as well as land with mining operations. These claims will
   require a substantive budget allocation.


 • Land and Tenure Reform: A key aspect of the land redistribution for  this
   period was the restructuring of land reform products to address different
   types  of  land  reform  beneficiaries,  namely:   landless   households,
   commercial and subsistence producers, expanding  commercial  smallholders
   and well established black commercial farmers. The  categorisation  shows
   the redirection of land reform to shift towards being responsive  to  the
   needs of the people. The closing of gaps in  legislation  for  tenure  on
   communal land in the former Homelands and  commercial  farms  are  issues
   that are long overdue.


 • Comprehensive Rural Development Programme: The overall strategy  for  the
   department is agrarian transformation, rural development and land reform.
   A major focus of this programme was the launch and implementation of  the
   CRDP with the intention to attain sustainable land  and  agrarian  reform
   that contributes to rural development, food security and improved quality
   of life in rural areas.

4.    Analysis of the 2009/10 Annual Reports  of  the  Department  of  Rural
   Development and Land Reform

During the 2009/10 financial year, the  department  witnessed  a  series  of
changes, from the change of name, realignment of its vision and  mission  to
address the new focus of rural development, land reform  and  job  creation.
In  addition,  seven  existing  programmes  were  reconfigured   into   nine
branches, including the newly formed  GTD,  STRIF,  and  RID.  However,  the
department reported on the seven programs as per its  strategic  plan  2009-
2012.

4.1.  Programme Performance of the DRDLR, including the CRLR

Table 2 below illustrates the non-financial performance  of  the  department
against the strategic and operational plan of the department.  Overall,  the
department had a 78% rate of non-achievement or partial achievement  on  its
targets  across  different  programmes.  Of  the  seven   programmes   being
reported, only one had more than 50% achievement rate or exceeding  targets,
whilst six programmes had more than 70% rate of non-achievement  or  partial
achievement on targets.

The programme  that  is  of  specific  concern  to  this  committee  is  the
Comprehensive  Rural  Development  Programme,  which  was   added   in   the
subsequent Strategic Plan  (2010-2013).  For  this  purpose,  the  committee
makes reference to Programme 8: Comprehensive Rural Development Programme.

Table 2: Overview of the non-financial performance of the DRDLR
|Programme   |Strategic  |Performance |Targets   |No. of   |No. of  |% not  |
|            |Objectives |Indicators  |per       |Targets  |targets |achieve|
|            |per        |per         |programme |achieved |not     |d      |
|            |programme  |programme   |          |and/or   |achieved|and/or |
|            |           |            |          |exceeded |or      |partial|
|            |           |            |          |         |partiall|ly     |
|            |           |            |          |         |y       |achieve|
|            |           |            |          |         |achieved|d      |
|2. Surveys  |2          |5           |5         |3        |2       |40%    |
|and Mapping |           |            |          |         |        |       |
|3. Cadastral|4          |7           |7         |2        |5       |71%    |
|Surveys     |           |            |          |         |        |       |
|Management  |           |            |          |         |        |       |
|4.          |1          |3           |3         |-        |3       |75%    |
|Restitution |           |            |          |         |        |       |
|5. Land and |3          |4           |4         |-        |4       |100%   |
|Tenure      |           |            |          |         |        |       |
|Reform      |           |            |          |         |        |       |
|6. Spatial  |1          |4           |4         |1        |3       |75%    |
|Planning and|           |            |          |         |        |       |
|Information |           |            |          |         |        |       |
|7. Deeds    |2          |7           |7         |1        |6       |85%    |
|registration|           |            |          |         |        |       |
|TOTAL       |14         |33          |33        |7        |26      |78%    |


Source: Based on the 2009/10 Annual Report of the DRDLR (2010)

The following sections highlight some of the successes and  challenges  with
the performance of the department according to programmes:

 •  Programme   1   (Administration):   This   programme   coordinated   the
   transformation process of the department to ensure alignment with the new
   mandate. One of the critical aspects in this regard is the  reduction  of
   vacancy rate. During the  period  under  review,  the  vacancy  rate  was
   reduced from 16, 7% to 10, 24%. This included the filling of 21  priority
   posts, 17 of those were for the  senior  management  levels.  Significant
   achievements included the development of the CRDP Framework by the policy
   unit. The same unit was involved with the development of the draft  Green
   Paper on Rural Development and Land  Reform.  However,  the  draft  green
   paper was not released during the 2009/10 financial year.  The  committee
   commended the department for progress with regards to the  pilot  of  the
   CRDP. It awaits information from the department on the  emerging  lessons
   from the pilot projects across the eight provinces of South  Africa.  The
   committee expressed concerns with this  programme  because  100%  of  the
   targets were only partially achieved.


 • Programme 2 (Surveys  and  Mapping):  The  programme  operates  within  a
   technical and highly specialised and well regulated field.  This  is  the
   only programme that managed to achieve 60% of their targets. However, the
   committee  believed  that  it  could  still  improve   to   ensure   100%
   achievement. Some of the key successes were the acquisition of up to date
   maps, which includes  the  production  of  1  900  up  to  date  maps  in
   compliance within prescribed standards.   This  includes  the  430,600km2
   earth imagery at 0.5 ground sample distance against  the  target  of  the
   290,000km2. The acquisition of this important  data  set  can  facilitate
   better spatial  planning,  tools  and  products  for  effective  decision
   making, especially around land use management and development.

 • Programme 3 (Cadastral Surveys Management): The programme operates within
   a well regulated and highly specialised field. Its performance  has  been
   relatively consistent and was improving. However, the committee expressed
   concern over its 29% achievement of its targets. Its failures relates  to
   targets regarding turnaround times for approval of diagrams, updating and
   archiving hard copies records. For example,  the  department  targeted  a
   turnaround time for updating and archiving hard copies of records  to  be
   15 days. However, the programme actually took 18 days.  The production of
   accurate  cadastral  data  and  surveying  underpins  the  production  of
   accurate maps and spatial information for geographic information  systems
   (GIS). Therefore, it is  of  paramount  importance  that  this  programme
   concentrates on achieving the targets set,  as  the  products  have  wide
   applications across the sectors.


 •  Programme  4  (Restitution):  This  programme  is  implemented  by   the
   Commission  on  Restitution  of  Land  Rights  (CRLR)  and  is  the  most
   challenging for the department. This section draws from the annual report
   of the CRLR as presented to the Portfolio Committee.   According  to  the
   strategic plan, all claims were to be settled by the  end  of  2011.  The
   target was revised due to budgetary constraints.  By  the  end  of  March
   2010, the CRLR was able to achieve 25% of its targets, that  is;  of  the
   131 claims processed during the year,  98  were  dismissed  and  33  were
   settled. If tracked for the last 10 years, the figures show a decline  in
   number of claims that the CRLR can settle. A number of reasons were noted
   for this decline, namely: exorbitant  land  prices  and  the  decline  in
   budget  allocation  for  restitution,  complexity  of   the   nature   of
   outstanding land claims. Other factors that contributed to the decline in
   settlement of claims is the complexity  of  claims  on  large  commercial
   agricultural land linked to  international  export  markets,  numbers  of
   rural employment associated with such farms, inter  and  intra  community
   disputes, and complexity of claims on national strategic assets  such  as
   national parks and forests.


      Figure 1: Settlement of Land Claims between 1999 and March 2010
















   Adapted from the Annual Report of the CRLR (2010)


   The department reported that 75 844 land claims  or  95%  of  total  land
   claims lodged by 1998 were resolved by March 2010. However, the graph  in
   figure 1 illustrates that majority were settled in cash compensation. The
   3 852 outstanding claims involve very complex rural claims on high  value
   agricultural land. However, the budget  for  land  restitution  has  been
   declining.


   The department and the CRLR developed a  turn-around  strategy  for  land
   restitution so that they could finalise the land claims by 2012  in  line
   with the strategic plan. The strategy focused on  the  following  issues:
   research and verification of land claims,  settlement  models,  financing
   land restitution, communication  plan  and  information  management,  and
   litigation and management. It is envisaged that the  turnaround  strategy
   will address challenges confronting the restitution programme or the CRLR
   with regards to  exorbitant  land  prices,  border  disputes,  settlement
   models and court cases.


 • Programme 5 (Land and Tenure Reform): This programme forms  part  of  the
   core business of the department, dealing  with  the  following  strategic
   areas: land redistribution, land tenure (communal and farm  dweller  land
   rights) and state land management.


   Government had set, as its target, a plan to redistribute  30%  of  white
   owned agricultural land by 2014. The department  targeted  redistributing
   656,000  hectares  during  the  2009/10  financial  year.  However,  only
   239,990.5363  hectares  were  transferred   under   374   projects.   The
   performance of the programme  towards  achievement  of  the  targets  was
   affected significantly  by  other  programmes,  such  as  the  new  rural
   development component (see financial performance for details).


   The committee welcomed the department’s commitment towards protection  of
   tenure rights for  farm  dwellers  through  the  Land  Rights  Management
   Facility. This  facility  provided  legal  services  to  the  victims  of
   eviction or those under threat of eviction. While the  committee  remains
   concerned about the failure of the programme to  achieve  the  target  of
   confirming, it  welcomed  the  achievement  of  confirming  438  people’s
   rights. The committee further requested the department  to  finalise  the
   legislative framework to strengthen the tenure  security  for  both  farm
   dwellers and those living in the former Homelands. With regards to  state
   land management, the department continues to experience  problems  around
   vesting parcels of land and surveying and registration of all state  land
   in South Africa.


 • Programme 6 (Spatial Planning and Information): This  programme  attained
   25% achievement on targets for  their  strategic  objectives.  Its  major
   successes are in the areas of development, implementation and  monitoring
   of  the  comprehensive  rural  development  status  quo,  monitoring  and
   implementation of CRDP and development spatial  plans  component  of  the
   rural development  plans.  A  key  challenge  related  to  the  Land  Use
   Management Bill (LUMB) and its reintroduction in Parliament. However,  it
   was reported that that the draft LUMB was developed by March 2010.


 • Programme 7 (Deeds Registration):    Of  the  seven  targets  under  this
   programme, only one was  achieved.  A  significant  improvement  in  this
   programme was the introduction of the day to day  scanning  in  Kimberly,
   Vryburg and Mthatha.  This  is  regarded  as  a  secure  archive  against
   corruption of data.


 • New programme of Rural Development: The branches of GTD,  STRIF  and  RID
   were established to enable the department to implement the new mandate of
   rural development. This programme managed to roll out CRDP pilot projects
   across the eight provinces, namely Limpopo, Mpumalanga, Free State, North
   West, Northern Cape, Western Cape, Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal.

        2. Financial Performance of the DRDLR according to its Programmes

The original 2009/10  total  appropriation  of  the  department  was  R6.099
billion. The amount was adjusted by R292 million to fund the new mandate  of
the CRDP in November 2009 to add up  to  a  total  appropriation  of  R6.391
billion. Of the final total  appropriated,  the  department  spent  R5,  854
billion or 91.61% of  the  total  budget.  Table  2  below  illustrates  the
financial performance of the department according to programmes.
Table 2: Financial Performance of the Department of  Rural  Development  and
Land Reform
|Programme    |Final         |Actual amount     |Under-spending   |Under-spend|
|             |appropriation |spent per         |per programme    |ing % per  |
|             |per programme |programme R’000   |R’000            |programme  |
|             |R’000         |                  |                 |           |
|1.           |652,244       |573,225           |79,019           |12.11%     |
|Administratio|              |                  |                 |           |
|n            |              |                  |                 |           |
|2. Surveys   |88,455        |84,529            |3,926            |4.44%      |
|and Mapping  |              |                  |                 |           |
|3. Cadastral |140,824       |127,662           |13,162           |9.35%      |
|Surveys      |              |                  |                 |           |
|Management   |              |                  |                 |           |
|4.           |2,338,393     |2,331,634         |6,759            |0.29%      |
|Restitution  |              |                  |                 |           |
|5. Land and  |2,787,536     |2,569,601         |217,935          |7,82       |
|Tenure Reform|              |                  |                 |           |
|6. Spatial   |64,102        |41,908            |22,194           |34.62%     |
|Planning and |              |                  |                 |           |
|Information  |              |                  |                 |           |
|7. Auxiliary |67,197        |63,171            |4,026            |5,99%      |
|and          |              |                  |                 |           |
|Associated   |              |                  |                 |           |
|services     |              |                  |                 |           |
|8. Rural     |252,340       |62,991            |189,349          |75.04%     |
|Development  |              |                  |                 |           |
|Total        |6, 391,091    |5,854,721         |536,370          |8.39%      |


Source: DRDLR (2010)

The committee expressed concern over the financial performance of  the  four
major  programmes  that  are  the  drivers  of   the   department,   namely:
administration, restitution, land and tenure reform and  rural  development.


 • The programme of administration under-spent its allocation by R79 million
   or 12.11% of its final appropriation. It is reported that under  spending
   under administration was mainly because of delays in  the  implementation
   of the new structure and  filling  of  associated  vacancies,  especially
   those of the level of senior management. The department also saved  money
   when it decided to end the use  of  recruitment  agencies  and  focus  on
   building internal capacity for recruitment.

 • Restitution  spent  99.71%  of  its  total  budget  allocation.  Although
   restitution spent almost 100% of its allocation,  the  programme  remains
   beset with a huge backlog in terms of funds that the DRDLR/CRLR still has
   to pay to both land owners, who signed the offer  to  purchase  with  the
   CRLR. As early as the second  quarter  of  2009/10,  the  allocation  for
   restitution was almost entirely depleted. This negatively impacted on the
   ability of the CRLR to purchase farms for land restitution. However,  the
   CRLR continued to negotiate and commit the state to  purchase  farms  for
   land restitution. By March 2010, the CRLR had entered into commitments to
   the total of about R7.5 billion, which is understood to have increased to
   R12 billion due to the court orders for enforcement of payments  to  land
   owners. As a result, R700 million of the restitution budgets were used to
   settle some of the court orders in terms of litigation awarded in  favour
   of applicants.  Over the last  couple  of  years,  the  budget  for  land
   restitution was declining, yet the price  of  land  to  be  acquired  was
   increasing. In addition, the types of land to be acquired comprised  high
   value agricultural land, mining land and national  strategic  assets.  In
   order to ensure that all outstanding land claims  are  settled  by  2012,
   more budgets alongside alternative ways of acquisition of land in a  cost
   effective manner would have to be sought.  Furthermore,  allocations  for
   post-settlement  support  and  recapitalization  of  failed  land  reform
   projects should be given considerable attention.

 • The programme of Land and Tenure reform under-spent its budget  by  R217,
   935 million or 7.82% of its total appropriation. The  under  spending  is
   mainly due to the non-disbursements of funds for the Land Reform  Grants.
   The DRDLR submitted to the National Treasury a request  of  approval  for
   the DRDLR to shift R500 million from land reform to restitution. However,
   the National Treasury only approved R100 million  which  was  shifted  in
   November 2009. The DRDLR therefore had R400 million under  the  Land  and
   Tenure Reform Programme to spend before the March  2010.  While  Treasury
   Regulations permit shifting of funds, the department shifted  funds  from
   land and tenure reform, a key driver for the department, to  restitution.
   As a result, fewer  funds  were  available  to  purchase  land  for  this
   programme.

 • The new programme of rural development spent only R62.991 million or  25%
   of the total allocation of R252 million. This fund was made available  in
   November 2009 during the adjustment period; and as a  result,  there  was
   limited time for the department to spend it as planned.


4. Expenditure report in terms of first quarter  report  for  the  financial
   year 2010/11

The total budget of the DRDLR for the 2010/11  financial  is  R6.7  billion.
The department had projected to spend 25% of that budget  during  the  first
quarter. By June 2010, the department had managed to spend only 13% of  that
overall budget. According to National Treasury, the  department  fell  below
the 25% benchmark because of the redirection of funds towards settlement  of
outstanding  restitution  court  cases,  rather  than  settling   new   land
restitution claims. Because of the focus on such payments of  court  orders,
spending on transfers to households has been less than projected.
Spending trends on two major programmes of the department:
 ← Restitution:  From  a  budget  allocation  of  R1,  5  billion  for  land
   restitution, R552 million or  35%  had  been  spent  by  June  2010.  The
   spending  trend  can  be  linked  to  the  department’s   settlement   of
   outstanding restitution court cases.
 ← Land reform: The department  spent  R162  million  or  4%  of  the  total
   budget allocation of R4.1 billion for land reform. According to  National
   Treasury, this spending pattern can be associated with the fact that  the
   department focussed on settlement of court cases and that funds for  Land
   Reform Grants have been shifted to restitution grants in order to  ensure
   that enough funds were available to pay for the court orders.

5. Consideration of the Report of the Auditor General

The department received 1 qualification  for  the  year  under  review.  The
qualification relates to tangible capital  assets  (immovable  assets).  The
Auditor-General could not confirm the completeness and valuation of,  rights
and obligations regarding immovable assets. In addition, the  milestones  as
per National Vesting Master Plan were  not  achieved.  The  committee  noted
that the department had been receiving a qualification on  this  matter  for
the past four years  (2005/06  to  2009/10).   For  the  year  2009/10,  the
department received a qualification only on this matter.

The Auditor-General also expressed five emphases of other  matters,  namely:
material  losses  through  criminal  conduct,   significant   uncertainties,
irregular expenditure, fruitless and wasteful expenditure  and  commitments.
With the material losses through criminal conduct - R53, 301 million  losses
were incurred as  a  result  of  fraudulent  activities  identified  through
forensic investigations in three  land  reform  projects  in  KwaZulu-Natal.
Those projects are the  Land  Redistribution  for  Agricultural  Development
(LRAD).   It  was  found  that  there  was  no  compliance  with  laws   and
regulations, particularly section  38(1)(a)(i)  of  the  PFMA.  This  matter
related to adequacy of policies and procedures,  database  of  beneficiaries
receiving  grant  funding  and  adequate  monitoring  to  detect  fictitious
beneficiaries.

7.    The observations of the Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and
      Land Reform

The Portfolio  Committee  on  Rural  Development  and  Land  Reform,  having
engaged the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform on  the  2009/10
Annual Report, made the following observations:

7.1.  The department lacks adequate capacity to fully  implement  programmes
      and attain targets set under key strategic programmes.  The  committee
      found that  capacity  inadequacies  were  in  the  following  specific
      strategic areas:


    • Strategic planning to ensure that the objectives and targets  set  are
      measurable and realistic. Majority of the objectives set  were  either
      not achieved or partially achieved as a result of poor planning.

    • Lack of leadership to ensure that the department maintains  effective,
      efficient and transparent systems and internal controls  with  regards
      to performance management. Related to this matter are the inadequacies
      around staffing for the department. Of  the  eight  senior  management
      positions, five of them are on an acting capacity. In turn, a lack  of
      dedicated  full  time  positions  impact   on   the   efficiency   and
      productivity of the ‘actors’ thus  compromising  the  quality  of  the
      work.

    • Creation of  systems  that  ensure  risk  management  and  fraud.  The
      portfolio committee expressed concern over the material losses through
      criminal conduct, where an amount R53.301 million was incurred through
      fraudulent activities. However, the committee welcomed the information
      that the department initiated a forensic investigation to uncover such
      fraudulent activities.

    • Research to ensure that credible and valid land claims are settled for
      the land reform purposes.

    • Monitoring and  evaluation  systems  to  ensure  that  the  department
      remains informed of indicators of success  or  failures  of  the  land
      reform projects. Additionally, research capacity  to  ensure  evidence
      based land and agrarian reform policy development.

    • Weaknesses of  the  internal  audit.  Although,  the  audit  committee
      reported that it raised some  of  the  concerns  highlighted  in  this
      report, for example, content and  quality  of  quarterly  reports,  it
      appears that it is ineffective in  terms  of  holding  the  accounting
      officer accountable.

    • Leadership to ensure that  the  department  complies  with  regulatory
      requirements and achieve predetermined objectives. The  committee  was
      concerned about the lack of systems, as found by the  Auditor-General.
      There were no adequate systems  regarding  performance  management  as
      well as compliance with section 38(1) (a) (i) and (b) of the PFMA.

    • Lack of adequate skilled human resources  for  the  implementation  of
      programmes, for example, skills in survey of communal  in  the  former
      homelands.



7.2.  An absence of a coherent legal framework to direct the  core  business
      of the department. Such core  business  is  land  restitution,  tenure
      reform, and rural development. The committee found that the  following
      areas were of major concern if the South  African  land  and  agrarian
      reform linked to rural development was successful:

      • While the committee commends the department for development of  the
        framework for the comprehensive rural development programme, it  is
        concerned about the capacity and capability within  the  department
        to facilitate a meaningful rural development programme informed  by
        the needs of the people.

      • There are critical challenges confronting South Africa with regards
        to the communal land rights tenure. The only legislation  available
        to this effect is the Interim Protection of  Informal  Land  Rights
        Act. However, its enforcement is weak due to  the  absence  of  the
        regulations.

      • The committee noted the inability of the Commission of  Restitution
        of Land Rights to finalise all the outstanding land claims by  2011
        as  well  as  the  failure  by  the  department  to   achieve   the
        redistribution of the 30% of white-owned agricultural land by 2014.
        One of the reasons why the  department  fails  to  settle  all  the
        claims is lack sufficient financial resources to  ensure  that  the
        state buys quality land for redistribution.

      • Rural development, as one of the key priorities of government,  has
        spent 25% of its budget. The  committee  welcomed  the  explanation
        regarding failure to use the allocation for the Comprehensive Rural
        Development  Programme,  for  example;  that  the  allocation   was
        received late in the  year,  thus  limiting  the  extent  to  which
        beneficiaries can engage on critical issues such as land.



7.3.  Lack of adequate financial resources is one of  the  reasons  why  the
      department  was  unable  to  meet  their  targets  for  land   reform.
      Furthermore, there are concerns about the cost of acquisition of  land
      through the market system, hence review of the willing  buyer  willing
      seller model. As a result,  the  Commission  on  Restitution  of  Land
      Rights has committed the department to the amount of approximately  R7
      billion for land restitution.




8.    Recommendations of the Portfolio Committee on  Rural  Development  and
    Land Reform




The Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform recommends  the
    following

with regards to enhancing the performance of the department:



The department should develop strategies  and  implementation  plans  to  be
submitted to parliament before the end of  2010/11  financial  year  on  the
following areas:



 ← Recruitment  of  highly  skilled  leaders  and  senior  managers  of  the
   department to  curb  the  weaknesses  regarding  lack  of  leadership  as
   identified by the Auditor-General and the committee.

 ← Research and monitoring  and  evaluation  to  enable  the  department  to
   track  progress  and  identify  problems  and  deficiencies  in   project
   implementation across the programmes.

 ←  A  functional  internal  audit  function   to   continuously   highlight
   weaknesses in the systems as well as holding the department  accountable,
   specifically  on  the  three  identified  issues  of   risk   management,
   predetermined objectives and fraud and corruption.




The department should submit a plan within the 2010/11  financial  year  and
reports on systems put in place to ensure that  the  core  business  of  the
department is adequately administered and functioning. These should  include
the following:



 ← Capacity for monitoring and evaluation  of  both  land  reform  and  CRDP
   pilot projects.

 ← Recruitment  and  development  of  technical  skills  in  the  fields  of
   surveys and deeds registries to ensure that the important areas  such  as
   surveying and vesting of all state land are accomplished.

 ← Development of a database of all previous and current  beneficiaries  who
   benefited through land reform to  ensure  compliance  with  criteria  for
   qualification as a beneficiary to land reform grants and subsidies.

 • Development of a plan regarding how the department  will  deal  with  the
   backlogs  related  to  commitments  made  under  the  programme  of  land
   restitution. In addition, the plan should outline the overall  figure  of
   commitments and grants to be paid out.



 The department must develop a legislation programme to  create  a  coherent
 legal framework that will ensure, as  a  matter  of  urgency,  secure  land
 tenure for all South Africans, which take into account  the  constitutional
 court judgment in Tongoane. In addition, it should hasten  the  process  of
 equitable land redistribution and settlement of all land claims. This  will
 take into account the constitutional requirement for legislation  providing
 for security of tenure in land. Section 25(8) of the constitution  provides
 for this, as follows: “No provision of this section may  impede  the  state
 from taking legislative and other  measures  to  achieve  land,  water  and
 related  reform,  in  order  to  redress  the  results   of   past   racial
 discrimination, provided that any departure from  the  provisions  of  this
 section is in accordance with the provisions of section 36(1).


The DRDLR to develop a strategy and realistic programme for land and  tenure
reform as well as the integrated approach to rural development with a  focus
on the following:

  • Completion of pilots for CRDP and plans with regards to a  roll  out  of
    the programme.

  • Guidelines with regards to implementation of land  restitution  in  line
    with the principles of land reform.

  • Recapitalization of all land reform projects


Parliament  should  consider  increasing  the  budget  allocation  for   the
department in the following areas:

  • The programme of restitution, by ring-fencing funds to  settle  backlogs
    of commitments made to land owners who signed offers to purchase  before
    March 2010.
  • The restitution programme to ensure that the CRLR settle all outstanding
    land claims.
  • Recapitalization of the  identified  failed  land  reform  project.  The
    Ministry estimated that 90% of the total land reform projects were in  a
    state of distress or have collapsed.
  • Comprehensive Rural Development Programme to ensure that pilot  projects
    were adequately resourced to provide sufficient space for lessons  on  a
    rural development path to be taken across the country, and  staffing  to
    ensure proper facilitation and coordination of rural development.
  • Capacity for implementation of the National Vesting Master Plan.




Report to be considered.



-----------------------
[pic]



