---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 11 May 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-05-11
---

TUESDAY, 11 MAY 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                   ______

The Council met at 10:31.

The Deputy Chairperson took the Chair and requested members to observe a
moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mnr W F FABER: Voorsitter, by die volgende sitting van die Raad sal ek
voorstel:

    Dat die Raad —

        1) kennis neem dat die De Beersgroep 40% van sy werkers te Finsch-
           myn in die Noord-Kaap gaan afdank weens finansiële verliese en
           die swak ekonomiese klimaat;

        2) verder kennis neem dat ongeveer 350 werkers hierdeur beïnvloed
           gaan word;
        3) toegee dat, met die geweldige hoë werkloosheidsyfer in die Noord-
           Kaap, dit rede tot kommer is; en

        4) ’n beroep sal doen op Minister Shabangu, Minister van Mynwese,
           om te bepaal of die 40% besnoeiing op werknemers geregverdig is
           deur die redes verstrek deur De Beers.

Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr W F FABER: Chairperson, at the next sitting of the Council, I shall
move:

   That the Council –

   1) notes that the De Beers group is going to dismiss 40% of its workers
      at the Finsch mine in the Northern Cape due to financial losses in the
      poor economic climate;

   2) further notes that approximately 350 workers will be affected by this,
      which, with the extremely high unemployment rate in the Northern Cape,
      is a reason for concern; and


      3) appeals to Minister Shabangu, the Minister of Mineral Resources, to
         establish whether the 40% cut in workers can be justified by the
         reason furnished by De Beers.

Thank you.]

Mr T D HARRIS: Chair, I hereby give notice that, at the next sitting of the
Council, I shall move:

   That the Council –


      1) acknowledges the comments made by political analyst Justice Malala
         who said on national television this week, and I quote:


         “Politicians can talk until the cows come home but if they do not
         create an environment for jobs then they have failed.


         It was therefore with approval that we heard this week that the
         Western Cape is creating jobs despite the 1% rise in unemployment
         nationally.


         Figures from Stats SA show that unemployment in the DA-run province
         has dropped by 1,2% between the last quarter of 2009 and the first
         quarter of this year.


         This means that jobs are on the increase in the Western Cape, while
         across the other eight provinces the average unemployment rate is
         26%.


         The Western Cape did particularly well when one considers that in
         the Eastern Cape 60 000 jobs have been lost, in Gauteng 81 000 more
         people are unemployed and in Mpumalanga 34 000 have lost jobs.


         What is the Western Cape doing that other provinces are failing to
         do?


         Perhaps the President should ask the premiers of these provinces to
         visit the Western Cape and learn a few things from there.”

Ms M G BOROTO: Chair, I hereby move without notice that the Council notes
that ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, can you
hold that thought? Can you hold on?

Ms M G BOROTO: All right.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Thank you. Hon Freddie,
please proceed.

Mr F ADAMS: Chair, I hereby give notice that, at the next sitting of the
Council, I shall move:

   That the Council –


      1) notes with utter dismay new reports of manipulated and erroneous
         margins that determine property rates in the DA-led City of Cape
         Town;


      2) further notes that this rates fiasco will leave thousands of
         homeowners paying exorbitant rates while thousands of others would
         score, paying low rates and costing the city hundreds of millions
         of rand; and


      3) acknowledges that the rates fiasco is one of the many scandals of
         poor governance by the DA and will cost the people of the Western
         Cape millions of rand, after the inflated costs of the Cape Town
         Stadium and the BRT system, which together have cost the province
         billions of rand that could have been used to complete the toilets
         they built without structures in Khayelitsha and ensure that
         communities in the townships get better services such as roads,
         refuse removal and water and sanitation.

Mnr H B GROENEWALD: Voorsitter, by die volgende sitting van die Huis sal ek
voorstel:


   Dat die Huis kennis neem dat die DA wil ernstig met President Zuma
   simpatiseer, wat dit na ’n jaar nie reggekry het om sy eie party se
   leierseienskapstoetse te slaag nie, maar verlam is deur sy eie populisme,
   swak morele leierskap en die aanstel van bondgenote in kern magsposisies
   sodat hulle en ook hyself ryk kan word en beskerming kan geniet.

Dankie. (Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Mr H B GROENEWALD: Chairperson, I give notice that at the next sitting of
the Council I shall move:


   That the Council notes that the DA sympathises with President Zuma, who
   after one year has failed to pass his own party’s tests on leadership
   quality characteristics, but who has been paralysed by his own populism,
   poor moral leadership and the appointment of allies in core positions of
   power, so that they as well as he himself can be enriched and enjoy
   protection.

Thank you.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Groenewald, was
that a motion or a notice?

Mr H B GROENEWALD: Chair, it is a motion.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): What kind of a motion?
Can you unpack it?
Mr H B GROENEWALD: Chair, sorry, it is notice of a motion.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): It’s a notice? Thank
you.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Chair, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the Council I shall move:

   That the Council –


      1) notes that the Transvaal Agricultural Union, TAU and the National
         Water Forum, NWF, laid criminal charges against Ministers Buyelwa
         Sonjica, Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs, Tina Joemat-
         Pettersson, Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries and
         Susan Shabangu, Minister of Mineral Resources, for alleged failure
         to protect South Africa’s rivers from pollution;


      2) notes that these two organisations said that they wrote numerous
         letters and requests to the three Ministers without any productive
         responses to alleviate or address the problem;


      3) further notes that if this is true, then it is unacceptable that
         these three Ministers act in such a manner because they are the
         public servants and have the powers to address the problem;
      4) acknowledges that they are also responsible for the wast of
         taxpayers’ money if the court case occurs against government; and


      5) requests the three Ministers to set up a consultative meeting with
         the two organisations to address the problems and to stop the legal
         actions taken by them.

                      PASSING AWAY OF MRS SHEENA DUNCAN
                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M G BOROTO: Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes with a great sense of loss the death of veteran human rights
         activist and anti-apartheid campaigner, Mrs Sheena Duncan, who
         sadly passed away on 4 May 2010 at the age of 78 years after a long
         illness;


      2) further notes that Sheena Duncan was a distinguished South African
         and an unrelenting activist who fought for justice and the pursuit
         of human rights for all in South Africa; and


      3) takes this opportunity to pass its profound heartfelt condolences
         to the Duncan family, especially her sister Her Excellency Sheila
         Camerer, who is South Africa’s Ambassador to Bulgaria, as well as
         relatives and friends, and hopes that they find solace in the
         contribution which she has made in the struggle for a nonsexist,
         just and democratic South Africa.


May her soul rest in peace!

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
                         2010 FIFA SOCCER WORLD CUP

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M W MAKGATE: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

       1) notes that today marks 30 days before the official kick off of
          the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup;


       2) expresses its audible sense of pride and humility that the people
          of the world are visiting the shores of our beautiful land;


       3) acknowledges that this important milestone will not, by any
          means, deter those who continue to peddle a sense of global fear,
          citing fears of crime, insecurity and an uncertain political
          climate;


       4) takes this opportunity to say to the world, we are ready to show
          you that we are a nation filled with pride, hope, aspiration and
          determination;

       5) calls on South Africans to blow their vuvuzelas and fly our
          national flag to rally behind our national team Bafana Bafana and
          to display our great spirit of ubuntu and humility, as we host
          our national guests; and

       6) expresses its profound appreciation to our outstanding
          compatriots who continue to spend sleepless nights and work
          tirelessly to make sure that this remains the best ever soccer
          World Cup.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                     SUPER 14 INTERNATIONAL RUGBY SERIES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A WATSON: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -
      1) notes the success of this season’s Super 14 International Rugby
         Series, now rapidly heading to an end and congratulates the teams
         at the head of the log;


      2) furthermore congratulates the mighty Bulls team, in particular, for
         being so far ahead of the other teams that they have already
         secured a home semi-final;


      3) furthermore, more importantly notes that they have chosen the
         Orlando Stadium in Soweto for the first semi-final and trusts that
         the outcome will be such that also the final will be played in
         Soweto; and

      4) acknowledges that this will not only be a welcome addition to the
         forthcoming soccer world series, but will add immensely to the
         image of our rainbow nation and the place of the game of rugby in
         it.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

                 WISHING MR L P M NZIMANDE A SPEEDY RECOVERY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr D D GAMEDE: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes that the hon Mr L P M Nzimande, MP, has been hospitalised
         since Friday; and


      2) takes this opportunity to wish him a speedy recovery and good
         health.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

   CONGRATULATING AMAZULU SOCCER TEAM AND SHARKS RUBGY TEAM ON THEIR FINE
                                PERFORMANCES

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr R A LEES: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes the well-deserved 2-1 quarter-final win of the AmaZulu soccer
         team over Pretoria University at the Harry Gwala stadium on
         Saturday, 9 May 2010;


      2) therefore congratulates AmaZulu on their fine performance and
         wishes them well for the Nedbank Cup semi-finals;


      3) further notes the excellent play of the Sharks rugby team on
         Saturday, 9 May 2010, when they trounced the Stormers 20-14 at
         Kings Park; and

      4) congratulates John Smit and his team on an outstanding performance
         despite having already been knocked out of the Super 14 tournament.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.

              SITUATION ON N1 AND N14 HIGHWAYS IN PRETORIA AREA

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr H B GROENEWALD: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes with concern the ongoing situation on the N1 and N14 highways
         in the Pretoria, Midrand area;


      2) notes that criminals are throwing stones from bridges onto
         bypassing cars on the highway, where innocent people have  been
         seriously injured and their lives taken; and

      3) calls for an immediate investigation into this ongoing matter.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


              BEHAVIOUR OF COPE MEMBERS AT PROVINCIAL CONGRESS


                             (Draft Resolution)


Ms B P MABE: Deputy Chairperson, I move without notice:


   That the Council –


      1) notes the callous and blatant acts of public violence displayed by
         disgruntled members of the flagging Congress of the People as they
         threw chairs and exchanged blows after a lengthy disagreement over
         the credentials during the party’s Gauteng provincial congress in
         Vereeniging;


      2) further notes that five people sustained various degrees of
         injuries and senior party members were forced to flee through the
         windows of the Assemblies of God hall, as party members engaged in
         a rat-chasing exercise of the current party leader Mbhazima Shilowa
         who was booed off the podium when he tried to address delegates;
         and


      3) acknowledges that these are some of the last kicks of the party, as
         it battles rowdy and disgruntled political cowboys that left the
         ANC for selfish political gain.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): The motion is agreed to
... Just hold on. Hon Harris?

Mr T D HARRIS: Madam Deputy Chair, my hand was up.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Harris ...

Mr T D HARRIS: Madam Deputy Chair, my hand was up when you asked for an
objection.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Yes. Hon Harris, what
is it?

Mr T D HARRIS: Chair, you asked whether there were any objections, and I
believe you did not see that my hand was up.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Well, I’ve just given
you a chance to voice your objection.

Mr T D HARRIS: Thank you for that chance, Chair.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! In light of the
objection, the motion may not be proceeded with. The motion without notice
will now become a notice of motion.

                FARMER JAILED FOR MURDER AND INDECENT ASSAULT

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms B V MNCUBE: Madam Deputy Chair, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes that a Leeu Gamka farmer, Piet Botes, was jailed for 35 years
         on 7 May 2010 and ordered to undergo a programme for sexual
         offenders while in prison for murdering his farmworker’s 13-year-
         old daughter and indecently assaulting two teenage girls in 2006;
         and


      2) acknowledges that this case sends a clear and unequivocal message
         to farmers who continue to treat women and girl-children as part of
         their properties that those days are over and all South Africans,
         regardless of their economic status, also have rights that are
         protected by the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.
               WOMAN RAPED AND MURDERED IN NORTH WEST PROVINCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Ms M W MAKGATE: Madam Deputy Chair, I move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes that on Saturday, 1 May 2010, Fiona Rollien Ephraims, aged
         25, was raped and murdered and her body was found on Sunday morning
         at Extension 1, Blydeville, Lichtenburg, North West province;


      2) also notes that she was naked and had sustained head injuries;


      3) further notes that she worked for the community and volunteered at
         the Afrisam project at the stadium;

      4) confirms that she is survived by her daughter, mother, three
         sisters and three brothers;


      5) calls upon the community to assist the South African Police with
         information which could lead to the arrest of the perpetrators who
         committed this heinous crime; and

      6) takes this opportunity to extend its condolences to the family.

May her soul rest in peace!

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                     BRETT GOLDIN BURSARY AWARD WINNERS

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Madam Deputy Chair, I hereby move without notice:

   That the Council -

      1) notes the wonderful achievement of two promising actors, Josette
         Eales, 26, from Johannesburg and Thato Moraka, 25, originally from
         Mafikeng, who were announced as winners of the Brett Goldin Bursary
         award this year;


      2) further notes that they will go to the home of the Royal
         Shakespeare Company in Stratford-upon-Avon from June 18 to July 19
         to get training and skills development in different acting skills
         to better their acting; and

      3) acknowledges that this is a useful and important achievement and
         bursary for these two young actors and wishes them good luck and
         success with their training and conveys its good wishes to them.

Motion agreed to in accordance with section 65 of the Constitution.


                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 2 – Parliament:

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Deputy Chairperson, hon delegates,
representatives of nongovernmental organisations, NGOs, civil society in
the gallery, and fellow South Africans, I want to thank you for coming
today to listen to Budget Vote 2: Parliament being debated.

   We have come ... not as pretenders to greatness but as a particle of a
   people whom we know to be noble and heroic, enduring, multiplying,
   permanent, rejoicing in the expectation and knowledge that their humanity
   will be reaffirmed and enlarged by open and unfettered communion with the
   nations of the world.

These were the words of Nelson Mandela in his address to the Joint Session
of the United States Congress, a few months after his release from jail.
Twenty years later, our country is on the eve of hosting the biggest soccer
spectacle in the world - the Fifa Soccer World Cup. Indeed, our humanity is
being reaffirmed by the nations of the world.

As you know, ladies and gentlemen, the theme of Parliament this year is:
Celebrate the legacy of Mandela – Contribute to nation-building. Mandela’s
legacy is legendary. It is about the embodiment of our struggle for
freedom. It is about constitutionalism. It is about nation-building. It is
about great love for humanity.

Towards advancing the project of reaffirming our humanity, resources have
been made available to support the work of Parliament. In the previous
financial year, 2009-10, Parliament was initially allocated a budget of
R1,35 billion. Three hundred and seventy-seven million of this was a direct
charge against national revenue for members’ remuneration. Nine hundred and
seventy-four million was appropriated through a Budget Vote to fund the
five main programmes of Parliament.

In addition to the R1,35 billion, an additional allocation of
R133,9 million was received for unavoidable costs. This resulted in a total
allocation of about R1,5 billion. The unavoidable costs were, for example,
as a result of expenses for information and communication technology, ICT,
equipment for the fourth Parliament, which cost us R14,1 million;
participation in various international forums, which cost us R31,1 million;
and adjustments to members benefits, which cost us R13,2 million.

In this regard, funded programmes, which are provided for in the new
budget, are the following. The first programme is Administration. The
programme is intended to provide strategic leadership, institutional
policy, administration and corporate services to support Members of
Parliament. The initial allocation for the previous year was R247 million,
and the new allocation is R317 million.

The second programme is Legislation and Oversight. This programme is
intended to enable Parliament to pass legislation and oversee executive
action. The initial allocation for the previous year was R187 million. The
new allocation is R282 million.

The third programme is Public and International Participation. This
programme allows Parliament to carry out public participation projects and
participate in international relations activities. The initial allocation
for the previous year was R67 million. The new allocation is R87 million.

The fourth programme is Members’ Facilities. This programme is intended to
provide travel, information and communication services and other facilities
for the Members of Parliament in both Houses of Parliament. The initial
allocation for the previous year was R212 million. The new allocation is
R211 million.

The fifth programme is Associated Services. This programme is intended to
provide financial support to political parties represented in Parliament.
It is divided into political party support, constituency support and party
leadership support. Can the party secretariat and media take note of this?
It’s very important. The initial allocation for the previous year was R258
million. The new allocation is R282 million.

When reflecting on the actual expenditure budget of the 2009-10 financial
year, Parliament spent 94% of its total budget allocation. One of the
contributing factors to the underspending emanates from the mismatch
between the swearing-in of the members of the Fourth Parliament and the
beginning of the 2009-10 financial year. As we all know, the 2009-10
financial year began on 1 April 2009, whereas members of the Fourth
Parliament were only sworn in on 6 May 2009. Effectively, the Fourth
Parliament began to operate in June 2009 after the induction of new
members. What is important is what we want to do with the new budget I have
just outlined.

Let us first look at the strategic framework. Both the National Assembly
and the National Council of Provinces, NCOP, contributed to the development
of the strategic framework for Parliament which was approved by the
Parliamentary Oversight Authority in March this year. The framework, which
contains our policy imperatives, proposes the following strategic
objectives for this term. The first one is strengthening the oversight
function and establishing a strong culture of overseeing executive action.
In this regard, we would like to improve Parliament’s capacity to exercise
its constitutional oversight role by developing protocols for assessing the
performance of all organs of state and providing them with sufficient
resources to effectively carry out their role. In order to ensure outcomes-
based oversight, Parliament needs to ensure dedicated support for
committees, development of members’ capacity, and improved institutional
management.

Oversight that focuses on outcomes will assist in the process of
reaffirming our humanity as the citizens of a democratic country. The
implementation of the oversight and accountability model is key to
improving our approach to add co-ordination of oversight work. Towards
this, an implementation team comprising officials and jointly chaired by
House Chairpersons of the two Houses responsible for oversight was
established.

The recommendations of the model were reviewed and systematically divided
into the following work areas: parliamentary planning, institutional
mechanisms, human resource capacity, facilities, technology and systems,
new mechanisms, public participation, and the Money Bills Amendment
Procedure and Related Matters Bill, which is now, of course, an Act. We are
in the process of considering these recommendations for implementation.

As this House, we have agreed on the priorities for oversight during the
period of the Fourth Parliament. They are agriculture, economic
development, health and social development, human settlements, police,
rural development, and land reform. We need to pay attention to these areas
at committee and institutional levels in our effort to contribute to the
work of Parliament.

The second strategic plan that we are looking at is increasing public
involvement and participation in building a responsive people’s Parliament.
Our democracy is both representative and participatory. The Constitution
provides for public involvement in the processes of Parliament. With regard
to the NCOP’s contribution in this regard, I am happy to report that the
implementation of the new approach to the Taking Parliament to the People
programme is delivering the impact we have always wanted it to deliver. For
example, in the case of Limpopo, some of the mining houses are already
implementing the commitments they made towards social investment.

To further strengthen public participation, we are developing a public
participation model for Parliament. The Joint Rules Committee has agreed
that the Third Parliament’s Joint Task Team on the Legislative Process in
Parliament be revived to link its work with the issues relating to public
participation. The task team is expected to report to the Joint Rules
Committee within six months after re-establishment.

The third point is strengthening co-operative government and fostering
improved co-operation and relations. Many of the aspects of the
Constitution relating to Parliament’s role in promoting co-operative
government and intergovernmental relations require the development of
processes and practice. Many areas have seen advancements, including the
greater role of this House in interventions and in the area of
intergovernmental fiscal relations.

However, we need to do more. We need to review the functioning of present
arrangements as embodied in legislation. We appreciate the work done by
this House in processing interventions. I think the committee is doing a
great job in that line in terms of the number of interventions that we see
coming to the NCOP. Our role is to ensure that these interventions are not
arbitrary. With the increase in the number of notices with regard to
interventions in municipalities, we appreciate that a lot of work still
needs to be done to improve governance in the local government sphere.

We are in the process of reconfiguring the portfolios of our two House
Chairpersons in the NCOP so as to provide for a new portfolio on
intergovernmental relations and co-operative government. The intention is
to improve our performance in this area.

On the issue of nation-building, Parliament aims to embark on a project to
increase its contribution to nation-building through enhancing unity and
democracy in South Africa. The envisaged “Project Democracy” is to be used
as a platform for robust and active involvement of Members of Parliament,
as well as extensive public engagement. We will elaborate on this bold
initiative after we have properly conceptualised it.

Strategic plan number four is to improve and widen the role of Parliament
in international co-operation and participation. In the period under
review, we participated in various regional, continental and international
forums to promote the African agenda and the role South Africa plays in
this regard. It is important to note that Parliament finds itself in a fast-
changing global domain.

Going forward, we need to pay particular attention to the increasing role
of Parliament in international relations. But the immediate task is to
transform the nature of support given to MPs from being mainly logistics to
being content-oriented, especially when it comes to international
participation. In order to elevate Parliament’s role in international
relations, we must start by improving our support capacity in research and
policy areas because those are the areas that I think are lacking in
supporting the members. If we don’t provide the members with good research
and assist them in terms of the policy that we are applying as our policy
for international co-operation, then we are denying them the right of
having the knowledge that they have to use when they interact with other
political multilateral bodies. This is especially so in the context of the
2011 deadline to transform the Pan-African Parliament into a legislative
body.

The last strategic plan is building an effective and efficient institution.
In order to achieve all the above, it is important that we pay particular
attention to the task of building an effective and efficient Parliament.
Towards this, we need to continue to improve our human resource capacity,
including a reorientation towards entrenching a culture of service
delivery. As we roll out the new system and more modern technology, it is
important for us to realise that a modern Parliament like ours will
function better if we all improve our ICT skills. I know we still have a
great shortage of those.

Can we all use our computers? [Interjections.] Surely? Am I the only one
who can’t? [Interjections.] Oh, all right. I will check that very soon
because I’ll be visiting your offices checking how many of us can
communicate with their constituencies whilst in Cape Town doing their job.
I will also be checking how many of you can communicate with the continent
and the international world whilst you are here in Parliament doing your
job. I will check that. I will visit anyone unannounced and ask him or her
to teach me how it is done.

We are reviewing the support structure in the NCOP to respond to the need
to follow up and assess our work. In line with the recommendations of the
study we have conducted on Taking Parliament to the People, I have
appointed a special adviser on intergovernmental matters in my office.
Building an effective and efficient Parliament will require that we provide
adequate space for members to do their work. Work is being done in this
regard as part of the space utilisation project, and more information will
be made available. The strategic plan for the Fourth Parliament, to be
brought before this House as soon as possible, will give more detail with
regard to these strategic objectives.  Unfortunately, the document has been
delayed because of political party processes.

In conclusion, in 1995, before the Rugby World Cup Nelson Mandela, who
spoke of us as a particle of the people and the servants of the newly
enfranchised, gave the captain of the Springboks a poem entitled Invictus
with the following words:

   I am the master of my fate:
   I am the captain of my soul.

The project of reaffirming our humanity is in our hands. Collectively, we
are its masters and captains; nobody else but all of us as we are sitting
here.

At this point, let me congratulate our parliamentary rugby team for their
success during a visit to the United Kingdom and Ireland in November last
year. They brought the trophy back to Parliament. I am doing this because I
have realised that hon members today have shown their support to different
sports clubs. I heard that Mr Lees supports AmaZulu. I also heard that Mr
Watson supports the Bulls, and so on. So, we all have our favourites.

On behalf of the millions of South Africans whom you have the privilege to
represent, I commend Budget Vote No 2: Parliament, totalling R1,571
billion, inclusive of the direct charge. I do so in the hope that you will
continue to support the project of reaffirming our people. I do so in the
hope that you will support the work of this Parliament in giving a voice to
the voiceless and holding the government to account. I thank you and the
officials for making it possible to elaborate on an important project for
our nation.

I want to thank the Secretary to Parliament and the staff. I also want to
thank our staff in the NCOP, the Secretary to the NCOP, and other staff
members. I want to thank you also, hon members, for the active role that
you are playing in your work, exactly one year after having started in this
House. It is now time for implementation, not time to play. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Mr A WATSON: Deputy Chairperson, Chairperson of the NCOP, hon fellow
delegates, this will be the seventh opportunity for me to participate in a
debate on the Budget Vote for Parliament. I must say that, especially in
regard to the NCOP, much has been achieved over the years. In saying that,
one cannot but acknowledge the tremendous role played by our Chairperson,
hon M J Mahlangu, in building on the image of the institution whilst, at
all times, considering the interests and the needs of the delegates.

During the past six years and seven Budget Vote debates, I have stood here
drawing attention to many shortcomings in our operation, whilst offering
suggestions to improve and acknowledging the positive. To me, possibly the
worst nightmares emanated over the years from being steered and bulldozed
by the administration and staff of the institution, rather than by the
presidium and the members. Speaking on behalf of my party, the DA, I have
always maintained that we are called Members of Parliament because
Parliament is our institution and should, as such, be governed by us.

I am happy to acknowledge that that has now come to an end. Whilst planning
and decision-making is now firmly in the hands of those elected to govern
the NCOP, serious thought must be given to getting more input from the
ordinary delegates to establish their views and needs, especially when it
comes to major events and excursions like Taking Parliament to the People,
workshops and conferences.
Questions to the executive remain one of the most important tools in our
oversight function. However, I am afraid it has steadily become a source of
great frustration to the delegates. We are aware of the fact that the
Chairperson is attending to the problem of written questions from the NCOP
not being answered in good time, and we thank him for that. But this
perceived disregard of the NCOP is also reflected in the attendance by
Ministers at question sessions in the NCOP. Then I ask: Why is the National
Assembly, NA, favoured by having questions posed to and answered by both
the President and the Deputy President, whilst in the NCOP we only have the
privilege of questions to the Deputy President?  Is that not just another
contributing factor to the attitude of some individuals of treating the
NCOP as inferior?

The update of the Rules of the NCOP and their application in the House is
also a matter that has been uppermost in our minds over many years. I am
happy to report that we, as the subcommittee, have gone a long way in
considering amendments. We look forward to the finalisation of the Rules by
the Rules Committee at the meeting scheduled by the Chairperson to start on
4 June, so that we can have a fresh set of Rules to work with when we come
back from the Fifa extravaganza.

Having up-to-date Rules is, however, by no means enough. We need to embark
on a programme of empowering ourselves as delegates with regard to the how
and when of those Rules, particularly to protect each other and ourselves.
I am not propagating a stiff, militarised assembly where no one dares to be
out of step at any time. On the contrary, legislatures all over the world
have been known for spontaneous wit and humour, and that must be preserved
at all costs.

However, when rising on serious points of order, points of clarity or
requests to address the Chair, actions should be in accordance with the
prescribed Rules. We must be serious and act accordingly. It also follows
logically, and even more importantly, that decisions and rulings from the
Chair should, likewise, be professional interpretations of the Rules and
should add to the decorum of the House rather than break it down.

As in previous years, I have said nothing about the actual finances of
Parliament because my party’s Chief Whip and Deputy Chief Whip will again
attend to that when addressing the National Assembly later today. I will,
therefore, remain focused on the NCOP as such, and end with my favourite
topic, namely the place and stature of the NCOP in society.

The sad fact is that we are still, and remain, an unknown entity in the
world out there, a poor replacement for the once illustrious Senate of the
Republic of South Africa. Now, much has been said about the problem and
many recommendations have been made. Chairperson, you would recall that we
even devoted part of our 10-year celebrations to discussing this matter. I
will never forget the professor of constitutional affairs who stood up and
said that he has taught 600 students, and if he doesn’t know what the NCOP
does, then how could we expect him to teach 600 students to know what we
were doing.

But I have a solution. Let us make and implement one small change to the
Constitution and rename this House the National Senate of Provinces. It
won’t be long before we will simply be referred to as the Senate and we,
the delegates, will be senators once again. Think about it. I thank you.

Mr S H PLAATJIE: Chairperson, because I only have about four minutes, I
will try to be fast. Parliament is the grand institution of the nation. Our
Parliament should be perceived as such by the people of the country.
Perception in politics is everything. Ivor Chipkin says that our politics
appeal to the wrong essentialism. They appeal to the essentialism of race
and culture, instead of to the essentials of the Constitution.

As the principle of responsible government prevails in South Africa, the
executive has to be fully accountable to the parliamentarians.
Unfortunately, those who have most cause to raise the most issues are
afforded the least time. Conversely, those who have the least questions are
given too much time. Such an apportionment of time, as occurs in
Parliament, fits very poorly with the principle of responsible government
and contributes to the worst problem in government. Is Parliament really
holding the government accountable? To answer this question, the
Chairperson should produce a balance sheet. The facts must speak for
themselves. This refers to answering of question by Ministers.

To us in Cope, it seems as though the parliamentarian majority only serves
to democratically trump Parliament’s constitutional obligations. Therefore,
where electorates give a political party maximum support, they get minimum
results. This irony is not lost on the people. South Africans are more
likely to trust our courts than Parliament because Parliament does not give
clear judgments on issues and is perceived to be hedging on challenges.

I now come to the question of the media. The media coverage of politics is
about political conduct because Parliament offers no real debate on
policies or current issues. The debilitation of Parliament is as a result
of what we have made our Parliament to be.

In conclusion, if the role of Parliament in the public’s mind is minimised
and it can no longer serve as the grand institution, the people, to whom
Parliament belongs, will increasingly reject Parliament. It is in our
interests and the interests of the nation to revitalise Parliament. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Chairperson, delegates,
our guests in the gallery, I rise to support the budget of Parliament as
presented by the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces. It is
now a year since this House was established in May 2009. This gives us an
opportunity to reflect on the road we have travelled since then.

I would like to start by emphasising that the process of contributing to
the development of the budget before us does not start and end with this
debate. Parliament has a governance structure for considering issues
throughout the year.

Our governance model provides for a Parliamentary Oversight Authority,
which is co-chaired by the Speaker of the National Assembly and the
Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces. The Parliamentary
Oversight Authority is responsible for formulating policy directives in
respect of the various services and facilities of Parliament.

Its mandate is to ensure an effective and efficient Parliament by putting
in place an appropriate system of governance by means of which Parliament
is managed and controlled in support and furtherance of its strategies and
policies. The Parliamentary Oversight Authority is accountable directly to
the two Houses of Parliament.

Members of Parliament make inputs to Parliament’s budget via two primary
structures. These are the Quarterly Consultative Forum and the
Parliamentary Budget Forum. The Quarterly Consultative Forum is a forum
that facilitates the input of Members of Parliament on matters related to
members’ facilities. The Parliamentary Budget Forum is the forum that
prepares the parliamentary budget and reports on it. The composition of
these structures is explained in the governance model document.

House Chairperson, one of the important tasks of the Fourth Parliament is
the implementation of the oversight and accountability model. The impact of
the model on the parliamentary programme is significant. For example, a
complete oversight process would require additional time for constituency
work to ensure sharper focus on oversight matters, greater public
participation in parliamentary activities and the consideration of reports
of committees, as well as private members’ business. The programme
framework to be proposed to the Joint Rules Committee, the Joint
Programming Committee and the Programming Committees of both Houses must
take into account these requirements.

The model identified potential mechanisms that could further strengthen
oversight and accountability. Therefore, the Rules had to be reviewed to
provide for regulatory frameworks in respect of the following: the
processing of reports from sectoral parliaments; oversight of international
agreements; executive compliance; joint reporting by committees; and
referral of matters arising from reports of international bodies. The model
recommends, among other things, the establishment and/or development of
sufficient human resource capacity to enable committees to conduct
effective oversight. We are responding to this by increasing support
capacity in areas such as research and content analysis.

Also under consideration is the joint parliamentary oversight and assurance
committee. This committee is proposed for the purposes of governing the
work and function of committees in Parliament.

On the other hand, the implementation of the new Money Bills Amendment
Procedure and Related Matters Act, Act 9 of 2009, presents new challenges
for Parliament. The Act provides Parliament with a procedure to amend money
Bills, as well as norms and standards for amending money Bills before
provincial legislatures and related matters.

While much progress has been made to facilitate the implementation of this
Act, such as the establishment of the Finance and Appropriations committees
in each House, a lot still needs to be done. This includes, for example,
processing and adoption of the Division of Revenue Bill. The provisions of
the Act were implemented to process the Division of Revenue Bill. However,
the time allocated for this process is too limited to invoke the provisions
of the Mandating Procedures of Provinces Act to allow the provinces
adequate time to process the Bill and provide mandates to their delegates
in this House.
With regard to the establishment of the parliamentary budget office, it is
under consideration. We need to find a common and shared view of how this
office should operate. A number of issues have still to be ironed out
regarding, among others, the accounting responsibilities of the director
and the roles of other structures within Parliament.

On legislative work, our focus has been the review of the legislation that
has been passed and rectifying areas of weakness through amendments.
However, there is a need for Parliament to ascertain the impact of the laws
we pass. Through its committees, this House can start by focusing on
section 76 legislation.

Hon members, we are aware of the expressed need to capacitate our
committees. As I have indicated, work is being done to ensure that
committees have the necessary capacity to carry out their responsibilities.
This must include the capacity to ensure value for money and proper
spending.

As you are aware, our financial environment is now regulated by the
Financial Management of Parliament Act. The Act, which came into operation
in April last year in accordance with the transitional arrangements as set
out in Schedule 4, will help to ensure transparency, accountability and
sound management of the revenue, expenditure, assets and liabilities of
Parliament. It reinforces the constitutional status of Parliament in that
it ensures a consultative relationship between Parliament and the National
Treasury.

It is worth noting that the role of Parliament and the provincial
legislatures is located within the broader scope of the legislative sector
in South Africa. Through the Speakers’ Forum, we continue to oversee the
management and co-ordination of the legislative sector programmes as
determined by the South African Legislative Sector Policy and Strategic
Framework. This is important because we have one government, which is
unitary but with regional features.

House Chairperson, I started by making reference to the work we do through
the provincial week, because it is important that we maintain the link with
provinces. At this point, I am reminded of what former Indian Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi once said:


   My grandfather once told me that there were two kinds of people: those
   who do the work and those who take the credit. He told me to try to be in
   the first group; there was much less competition there.

Let us be part of the first group of people who do the work.
Twelve months after the establishment of this House, allow me to raise
certain questions to establish whether we have done what we were supposed
to do.

The questions are as follows: What have we done to advance the mandate of
this House? What have we done to respond to the priorities we set ourselves
in August last year, which are contained in the NCOP Strategic Framework
Plan? What have we done to promote intergovernmental relations and co-
operative government in the conduct of our business? How have we followed
up on service delivery matters that were the subject of consideration by
this House? I would like the chairpersons of the committees and the
Whippery to consider and respond to these questions before recess. Their
responses will give us an opportunity to do an analysis in order to develop
our first report, which should be ready after the 2010 Fifa Soccer World
Cup.

The legacy of Mandela requires that we work hard to uplift our people and
to destroy the remains of the legacy of apartheid. With these words, I
would like to thank the officials for the support they continue to give us
under the leadership of the Secretary to Parliament. Their role is
indispensable, as Members of Parliament rely on technical support to be
able to do their work. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: House Chair, and all protocol observed, allow me to
congratulate the hon Deputy Chair on the questions she has just asked. We
should all ask ourselves those questions. We should take this House very
seriously. Today I am going to speak from my heart and forget about the
speech that is in front of me.
The first thing that you should really know is that this is a serious
budget. Since we are claiming that this is the people’s Parliament, as
members, we should ask ourselves if we are serving the people who voted for
us, doing justice to the provinces, and are delivering the service to them.
I believe that the increment of this budget is not much. Our important role
is to provide oversight so that people can know the meaning and understand
the purpose of the NCOP.

Through the media, we should go out there and make South Africans
understand what the NCOP stands for. Fighting amongst ourselves when our
people out there are suffering is not going to help us. As the NCOP, we
should be hands-on concerning our oversight role and service delivery in
the provinces.

The ID does not believe that allowing Ministers to devise their own
ministerial handbook will achieve anything in terms of cutting down on
expenses. Instead, the ID believes that an ad hoc committee consisting of
all parties from both Houses should revise that ministerial handbook in
order to bring it in line with the slogan, “Working together we can do more
for our people”. If we are serious, we will use that slogan to implement
that and to see to it that people on the ground are getting the service. I
believe that this House can do anything. There is nothing that is
impossible for this House.

I believe that the NCOP has the capacity. When I listened to the people who
debated in this House today, they all had the capacity. They had everything
inside them to see to it that the Rules in this House are implemented in
each and every province, so that the people can understand what the NCOP
does in this country. I thank you. [Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo, ungixolele ngoba eNgilandi ngeke ngiye
ngiseAfrika. Sihlalo womhlangano namalungu ahloniphekile ale Ndlu, kanye
nezivakashi zethu ezikhona. Nami ngithi angizojoyina bonke abaningi
asebekhulumile ngendaba yePhalamende kulo nyaka.

Bese sifisela impumelelo bonke abakhona abalisebenzelayo kulonyaka noma
ungakapheli. Sihlalo, ngithi kuleminyaka eyishumi nesithupha eyedlule
sakwazi ukuthi sithole intando yeningi sibe nomthethosisekelo wethu
okuyiwona laba abafundile abathi yi “Supreme law of our land”.

Ngithi ke kufuneka sibone ukuthi sihlukanise phakathi kwesikuzuzile
nesingakuzuzanga ngoba njengabantu kufuneka sikwazi ukubheka ukuthi yikuphi
esikuzuzile futhi yikuphi esingakuzuzanga. Lapho kufuneka singamalungu
ePhalamende noma amalungu eSishayamthetho Sikazwelonke, namalungu eNdlu
Yomkhandlu Kazwelonke Wezifundazwe siyohlala phansi sibheke ukuthi yikuphi
esingakuzuzanga. Singenzenjani ukuze sikuzuze ukuze kusizakale abantu
bakithi.

Bakithi, uma sibheka kulokhu kubhekwa kweMinyango kahulumeni lokhu
abafundile abathi yi “oversight” ngithi kuwumsebenzi obaluleke kakhulu
Sihlalo wale Ndlu ukuthi lomsebenzi wenzeke ngoba isibopho sokuchaza
ngokwenzekayo yinto edingekayo kunoma yimuphi omunye umuntu kuleli lizwe.
Ngoba uma ungenaso isibopho sokuchaza ngokwenzekayo kusho ukuthi usebenza
nje, uyadunguza nje, nokugxekwa kufuneka ukuba ugxeke ngokwakhayo ukuze
bakwazi nabantu ukuthi izinto zihamba kanjani.

Ngithi alukho nolulodwa usuku lapho kufuneka siziqhenye singabantu
abamnyama baseNingizimu Afrika, noma njengabantu baseNingizimu Afrika,
abahluphekayo bonke ukuba sikwazi ukuthi siphucule izimpilo zabantu bakithi
bonke bakwazi ukuphumelela.

Bakithi lokho okuzuziwe obabamkhulu, abakuzuzanga baze bahamba belwela leli
lizwe kuwo wonke amagumbi e-Afrika ngoba yonke indoda emnyama kuleli lizwe
iyazi ukuthi amadoda amnyama alwa kanjani, elwa kukubi kungemnandi.
Ubabomkhulu akaguqanga ngamadolo ephezu kogogo nje, waye la eSt Helena,
eNorthern Cape, kwesakho De Beer ehlezi khona iminyaka. Akaze aguqa. Ngithi
kulokho ke Sihlalo ngicela ukuthi njengeqembu leNkatha siyasesekela
iSabiwomali ukuba sisetshenziswe kahle sikwazi ukusiza izidingo zabantu
abampisholo kulelizwe. Ngiyabonga. (Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson, you will pardon me because I will not
speak English while I am in Africa. Chairperson of the Council, hon members
of this House, as well as our guests who are present, I just want to join
all those who have spoken before me about the performance of Parliament
this year.

We also wish all those who work for Parliament success this year, although
the year has not yet ended. In the past 16 years we managed to bring about
democracy and have our Constitution which is referred to by academics as
the supreme law of our land.

I want say that we must separate what we have achieved from what we have
not because as people we must be able to recognise what we have achieved
and what we have not. What is expected of us as Members of Parliament or as
members of the National Assembly, and as members of the National Council of
Provinces, is to sit down and check what we did not achieve. What can we do
to achieve it in order to assist our people?

Hon members, if we look at our monitoring function with regard to the
government departments, which our academics refer to as oversight, I want
to say that it is very important, Chairperson of this House, that this job
should be done thoroughly because it is the responsibility of every person
in this country to account about what is happening. If you do not have the
responsibility to explain what is happening it means that you are not doing
your best, that you have no direction and that you must be criticised
constructively so that our people are informed of what is going on.
There should not be a single day when we are proud as black people of South
Africa, or as South Africans who are destitute. We must be able to make the
lives of all our people better in order for them to succeed in life.

Hon members, what has been achieved by our grandfathers? They did not
achieve anything; they died fighting for this country in Africa because
every black man in this country knows that men fight under difficult
circumstances. My grandfather did not consummate his relationship because
he was imprisoned here in St Helena, in the Western Cape, where you reside,
Mr De Beer. He lived there for a number of years. He never surrendered. In
that context, as the IFP, we support the budget and it should be utilised
effectively so that it could cater for the needs of black people in this
country. Thank you.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Chairperson, we have noted the
importance of this particular debate, and maybe before I deal with some
issues, there is something I find very interesting that we need to reflect
on. It comes from the DA and Cope.

The DA, for a very long time, has very consistently defended the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. All of us agree that it is a
very important document that we need to pride ourselves on. The formation
of Cope was based on the defence of the Constitution of the Republic of
South Africa. They have also been very consistent in bringing this to the
attention of the South African populace, raising false alarms about how the
ANC under the leadership of our President, Jacob Zuma, is going to
undermine and amend the Constitution.

But I find it quite interesting that in this very important debate today,
the DA and Cope are proposing amendments to the Constitution – very
selective amendments to the Constitution, for that matter. And we find it
very interesting that the DA, in particular, is giving leadership in that
regard, that where there are shortcomings, we need to look at the amendment
of the Constitution to go forward. And maybe one of the key things that we
need to look at is the property clause, because it is through that that we
will be able to fight poverty, we will be able to fight the inequality that
exists within our society that is created by the very same problems that
this Constitution addresses here. [Applause.]

Since 1955, at the gathering of our people in Kliptown, at the Congress of
the People, we have been very clear. Here, the people of South Africa
declared that South Africa belongs to all those who live in it. It was at
that particular gathering that we brought up the concept of a people’s
assembly, of a people’s Parliament again. And that concept at that
gathering has guided the ANC, throughout the processes of the bannings and
even after our liberation. We continued to say, ours will be to build a
people’s Parliament in which all those who live in South Africa shall be
part and parcel of it and will participate actively in deciding the path
that our country is supposed to take. [Applause.]

It is not loose. That concept is not loose. It has a particular history as
well, because that history is informed by the ANC’s adoption of a concept
referred to as the national democratic revolution. It was explained as
follows – that our main mission is the creation of a South Africa that is
nonracist, nonsexist and democratic, which will allow all our people to
participate actively in the processes of our advancement.

Therefore, as we speak today we are not losing sight of those historical
imperatives. Hence today, as the ANC, we can stand up proudly and say that
ours is about the development and the strengthening of an activist
parliament, because an activist parliament is that parliament that will
take into account all the very same aspects that members have been raising.
These are strengthening the capacity of Parliament to do oversight and to
be accountable, strengthening the capacity of Parliament or the
legislatures to have that kind of relationship with the executive.

Our understanding of the separation of powers and the capacity of
Parliament is not based on the liberal conceptualisation of oversight,
because that conceptualisation sees Parliament as being a watchdog and an
institution with the sole responsibility being to criticise, criticise,
criticise. Ours is about a relationship, an understanding that there is a
separation of powers, and each and every arm has a particular role to play
and, by doing that, we complement one another. We do not just shout from
the rooftops about how government or the executive is useless and is not
doing their work without providing alternatives that seek to enhance the
work of the executive. It is that particular role that we will be playing.

I think one of the things that is very important and unique, in actual fact
- and I find it quite strange that it is raised by the DA again - is with
the conceptualisation of the National Council of Provinces vis-à-vis how
the Senate works. The basis of the establishment of the National Council of
Provinces was, in actual fact, to ensure that we build on the capacity of
local, provincial and national government in order to be able to work
together, hence the intergovernmental relations. It is, therefore,
important.

It would have been quite wise and very progressive, for instance, for the
DA to have raised a question concerning the role of the SA Local Government
Association, Salga. How, then, do we, as the National Council of Provinces,
begin to look at the capacity and active role of Salga in the NCOP? I think
it is a matter with regard to which we, as the ANC, say we are lacking in
that particular area.

Therefore, we need to look at how best we can ensure that Salga plays the
strategic role that it is supposed to play – by ensuring that they are
actively involved, not only in plenaries in this particular House, but also
even at the committee level. The question should probably be: Does Salga
have that capacity? And what, therefore, becomes our role as the NCOP in
terms of our budget and programme to capacitate and enable Salga to play an
active role in the NCOP? I think that is a very important matter that we
need to look at.

There is another thing that we, as the ANC, are raising, because we have
made a very important observation on oversight and the role that committees
are supposed to play vis-à-vis the leadership that must be provided to
committees in order for them to do effective oversight. You would find that
the Chairperson raises the question on strengthening the capacity of
chairpersons of committees with content advisers, secretaries, and
researchers. But the question we are raising is the disjuncture that you
find that exists between the chair and the secretary of the committee in
terms of their reporting mechanism. You would find that the chairperson has
no role, no say over his or her own support mechanism. The secretary to the
committee reports somewhere, the researcher reports somewhere else, and
even, sometimes, the content advisers report somewhere else. [Applause.]
That causes a serious disjuncture in terms of the functionality of
committees.

Beyond that, maybe there is another question we need to ask ourselves, as
Parliament, in terms of our budget. Are we really doing them justice in
terms of support to committees, particularly committees of the National
Council of Provinces, where you find clustered committees that must do
oversight over three departments? Just one department can come and make a
presentation to a committee of the NCOP, and it comes with two legal
advisers, two researchers and the director-general. The department is
heavily resourced, and now they sit here with these members whose capacity
cannot match the capacity of the department. I think that is another matter
that we really need to look at when we speak about this, especially when it
comes to committees of the National Council of Provinces, namely whether
really, we need to give the necessary and effective assistance.

Coupled to that, there is a particular wave that we see introduced. As much
as the others, for instance Helen Zille, went out to say that this
government or this executive has achieved zero under the leadership of
President Zuma, there is a particular wave in the country, something new
that is being introduced that seeks to revolutionise the functionality of
the executive in terms of accountability to the President and
accountability to the South African public through the signing of
performance-based agreements.

The question that we need to ask ourselves as legislators now is how we
position ourselves not to be left behind by the speed at which the
executive is moving. If we do not do that, we may find ourselves lagging
behind and chasing after the executive, where the executive is running at
340km per hour, while we are still at 60km per hour in terms of doing our
oversight work, and so forth.

It is quite important that, as a legislative body, we need to reflect and
ponder on some of these questions. What are the implications of these
performance agreements between the President and the Ministers and the role
of Parliament and its committees to do oversight?

Perhaps this is also important, Chair. In 2004-05 there was a concept that
was introduced by the NCOP, and it gained momentum up to a point but we ran
just short of implementing it - strengthening our oversight mechanism. One
of the things that we were saying was about doing 70% oversight and being
in the constituencies, and being in Parliament 30% of the time. That was
informed, of course, by the fact that, since 1994 and up until that
particular time, we had dealt a lot, and sufficiently so, with legislation.

Is it not possible to really revisit that particular concept and its
relevance in strengthening our way of doing oversight? That means we would
spend 70% of our time with the people that elected us, with the people that
gave us a mandate. For the remaining 30% of the time, we would be here
doing our legislative work and other things that are relevant to
Parliament.

The last thing I thought would be quite important for us to look at closely
is the question of the notion of taking Parliament to the people. Is it
effective? Is it working for us? What are the gaps? What are the areas that
we need to look at? For instance, an issue that we can begin to grapple
with is the following: When we leave a place, how do we consistently keep
that link with the people that we visited in order to ensure that by the
time something happens in those areas, people are able to carry on and say,
“If it were not because of the National Council of Provinces, this
particular thing would not have happened”? This is an option, as opposed to
merely going in and getting out without really ensuring that together we
work with our people to find solutions to their problems.

I think it is quite important that as the NCOP we need to have a mechanism
that will ensure that as and when we take Parliament to the people, whether
it is the National Assembly through the People’s Assembly, and so forth, we
are still able to keep in touch and keep track of the issues that were
raised by our people to ensure that they are not left behind.

Let me conclude by saying that a very important commitment was made. That
commitment was based on the fact that, as Parliament, we passed legislation
and we passed a Budget. That commitment also went to the construction
workers, in that they were committed to constructing the stadiums, and so
forth. As we speak today, the Local Organising Committee has lived up to
that particular commitment, but only as far as the construction workers are
concerned. We want to know what is going to happen to the Members of
Parliament who passed the budget to ensure that those things do happen. On
that note, thank you very much, Chairperson. [Applause.]

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Chairperson, hon Tau, I am not a member of the
Local Organising Committee. I am the Chairperson of the NCOP. I am not sure
whether you will get the tickets or not, but keep on trying your luck.

Let me start with you and reply to just one thing. I cannot reply to
everyone. One of the two things that you have raised that is very important
to me is the participation of Salga. That discussion has to continue in the
Fourth Parliament and must take place. You are aware that I have said many
times in this House that Salga has not taken its full place in the NCOP. I
would like you, particularly as the House Chair, to assist me to take that
discussion on. We cannot leave it like that because they have a role to
play, and I believe, in terms of co-operative government and delivery of
services on the ground by the local municipalities, Salga can play a very
important role.

On the second thing you have raised, and I have heard it before, I want to
say that I find it very strange that a report of a committee can be tabled
in this House without a chairperson having gone through that report. I find
it strange that the committee secretary just finalises the report, and then
the report comes to the House. I don’t know whether I heard you well. That
report is the chairperson’s and the committee’s report. It cannot be the
secretary’s report.

It is like the Bill. When the Bill is before the committee, it is your
Bill. You have to deal with it if there are amendments. I have said it many
times. An example of this was the Children’s Bill, as you will remember. It
cannot be correct that you make some amendments to the Bill and when the
Bill comes to the House to be passed, there are other amendments that you
don’t know about. Then you stand in the House and you say that you support
the Bill but you don’t know that somebody has added some amendments that
you have not seen and discussed. The final piece of legislation that comes
to the House should have been passed by the committee, and you should have
agreed to those amendments.

The same applies to the report of the committee. The chairperson is the
owner of that report. What is it then that you are debating about? Is it
the report that you haven’t seen and discussed? How do you defend it? I
just want to support you with that one. I think secretaries to the
committees must be very careful. Let them give support to the chairpersons,
but don’t let them take over from the chairpersons. That is their job. They
should not take over. They must give support to the chairpersons.
Everything has to be checked by the chairperson before it comes to the
House.
The last important thing which you have mentioned is the question of follow-
ups on our public participation. It doesn’t matter whether it is Taking
Parliament to the People, public participation on policy issues or any
matter that the committee has undertaken. What is of importance is those
regular follow-ups in order for us to get in touch, either with those
communities or the leadership around there, to ensure that things are
happening the way we want them to happen. That is the capacity –and- I
agree with you - that we need to build. Committees should actually build
them into their programmes when they carry out their oversight function.

You’ve already said to me that we went to Limpopo and that we should go
back. I am going back with a small team in May. I will take one or two of
you people. We are going to do some work with the leadership there to check
what they have done up to now, because it is leading up to the new local
government budget which will be in July. Before they finalise their budget
we would like to know what they have done about the issues that have been
raised by the people there. We would like to know what the province has
done because provinces have their entire budget to apply already to those
particular municipalities in order to address some of the issues there. We
will do that. [Interjections.] I said I will take a few people with. You
must leave it to the chairperson. I will take a few people. I will
definitely not go alone.

I have listened to Prince Zulu, Mr Gunda and Mr Plaatjie. All members,
including Mr Tau, have emphasised the oversight function. I realise how
important this aspect of work is to us as members. I am very happy about
that. Without us doing that type of work, it will be as if we are glued to
our chairs. It will be as if we do not see what is happening out there.
That is the most important work that Members of Parliament have to do,
because we represent the people on the ground. We are their mouths, their
voices and everything. We have the power, and we are their saviour. If we
don’t do that, we will not achieve anything. I am very glad that members
have a full grasp of that. Maybe it is of importance that more capacity is
built around the Members of Parliament in order to do all those things. I
must thank you.

Prince Zulu, for the past three years Parliament has never had
qualifications from the Auditor-General. [Applause.] We are managing our
money very well. Nobody can say that there is anything wrong with our
budget. It has taken us five to six years to remove that. When we took over
as presiding officers, we found qualifications that were nearing
disclaimers, unfortunately. We, together with the Secretary to Parliament,
have overturned that to make our budget more effectively managed. With the
Bill that we have passed now, the Financial Management of Parliament Bill,
we will do much better in managing our finances in Parliament.

Mr Watson, on your comment on the involvement of the members of the NCOP, I
can guarantee that we are involved. We are so small in the NCOP in terms of
size. I don’t know what we will do if we are not involving each other.
Democracy is about involving other people. I want to repeat it. It is
important that everybody is involved, whether you agree on a thing or not.
I have said to you many times in this House that involvement does not mean
that we will agree all the time on the issues on the table. It does not
mean that. We will disagree and sometimes agree. We will find each other
where we can find each other. That is an important thing.

Dialogue is very important because one will hear all the sides of the
people in this institution. We will keep doing that, and I believe in it.
Openness and transparency are very good principles of democracy. We will
discuss with the people who are in the institution and take decisions
together. You will have a very peaceful institution. You will have an
institution that achieves things, rather than having a setback with the
things that we are doing in this House.

I am very happy about the way we are functioning, and some of us might be
staying a little behind and we are saying: Die agteros kom ook in die kraal
[Even those who progress slowly eventually reach their destinations].

We will not leave you behind. We will take you with us. That is important.
Let’s assist each other.

In terms of the questions, you are correct. I have made it my job to check,
every quarter at least, how many questions have not been answered by the
executive so that I can respond on behalf of the members of this House. I
have done that again this quarter because we are just finishing our first
quarter.

I have already written a letter to the Deputy President. It is here in
front of me. If you want a copy of it, you can just ask me. There is a
total of 38 written questions from members to which there has been no
response. I am not taking this very kindly, because I think 38 questions
not responded to are many questions. I have already written to the Deputy
President, and I have asked him to intervene as a matter of urgency. It is
mostly on the written questions. On oral questions, Ministers come here and
they respond to the questions, but the problem comes in with written
questions. I have done a check again. From 19 March until 16 April, these
questions have not been responded to. I have taken the matter up already
with the Deputy President.

In terms of the Rules, I should commend you. Mr Jacobs, the chairperson of
the subcommittee on review of Council Rules, and you, as members, have done
a wonderful job. I have never seen people working at the speed that you
have done. I thought that it would take us another year to review those
Rules. You would remember that in the Third Parliament you and I discussed
that we should revisit our Rules. The Programming Committee agreed that we
should revisit all our Rules because they were drafted in 1994 when we came
here. We have completed the review of our Rules. Is the workshop for the
Programming Committee or for all of us? The workshop is for the Rules
Committee on 4 June.

In terms of points of order, I heard that you have raised it and the
presiding officers will meet soon. We will look at ourselves in terms of
how we are dealing with those issues concerning the Rules. I want to
introduce something in this House. When you stand up on a point of order,
can you carry your book with you? Can you tell the Chairperson that you are
standing up on a point of order in terms of Rule 106?  I want to teach you
that.

People just stand up on a point of order, even if it is not a point of
order. That wastes the time of the House and interrupts the business of the
House. That, at the same time, will teach you how to use the Rules. You are
assisting me, as the Chair. You will know if the member is correct or
wrong, in terms of Rule 106. You will know if the member could not have
raised a point of order, in terms of Rule 106. If we carry our books, even
though we memorise the Rule, we can just refer to the Rule. I will then
check the Rules while I am sitting here. It also teaches me because I
forget some of the Rules. All of us will learn the Rules by doing this.
Mr Watson, the other point that you have raised was actually raised by Mr
Bloem. I have advised that you should write to the Constitutional Review
Committee to look at whether we can deal with that and other discussions
can take place. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                  ALLEGED INSULT TO PREMIER OF WESTERN CAPE

                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, before we
part, I have responses for the two points of order that were raised on 5
May 2010. I will then start with hon van Lingen. I would like to make a
ruling on a point of order raised by hon van Lingen. The hon member raised
a point of order that hon Ntwanambi insulted the Premier of the Western
Cape, hon Helen Zille, during her debate. I requested hon van Lingen to
indicate to me what it was that was found to be insulting in hon
Ntwanambi’s speech.

Hon van Lingen said that it was with reference to the fact that the Western
Cape had built toilets without walls and that the premier was not
empowering women in the province.

Before I make a ruling, I would like to appeal to members that points of
order should not be used either to interrupt the speaker at the podium or
as a form of response to a member’s speech. If members disagree with the
speaker, they should rather raise such matters during their debates. I
therefore rule that there is nothing insulting in the statement made by hon
Ntwanambi. But instead, there are political statements and any member who
disagrees should rather engage during debates. Thank you.

                      ALLEGED CONTRAVENTION OF RULE 46

                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): The second ruling is
directed to hon Harris. Hon member, I would like to make a ruling on a
point of order raised by you during our plenary on Wednesday, 5 May 2010.
The hon member has raised a point of order with regard to the statement
made by hon Ntwanambi, when she said that the services had been cut off, on
the grounds that such a statement is in violation of Rule 46 of the Council
Rules. Rule 46 provides that no member may deliberately make a statement in
the Council which the member knows is false.

The question that I have to consider is whether the statement made by hon
Ntwanambi was false and, if so, whether such a statement was deliberately
made, because as presiding officers we are not always privy to the
statements that members make in the House. However, on this matter it was
reported in the media that certain services were cut off in some areas in
the Western Cape.

I therefore rule that it cannot be said that the statement is false. Thank
you, members.

The Council adjourned at 12:09.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                             FRIDAY, 7 MAY 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Referral of Bill to National House of Traditional Leaders


    The Secretary to Parliament has, in accordance with section 18(1) of
    the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act, 2003 (Act No.
    41 of 2003), referred the Black Authorities Act Repeal Bill [B 9 –
    2010] (National Assembly – sec 76) to the National House of Traditional
    Leaders, which must, within 30 days from the date of the referral (7
    June 2010), make any comments it wishes to make.

National Council of Provinces

The Chairperson

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) Correction: The following entry replaces item (4) published under
        Referral to Committees of papers tabled in the Announcements,
        Tablings and Committee Reports of 6 May 2010, on page 1301.

        (4)      The following papers are referred to the Select Committee
             on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs for
             consideration:


             (a)  Medium-Term Strategic Plan of the Public Service
                 Commission (PSC) for 2010-11 to 2012-13.


             (b)  Strategic Plan of the Department of Public Service and
                 Administration for 2010-14.


             (c)  Strategic Plan of the Public Administration Leadership and
                 Management Academy (Palama) for 2010-11 to 2012-13.

     2) Correction: The following entry replaces item (11) published under
        Referral to Committees of papers tabled in the Announcements,
        Tablings and Committee Reports of 6 May 2010, on page 1303.

        (11)     The following papers are referred to the Select Committee
             on Trade and International Relations for consideration and
             report:


             (a)  Agreement on Mutual Acceptance of Oenological Practices by
                 the World Wine Trade Group (WWTG), tabled in terms of
                 section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


             (b)  Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement on Mutual
                 Acceptance of Oenological Practices by the World Wine Trade
                 Group (WWTG).


             (c)  Agreement on Requirements for Wine Labelling of the World
                 Wine Trade Group (WWTG), tabled in terms of section 231(2)
                 of the Constitution, 1996.


             (d)  Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement on Requirements
                 for Wine Labelling of the World Wine Trade Group (WWTG).

    (3)     The following paper is referred to the Select Committee on
        Security and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:
        (a)      Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr D
             Jacobs, a magistrate at Clocolan in terms of section 13(3)(c)
             of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).
TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

    (a)     Notice of intervention issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of
        the Constitution, 1996 to Thembisile Hani Municipality, Mpumalanga.

        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.

    (b)     Statement issued in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000), on
        allegations of maladministration, fraud and corrupt practices
        within Emadlangeni Municipality, Kwazulu-Natal.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.


    (c)     Statement issued in terms of section 106(1)(b) of the Local
        Government: Municipal Systems Act, 2000 (Act No 32 of 2000), on
        allegations of maladministration, serious malpractice, fraud and
        corruption within Umhlathuze Municipality, Kwazulu-Natal.


        Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and
        Traditional Affairs for consideration.
COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    Report of the Select Committee on Education and Recreation on the
   oversight visit to Nondzame Primary School, Groot Drakenstein, Paarl on
   14 October 2009, dated 17 February 2010

1.    Introduction
The Select Committee on Education  and  Recreation  undertook  an  oversight
visit to Nondzame Primary School in Paarl on  Wednesday,  14  October  2009.
The visit was in response to  correspondence  received  from  the  governing
body of the school. The visit also aimed to contribute  to  the  Committee’s
mandate of ensuring that provincial interests are taken into account in  the
national sphere of government.

1.1   Delegation
The committee consisted of a multiparty delegation led by  the  Chairperson,
Ms M W Makgate (ANC - North West), Ms R N Rasmeni (ANC - North West),  Mr  J
R de Villiers (DA - Western Cape), Ms M L Moshodi (ANC - Free State),  Mr  S
H Plaatjie (Cope - North West), Mr T A Mashamaite (ANC - Limpopo).

The following persons were present:



Ms N May,  Principal:  Nondzame  Primary  School;,  Ms  N  Mthwa,  Educator:
Nondzame Primary School; Ms V Kasibe, Educator: Nondzame Primary School;  Mr
B Phekula, Educator:  Nondzame  Primary  School;  Ms  N  Ngcikwe,  Educator:
Nondzame Primary School; Ms N  Malangeni,  School  Clerk:  Nondzame  Primary
School; Mr A Ndlazi, Chairperson: School Governing Body (SGB); Ms N  Lufele,
SGB member; Ms N Mzimba, SGB member; Mr  E  Tshitshiba,  SGB  member;  Ms  C
Gcasamba, Parliamentary Officer Office of the  Director  General  for  Basic
Education,  Mr  M  Dlanga,  Committee  Secretary,  Mr  K  Gorata,   Language
Practitioner, Mr E Lourens, Committee Assistant.



2.    Activities and Proceedings

The Committee interacted with the school governing body (SGB),  as  well  as
educators and was briefed on the challenges facing  the  school  ever  since
there was talk of a possible merger of the school. The main  issues  of  the
meeting were the challenges on how to proceed with the proposed  merger  and
terms and conditions in the  event  that  such  a  merger  did  take  place.
Relocation of the school from Groot Drankenstein to  Stellenbosch  was  also
another bone of contention.  It  transpired  during  the  meeting  that  the
Provincial Department of Education has been  offered  a  piece  of  land  to
where the school could be relocated, but due to a  misunderstanding  between
the officials representing the department and the SGB  of  the  school  that
plan did not materialise. The oversight visit to  the  school  provided  the
delegation with an in-depth  understanding  of  the  situation  at  Nondzame
Primary School.



3.    Findings

The following formed part of the key findings:

 ▪ The school is situated on privately-owned land and  is  the  only  school
   in the area using isiXhosa as a medium of instruction.

 ▪ After a visit by the MEC for Education, a proposal to  merge  the  school
   with another school offering Afrikaans as a  medium  of  instruction  was
   made.

 ▪ It appears that  there  were  no  clear  terms  and  conditions  for  the
   proposed merger, which has led to the conflict.

 ▪ The Provincial Department of Education did not  handle  the  matter  with
   the sensitivity that it deserved.

 ▪ The possible closure and merger of the  school  has  led  to  the  school
   losing a number of teachers due to uncertainty about the  future  of  the
   school.

 ▪ The department has  been  keeping  the  school  in  the  dark  about  the
   processes involved with the proposed merger.


 ▪ Communication channels between the SGB and the department is almost  non-
   existent, as most of the time the department has been giving instructions
   to the school.

 • The provincial department has  at  one  stage  unilaterally  appointed  a
   person who referred to himself as a doctor  to  make  an  assessment  and
   report back to the provincial department. The doctor  reported  that  for
   environmental reasons it is not advisable for the  school  to  remain  in
   Groot Drankestein.

 • The report by the doctor  that  the  environment  in  the  area  was  not
   conducive for human beings  and  students  was  disputed  by  the  school
   management and governing body.

 • The name of the doctor sent to do the assessment  is  not  known  to  the
   school.

 • The school together with the governing body is not opposed to the idea of
   a proposed merger or relocation.

 • The general view is that before the  school  can  consider  the  proposed
   merger  and  possible  relocation,  terms  and  conditions  need  to   be
   clarified.

 • Some learners are using bicycles donated to  the  school  as  a  mode  of
   transport to and from school.

 • The school is far from the residential area,  and  this  is  one  of  the
   reasons why the school is not opposed to the  idea  of  relocating  to  a
   place closer to the community.

 • The councilor could have a played a major role in this regard, but failed
   to do so.

 • The relations between the  councilor  and  the  school  are  almost  non-
   existent as he is alleged to have failed to act and intervene  where  his
   intervention was most needed.

 • The regional director did not assist the school to address the  issue  of
   the possible relocation and merger.


4.    Departmental representative Mr Samaal, Circuit Manager

The circuit manager arrived late for  the  meeting  as  he  was  visiting  a
neighbouring school at the time. Mr Samaal could not respond to any  of  the
questions posed by the delegation since he  was  not  briefed.  He  reported
that he was not directly involved in the matter and was not  in  a  position
to respond.



5.    Challenges

The following formed part of the key challenges that were highlighted:

 ▪ Lack of library facilities, computers and sports grounds.

 ▪ Limited number of classrooms resulting in overcrowding.

 ▪ Lack of security which leads to vandalism.

 ▪ Insufficient number of teachers which leads  to  some  teachers  teaching
   more than one learning area.

 ▪ Insufficient school furniture.

 ▪  Teachers  leaving  the  school  for  greener  pastures.  This  was  also
   triggered by the possibility of the merger and relocation of  the  school
   to Pniel.

 ▪ Learners walk long distances to and from school as the  school  does  not
   benefit from the scholar transport grant. Some learners  only  reach  the
   school by midday due to long distances they have to walk.

 ▪ Parents are unemployed and it becomes difficult to pay  for  learners  to
   get to school. This leads to late learners arriving late for school.



6.    Conclusion

The visit has  provided  the  Committee  with  a  general  overview  of  the
challenges faced by the school. The visit also provided the  Committee  with
clear evidence of the situation and the manner in  which  this  whole  issue
was handled. In essence, the school is faced  with  a  common  challenge  of
poor quality of physical infrastructure and a general lack of resources.



The Committee resolved that the Department  of  Education  in  the  Province
would be summoned to appear before  the  Select  Committee  to  explain  the
status of the Nondzame  Primary  School  specifically  with  regard  to  the
proposed merger and relocation.



7.    Recommendations

The Committee recommends that:

 ▪ The Provincial Department of  Education  should  clarify  the  terms  and
   conditions of the merger and proposed relocation.

 ▪ The Provincial Department of Education should ensure that  in  the  event
   that the two schools are merged, the legacy of the  two  schools  is  not
   compromised.

 ▪ The School Governing Body as well as the management of  the  school  must
   not be excluded from taking part in the above process.

 ▪ The challenge at Nondzame Primary is very sensitive  and  the  department
   has a moral obligation to treat this matter with the urgency it deserves.

 ▪ Mechanisms should be developed to improve relations  between  the  school
   governing body and the councillor of the area.

 ▪ The Department and the school must  find  an  amicable  solution  without
   compromising the learner’s constitutional right to education.

 ▪ Communication channels between the department and the  school  should  be
   improved.

 ▪ Communities must begin to treat the school  as  community  centres;  they
   should feel that they own the school, and this will also ensure  that  no
   vandalism takes place in the school.

 ▪ The merger should be done in a way that does not  lead  to  the  learners
   being deprived of their constitutional  right  of  being  taught  in  the
   language of their choice.

 ▪ The Department of Education both at district and  provincial  level  must
   explore ways of developing retention strategies to  prevent  poaching  of
   teachers by urban schools.

 ▪ The Department of Education must  ensure  that  Nondazme  Primary  has  a
   proper infrastructure such as sport facilities,  libraries  and  computer
   laboratories.

 ▪ The Department of Education  should  ensure  that  scholar  transport  is
   provided as a matter of priority.

 ▪ The Provincial Department must ensure that security is  provided  to  the
   schools as a matter of urgency.

 ▪ The Provincial Department of Education must ensure  that  the  school  is
   fenced to prevent vandalism.

 ▪ That the matter  of  Nondzame  Primary  School  could  have  been  better
   handled by the Provincial Department.

 ▪  The  regional  and  provincial  Department  of  Education  must  develop
   mechanisms to provide incentives for  teachers  in  the  rural  and  farm
   schools such as Nondzame.



Report to be considered


2.     REPORT  OF  THE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  ON  CO-OPERATIVE  GOVERNANCE  AND
   TRADITIONAL  AFFAIRS  ON  OVERSIGHT  VISIT  TO   UMHLABUYALINGANA   LOCAL
   MUNICIPALITY – DATED 06th APRIL 2010

1.    Background and Overview
1.1   The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs, having considered the request  by  the  National  Council  of
      Provinces (NCOP) on the 06th December 2009, to consider and report  on
      the intervention notice invoked in terms of section 139 (1)(b) of  the
      Constitution  at  Umhlabuyalingana  Local  Municipality,  reports   as
      follows:

1.2   In terms of section 139(1)(b), when a municipality cannot or does  not
      fulfil an  executive  obligation  in  terms  of  the  Constitution  or
      legislation, the relevant provincial executive may intervene by taking
      any appropriate steps to ensure the  fulfilment  of  that  obligation,
      including assuming the responsibility for the relevant  obligation  in
      that municipality.

1.3   In terms of NCOP rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of  the  NCOP
      referred the notice of intervention in the affairs of Umhlabuyalingana
      Local Municipality to the Select Committee on Co-operative  Governance
      and Traditional Affairs for consideration and reporting. On  the  19th
      February 2010, the Select Committee took a decision during its meeting
      to conduct an oversight visit to the above-mentioned  Municipality  on
      the 17th March 2010.

2.    Purpose and Objectives
2.1   The objectives  of  the  oversight  visit  was  to  determine  whether
      procedural requirements have  been  met  and  to  verify  whether  the
      Provincial Executive has used its discretion appropriately before  the
      Committee  can  approve/disapprove  the  intervention.   Through   the
      deliberations and interaction with internal and external stakeholders,
      the Committee wanted to determine how  the  Provincial  Executive  was
      intending to restore the fulfilment of the  relevant  obligations  and
      ensure fulfilment in the long-term.  The  aim  being  to  ensure  that
      intergovernmental checks and balances aimed at guarding the  integrity
      and efficiency of the intervention process.

3.    Delegation
3.1   The Delegation of the Committee was composed of the following  Members
      of Parliament and Officials: Hon MH Mokgobi,  Limpopo  (ANC);  Hon  AG
      Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon DV Bloem, Free State (COPE); Mr TM  Manele,
      Committee Secretary (Committee Section); Mr N Mfuku,  Content  Adviser
      (Committee  Section);  Mr  V  Mfuniselwa,   Administration   Assistant
      (Committee Section).

4.    Introduction
4.1   On the 24th December  2009  the  KwaZulu-Natal  MEC  for  Co-operative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs tabled a notice of intervention  on
      Umhlabuyalingana Local Municipality to the Office of  the  Chairperson
      of the NCOP. Subsequent to the tabling, a notice of  intervention  was
      referred to  the  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and
      Traditional Affairs  for  consideration  and  reporting  in  terms  of
      Council Rule 101. In compliance with the Council referral, the  Select
      Committee  resolved  to  undertake  a  fact-finding   visit   to   the
      Municipality  on  the  17th  March  2010.  In  terms  of  section  139
      (2)(b)(ii) of the Constitution, the intervention must end if the  NCOP
      does not positively approve the intervention within 180 days, in  this
      case before the end of the 24th May 2010, since the  intervention  has
      began.

5.    Problems Identified by the Provincial Executive Council (PEC)
5.1   The main issues identified by the Provincial  Executive  to  intervene
      in the affairs of Umhlabuyalingana Local Municipality related  to  the
      breach of legislation, lack of accountability,  none  availability  of
      section 57  managers,  allegations  of  maladministration,  fraud  and
      corruption,   irregular,   fruitless   and    wasteful    expenditure,
      unauthorized expenditure, cash flow  problems  and  late  payments  of
      salaries and creditors.

6.    Appointment and Functions of the Administrator
6.1    The  Administrator  was  appointed  on  the  24th  November  2009  to
      undertake the functions as contained in terms of  Section  51  of  the
      Municipal System Act,  including  the  development  of  a  turn–around
      strategy, rectification of all the decisions  made  by  the  Municipal
      Council prior to implementation, rectification of all decisions  taken
      by the Municipal Manager and section 57 managers in terms of delegated
      or  original  authority,  ensuring  the  implementation   of   Council
      resolutions,  implement  a  system  to   control   and   approve   all
      expenditure, implementation  of  governance  procedures  and  systems,
      implementation  of  financial  systems,   procedures   and   policies,
      implementation of the Municipal Property Rates Act, preparation of the
      adjustment budget for the 2009/10 financial year,  and  reviewing  the
      organisational structure of the Municipality.

7.    Oversight Visit to Umhlabuyalingana Local Municipality
7.1    On  the  17th  March  2010  the  Delegation  of  the  Committee   had
      interactive and robust engagements  with  the  internal  and  external
      stakeholders of the  Umhlabuyalingana  Local  Municipality.  The  main
      internal  stakeholders  the  Delegation   interacted   with   in   the
      Municipality included the Speaker, Mayor, Chief Whip,  Ward  Committee
      Members,  Councillors  and  the  Administrator.  The   main   external
      stakeholders the Delegation interacted with included  members  of  the
      community and business forums and non-governmental organizations.

7.2   For the purpose of this report, the submissions made by both  internal
      and external  stakeholders  are  structured  based  on  the  five  key
      performance  areas  of  the  local  government  which  are:  Municipal
      Transformation; Basic Service Delivery;  Local  Economic  Development;
      Municipal  Financial  Viability  and  Management  as  well   as   Good
      Governance and Public Participation.

(A).  Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

7.3   Administrator: The Administrator indicated that   on  the  14th  April
      2009  the MEC of the then  Local Government  and  Traditional  Affairs
      gave notice to Umhlabuyalingana Municipal Council of his  intervention
      in terms of section 136 and137 of the Municipal Finance Management Act
      (MFMA) and section 139  of  the  Constitution,  which  raised  matters
      related to the municipal inability to meet all its  current  creditors
      commitment  and  payments,  irregular  expenditure,   utilization   of
      conditional  capital  grant  funding   is   utilized   for   operating
      expenditure,  and gross mismanagement of cash resources.
7.4   Members of the Community Forums: The  major  concerns  raised  by  the
      Members of the Community  Forums  in  respect  to  transformation  and
      organisational development related to the  failure  of  the  Mayor  to
      implement Council resolutions, more  especially  with  regard  to  the
      suspension of the Chief Financial Officer and the  Municipal  Manager,
      as well as instituting of a forensic investigation on misappropriation
      of municipal funds.

(B).  Basic Service Delivery

7.5    Administrator:   The  Administrator  indicated  that  some   of   the
      challenges faced by  the  Municipality  were  the  wrong  use  of  the
      Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) funds on Council  activities,  at
      the expense of service delivery. However, the major progress  reported
      thus far by the Administrator was the co-operative initiatives of  the
      Municipality to involve non-governmental organisations  and  community
      members in the municipal planning and development processes.

(C).  Local Economic Development (LED)

7.6   Ward Committees: In terms of this key performance area,  the  concerns
      registered by Ward Committees with regard to LED related  to  lack  of
      land use management system, lack of  spatial  development  and  proper
      Integrated Development Planning (IDP).

(D).  Municipal Financial Viability and Management

   7. Administrator: The major challenges reported by the  Administrator  in
      respect of financial management related to lack of financial  recovery
      plan and spending of funds  on  operational  matters  rather  than  on
      service delivery  matters.  Some  of  the  major  municipal  financial
      viability  and  management  progress  reported  by  the  Administrator
      included successful stabilization of municipal finances with  a  cash-
      flow, the development of a stringent cash-flow management plan and the
      development of financial-recovery plan through the co-operation of the
      Municipal Councilors.

   8. Ward Committees: The major progress reported  by  the  Ward  Committee
      Members as the result of the appointment of the Administrator and  the
      placement of  the  municipality  under  section   139  (1)(b)  of  the
      Constitution related  to  the  development  of  Municipal  Turn-Around
      Strategy to manage municipal finances efficiently.

(E).  Good Governance and Public Participation

7.9   Administrator:  The Administrator indicated that the Municipality  had
      involved members of the public to be part of the consultation  process
      related  to  service  delivery  and  municipal  planning.  He  further
      acknowledged the support received from the Municipal Council.

7.10  Ward Committees:  Members of the Ward Committees in  respect  of  good
      governance and  public  participation,  acknowledged  the  initiatives
      developed by Administrator in consulting with  the  Councillors,  non-
      governmental organisations and  Members  of  the  Ward  Committees  in
      developing the municipal turn around strategy, financial recovery plan
      and the medium-term budget review.

8.    Committee Observations

8.1   The Delegation of the  Committee  has  observed  that  the  since  the
      placing  of  the  Municipality  under  section  139  (1)(b)   of   the
      Constitution  and  the   appointment   of   the   Administrator,   the
      Municipality has made progress in respect of developing a  turn-around
      strategy, development  of  medium-term  budget  review  and  municipal
      financial recovery plan.

8.2   Furthermore, it was observed  that  in  all  the  intervention  visits
      undertaken  by  the   Committee   so   far,   Umhlabuyalingana   Local
      Municipality reflected a significant level of political unity and  co-
      operative governance in addressing the municipal challenges.

9.    Acknowledgement

9.1   The Committee Delegation acknowledged the varied contributions of  the
      parliamentary staff who participated in the oversight visit  in  their
      various capacities. A word of appreciation is also extended to all the
      internal and external stakeholders of the municipality who  interacted
      and had robust engagements with the Delegation  of  the  Committee  on
      matters related to the placement of the Municipality under section 139
      (1) (b) of the Constitution.

10.   Recommendations

10.1   Having  conducted  the  oversight  visit  to  Umhlabuyalingana  Local
      Municipality and interacted with internal and  external  stakeholders,
      the  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs recommends as follows:

      10.1.1       The  National   Council   of   Provinces   approves   the
           intervention as issued by the Provincial  Executive  Council  in
           terms of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution.
      10.1.2       The  Administrator  should  fast-tract  the  process   of
           appointing Section 57 Managers and assist  the  Municipality  in
           developing a labour-retention strategy, in order to ensure  that
           future  service  delivery  projects  have  the  support  of  the
           community and are aligned with the IDP.


      10.1.3      The KwaZulu-Natal  MEC  for  Co-operative  Governance  and
           Traditional Affairs should table quarterly progress  reports  to
           the NCOP  and  the  Provincial  Legislature  on  the  status  of
           intervention   in   the   Municipality,   including   challenges
           encountered.

      10.1.4      The South African  Local  Government  Association  in  co-
           operation with Local Government Sector  Education  and  Training
           Authority should facilitate the training and  capacity  building
           for Municipal Councillors; to further deepen their understanding
           of the oversight role; legal framework and policies that  govern
           the activities of the Municipality.


      10.1.5      The South African Local Government Association should also
           facilitate  Executive  Training  Programme  for  the   municipal
           officials.

      10.1.6      The approved report by the NCOP should be shared with  all
           the internal and external stakeholders of Umhlabuyalingana Local
           Municipality  whom  the  Committee  Delegation  interacted  with
           during the oversight visit.

        7. The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and  Traditional
           Affairs, in co-operation with the relevant  Portfolio  Committee
           in KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Legislature would conduct a  follow-
           up  visit  to  the  Municipality,   three   months   after   the
           intervention has ended in order to monitor  through  interaction
           with  internal  and  external  stakeholders,  progress  made  in
           respect of the intervention in the Municipality.

Report to be considered.

3.  REPORT  OF  THE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  ON   CO-OPERATIVE   GOVERNANCE   AND
   TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON OVERSIGHT VISIT TO  INDAKA  LOCAL  MUNICIPALITY  –
   DATED 06th APRIL 2010

1.    Background and Overview
1.1   The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs, having considered the request  by  the  National  Council  of
      Provinces (NCOP) on the 06th December 2009, to consider and report  on
      the intervention notice invoked in terms of section 139 (1)(b) of  the
      Constitution at Indaka  Local Municipality, reports as follows:

1.2   In terms of section 139(1)(b), when a municipality cannot or does  not
      fulfil an  executive  obligation  in  terms  of  the  Constitution  or
      legislation, the relevant provincial executive may intervene by taking
      any appropriate steps to ensure the  fulfilment  of  that  obligation,
      including assuming the responsibility for the relevant  obligation  in
      that municipality.

1.3   Section 139 (2) of  the  Constitution  requires  that  the  provincial
      executive to notify the NCOP within 14 days when it  intervenes  in  a
      municipality, and the NCOP  may  disapprove/approve  the  intervention
      within 180 days after the intervention  has begin.

1.4   In terms of NCOP rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of  the  NCOP
      referred the notice of intervention in the  affairs  of  Indaka  Local
      Municipality to the Select Committee on  Co-operative  Governance  and
      Traditional Affairs for  consideration  and  reporting.  On  the  19th
      February 2010, the Select Committee took a decision during its meeting
      to conduct an oversight visit to the above-mentioned  Municipality  on
      the 18th March 2010.

2.    Purpose and Objectives
2.1   The objectives  of  the  oversight  visit  was  to  determine  whether
      procedural requirements have  been  met  and  to  verify  whether  the
      Provincial Executive has used its discretion appropriately before  the
      Committee  can  approve/disapprove  the  intervention.   Through   the
      deliberations and interaction with internal and external stakeholders,
      the Committee wanted to determine how  the  Provincial  Executive  was
      intending to restore the fulfilment of the  relevant  obligations  and
      ensure fulfilment in the long-term.  The  aim  being  to  ensure  that
      intergovernmental checks and balances aimed at guarding the  integrity
      and efficiency of the intervention process.

3.    Delegation
3.1   The Delegation of the Committee was composed of the following  Members
      of Parliament and Officials: Hon MH Mokgobi,  Limpopo  (ANC);  Hon  AG
      Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon  DV  Bloem,  Free  State  (COPE);    Mr  TM
      Manele, Committee Secretary (Committee Section); Mr N  Mfuku,  Content
      Adviser (Committee Section); Mr V Mfuniselwa, Administration Assistant
      (Committee Section).

4.    Introduction
4.1   On the 24th November  2009  the  KwaZulu-Natal  MEC  for  Co-operative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs tabled a notice of intervention  on
      Indaka Local Municipality to the Office  of  the  Chairperson  of  the
      NCOP. Subsequent to the tabling, a notice of intervention was referred
      to the Select Committee on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs for consideration and reporting in terms of Council Rule 101.

4.2    In  compliance  with  the  Council  referral,  the  Select  Committee
      resolved to undertake a fact-finding visit to the Municipality on  the
      18th  March  2010.  In  terms  of  section  139  (2)(b)(ii)   of   the
      Constitution,  the  intervention  must  end  if  the  NCOP  does   not
      positively approve the intervention within  180  days,  in  this  case
      before the end of  the 24th May 2010 since the intervention began.

5.    The Reason for Intervention in Indaka Local Municipality
5.1   The main issues identified by the Provincial  Executive  to  intervene
      in the affairs of Indaka Local Municipality related  to  the  lack  of
      capacity in the Municipal Council to exercise an  oversight  role  and
      implement municipal reforms,  non-submission  of  the  2008/09  annual
      financial statements, non-compliance with section 121 of the Municipal
      Finance Management Act  (MFMA),  serious  deficiencies  in  management
      systems and other accounting and financial controls.

6.    Appointment and Functions of the Administrator
6.1    The  Administrator  was  appointed  on  the  24th  November  2009  to
      undertake the functions as contained in terms of  Section  51  of  the
      Municipal System Act,  including  the  development  of  a  turn–around
      strategy, rectification of all the decisions  made  by  the  Municipal
      Council prior implementation, rectification of all decisions taken  by
      the Municipal Manager and section 57 managers in terms of delegated or
      original   authority,   ensuring   the   implementation   of   Council
      resolutions, implementation of a system to  control  and  approve  all
      expenditure, implementation  of  governance  procedures  and  systems,
      implementation  of  financial  systems,   procedures   and   policies,
      implementation of the Municipal Property Rates Act, preparation of the
      adjustment budget for the 2009/10 financial year,  and  reviewing  the
      organisational structure of the Municipality.

7.    Oversight Visit to Indaka Local Municipality
7.1    On  the  18th  March  2010  the  Delegation  of  the  Committee   had
      interactive and robust engagements  with  the  internal  and  external
      stakeholders of the  Indaka  Local  Municipality.  The  main  internal
      stakeholders  the  Delegation  interacted  with  in  the  Municipality
      included the Speaker,  Mayor,  Chief  Whip,  Ward  Committee  Members,
      Councillors and the Administrator. The main external stakeholders  the
      Delegation interacted with  included  members  of  the  community  and
      business forums and non-governmental organizations.

7.2   For the purpose of this report, the submissions made by both  internal
      and external  stakeholders  are  structured  based  on  the  five  key
      performance  areas  of  the  local  government  which  are:  Municipal
      Transformation; Basic Service Delivery;  Local  Economic  Development;
      Municipal  Financial  Viability  and  Management  as  well   as   Good
      Governance and Public Participation.

(A).  Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

7.3    Administrator:  The  municipal  transformation   and   organisational
      development  issues  reported  by  the  Administrator   included   the
      finalization of a disciplinary action against the suspended  Municipal
      Manager  and  the  stabilization  of  the  municipal   administration.
      Furthermore, the Manager in the  Mayor’s  Office  salary  was  cut-off
      because of his long absence from work, and  his  disciplinary  hearing
      was schedule for the 19th March 2010.
   4.  Organised  Labour:   the  major  transformation  and   organisational
      development progress reported by  the  representatives  of  IMATU  and
      SAMMU related  to  the  open  door  policy  approach  adopted  by  the
      Administrator in dealing with matters related to the labour forum, and
      problems pertaining to job evaluation system. Furthermore,  a  concern
      was raised with regard to the wage-gap between different  occupational
      levels which requires urgent attention.

(B).  Basic Service Delivery

7.5   Administrator:  The major basic service delivery  priorities  reported
      by the Administrator  as  the  result  of  the  developed  turn-around
      strategy included the review and evaluation of  allocated  powers  and
      functions, identification of  core  powers  and  functions  to  ensure
      provision of basis services and identification of functions that could
      be  provided  collectively  with  other  municipalities   within   the
      district.

7.6   Ward Committees:  The major basic service delivery concerns raised  by
      the Ward Committee Members related to lack  of  development,  lack  of
      drinking water and poor road infrastructure.  In  addition,  the  Ward
      Committee Members raised a concern  pertaining  to  the  provision  of
      electricity, since there was still no electricity reticulated in areas
      like Stanford and Dikishoba.

   7.  Traditional  Leaders:   The  major  concerns  raised  by  the   local
      traditional leaders in respect of basic service  delivery  related  to
      the lack of decent roads and lack of access to drinking water.

(C).  Local Economic Development (LED)

7.8   Ward Committees: The LED concerns raised by the members  of  the  Ward
      Committees related  to  the  lack  of  economic  development  and  job
      creation opportunities, lack of agricultural projects and the lack  of
      industrial development in the municipal jurisdiction.

(D).  Municipal Financial Viability and Management

7.9   Administrator: Some of the major priorities in terms of the  municipal
      turn-around  strategy  reported  by  the  Administrator  included  the
      updating  of  financial  systems,   finalization   and   adoption   of
      adjustments budget, development of a list of outstanding creditors and
      payment plan, recovery of  the  withheld  local  government  equitable
      share, resolution of audit findings, drafting of  a  credible  2010/11
      Integrated Development Plan (IDP) and  budget as the reconstitution of
      all matters related to supply chain management.

7.10  The Administrator further reported that the deficit  for  the  2007/08
      stood a R8, 5 million, in 2008/09 it was reduced to R5 million and  in
      2009/10 it was expected to  be  reduced  to  R1  million.  He  further
      indicated that the Municipal Council has made  bad  decisions  in  the
      past that has led to the current predicament facing the Municipality.

(E).  Good Governance and Public Participation

7.11  Administrator: Some of major good governance and public  participation
      priorities reported by the Administrator in  terms  of  the  developed
      turn-around strategic plan related to raising an  awareness  on  local
      government legislative environment, ensuring compliance  in  order  to
      ensure   a   well   functioning   and   developmental    Municipality,
      consideration   and   adoption   of   Standing   Rules   and   Orders,
      reconstituting   the   Ward   Committees   and   ensuring    municipal
      accountability and oversight.

7.12  Ward Committees:  Members  of  the  Ward  Committees  raised  concerns
      ranging from non-functioning of Ward Committees,  lack  of  human  and
      financial resources  for  the  Ward  Committees,  inadequate  capacity
      building programmes for Members of the Ward  Committees  and  lack  of
      consultation and communication with local farmers.

8.    Committee Observations and Opinion

8.1   The Delegation of the Committee has observed that  since  the  placing
      of the Municipality under section 139 (1)(b) of the  Constitution  and
      the appointment  of  the  Administrator,  the  Municipality  has  made
      significant progress in respect  of  the  development  of  turn-around
      strategy, drafting of 2010/11 IDP and reconstitution  of  all  matters
      related to supply chain management.

8.2   The Delegation is of the opinion that  the  current  Acting  Municipal
      Manager should work closely with Administrator  for  skills  transfer.
      This will facilitate capacity building  and  administration  stability
      when the intervention expires.

8.3   In addition, the Delegation is also of the opinion that  the  district
      and the local municipality should speedily work together in addressing
      water-shortages, as well as powers and functions.

9.    Acknowledgement
9.1   The Committee Delegation acknowledged the varied contributions of  the
      parliamentary staff who participated in the oversight visit  in  their
      various capacities. A word of appreciation is also extended to all the
      internal and external stakeholders of the municipality who  interacted
      and had robust engagements with the delegation  of  the  committee  on
      matters related to the placement of the municipality under section 139
      (1) (b) of the Constitution.

10.   Recommendations

10.1  Having conducted the oversight visit to Indaka Local Municipality  and
      interacted  with  internal  and  external  stakeholders,  the   Select
      Committee  on  Co-operative   Governance   and   Traditional   Affairs
      recommends as follows:

      10.1.1       The  National   Council   of   Provinces   approves   the
           intervention as issued by the Provincial  Executive  Council  in
           terms of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution.


      10.1.2       The  Administrator  should  fast-tract  the  process   of
           appointing Section 57 Managers and assist  the  Municipality  in
           developing a labour retention strategy, in order to ensure  that
           future  service  delivery  projects  have  the  support  of  the
           community and are aligned with the IDP.


      10.1.3      The KwaZulu-Natal  MEC  for  Co-operative  Governance  and
           Traditional Affairs should table quarterly progress  reports  to
           the NCOP  and  the  Provincial  Legislature  on  the  status  of
           intervention   in   the   Municipality,   including   challenges
           encountered.

      10.1.4      The South African  Local  Government  Association  in  co-
           operation with Local Government Sector  Education  and  Training
           Authority should facilitate the training and  capacity  building
           for Municipal Councillors; to further deepen their understanding
           of the oversight role; legal framework and policies that  govern
           the activities of the Municipality.


      10.1.5      The South African Local Government Association should also
           facilitate  Executive  Training  Programme  for  the   municipal
           officials.

        6. The approved report by the NCOP should be shared  with  all  the
           internal and external stakeholders of Indaka Local  Municipality
           whom  the  Committee  Delegation  interacted  with  during   the
           oversight visit.

        7. The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and  Traditional
           Affairs, in co-operation with the relevant  Portfolio  Committee
           in KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Legislature would conduct a  follow-
           up  visit  to  the  Municipality,   three   months   after   the
           intervention has ended in order to monitor  through  interaction
           with  internal  and  external  stakeholders,  progress  made  in
           respect of the intervention in the Municipality.

Report to be considered.

4.     REPORT  OF  THE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  ON  CO-OPERATIVE  GOVERNANCE  AND
   TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON OVERSIGHT VISIT TO OKHAHLAMBA LOCAL MUNICIPALITY –
   DATED 06th APRIL 2010

1.    Background and Overview
1.1   The  Select  Committee  on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs, having considered the request  by  the  National  Council  of
      Provinces (NCOP) on the 12th January 2010,  to consider and report  on
      the intervention notice invoked in terms of section 139 (1)(b) of  the
      Constitution at Okhahlamba Local Municipality, reports as follows:

1.2   In terms of section 139(1)(b), when a municipality cannot or does  not
      fulfil an  executive  obligation  in  terms  of  the  Constitution  or
      legislation, the relevant provincial executive may intervene by taking
      any appropriate steps to ensure the  fulfilment  of  that  obligation,
      including assuming the responsibility for the relevant  obligation  in
      that municipality.

1.3   In terms of NCOP Rule 101, the Office of the Chairperson of  the  NCOP
      referred the notice of intervention in the affairs of Okhahlamba Local
      Municipality to the Select Committee of  Co-operative  Governance  and
      Traditional Affairs for  consideration  and  reporting.  On  the  19th
      February 2010, the Select Committee took a decision during its meeting
      to conduct an oversight visit to the above-mentioned  Municipality  on
      the 19th March 2010.

2.    Purpose and Objectives
2.1   The main objectives of the oversight visit was  to  determine  whether
      procedural requirements have  been  met  and  to  verify  whether  the
      Provincial Executive has used its discretion appropriately before  the
      Committee  can  approve/disapprove  the  intervention.   Through   the
      deliberations and interaction with internal and external stakeholders,
      the Committee wanted to determine how  the  Provincial  Executive  was
      intending to restore the fulfilment of the  relevant  obligations  and
      ensure fulfilment in the long-term.  The  aim  being  to  ensure  that
      intergovernmental checks and balances aimed at guarding the  integrity
      and efficiency of the intervention process.

3.    Delegation
3.1   The Delegation of the Committee was composed of the following  Members
      of Parliament and Officials: Hon MH Mokgobi,  Limpopo  (ANC);  Hon  AG
      Matila, Gauteng (ANC); Hon DV Bloem, Free State (COPE); Mr TM  Manele,
      Committee Secretary (Committee Section); Mr N Mfuku,  Content  Adviser
      (Committee  Section);  Mr  V  Mfuniselwa,   Administration   Assistant
      (Committee Section).

4.    Introduction

4.1   On the 24th November  2009  the  KwaZulu-Natal  MEC  for  Co-operative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs tabled a notice of intervention  on
      Okhahlamba Local Municipality to the Office of the Chairperson of  the
      NCOP. Subsequent to the tabling, a notice of intervention was referred
      to the Select Committee on  Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional
      Affairs for consideration and reporting in terms of Council Rule  101.
      In compliance with the Council referral, the Select Committee resolved
      to undertake a fact-finding visit to  the  Municipality  on  the  19th
      March 2010.

4.2    In  terms  of  section  139  (2)(b)(ii)  of  the  Constitution,   the
      intervention must end if the NCOP does not  approve  the  intervention
      within 180 days, in this case before the end  of  the  24th  May  2010
      since the intervention began.

5.    Reasons for Intervening in Okhahlamba Local Municipality
5.1   The main issues identified by the Provincial  Executive  to  intervene
      in the affairs of Okhahlamba Local Municipality related to  persistent
      or material breach of legislation; lack of  financial  and  management
      accountability; serious allegations of  maladministration,  fraud  and
      corruption; irregular fruitless and wasteful expenditure; unauthorized
      expenditures; cash  flow  problems  and  late  payments  of  salaries.
      Furthermore, there was  a  complete  disdain  for  the  views  of  the
      opposition and  the  ignoring  of  appeals  to  desist  from  misusing
      political majority, by subjecting to a vote matters that  had  serious
      financial and legal consequences.

6.    Appointment and Functions of the Administrator

6.1    The  Administrator  was  appointed  on  the  24th  November  2009  to
      undertake the functions in terms of Section 51 of the Municipal System
      Act; including development of turn–around strategy;  rectification  of
      all decisions  of  the  Municipal  Council  prior  to  implementation;
      rectification of all decisions taken by Municipal Manager and  section
      57 managers in terms of the delegated or original authority;  ensuring
      the implementation of Council resolution; implementation of  a  system
      to control and approve all expenditure; implementation  of  governance
      procedures  and  systems;   implementation   of   financial   systems,
      procedures and policies; implementation of  Municipal  Property  Rates
      Act (MPRA), preparation of  the  adjustment  budget  for  the  2009/10
      financial year, and the  reviewing  of  the  municipal  organisational
      structure.

7.    Oversight Visit to Okhahlamba Local Municipality

1. On the 19th March 2010 the Delegation of the  Committee  had  interactive
   and robust engagements with the
      internal and external  stakeholders  of  the  Municipality.  The  main
      internal  stakeholders  the  Delegation   interacted   with   in   the
      Municipality included the Speaker, Mayor, Chief Whip,  Ward  Committee
      Members,  Councillors  and  the  Administrator.  The   main   external
      stakeholders the Delegation interacted with included  members  of  the
      community and business forums and non-governmental organizations.


7.2   For the purpose of this report, the submissions made by both  internal
      and external stakeholders are structured on  the  basis  of  the  five
      strategic key performance areas of the local government  agenda  which
      are: Municipal Transformation; Basic Service Delivery; Local  Economic
      Development; Municipal Financial Viability and Management as  well  as
      Good Governance and Public Participation.

(A).  Municipal Transformation and Organisational Development

7.3    Administrator:  The  transformation  and  organisational  development
      crisis reported by  the  Administrator  involved  the  appointment  of
      personnel without relevant qualifications  and  experience,  high-turn
      over  of  Municipal  Managers  and  Chief  Financial  Officers;  staff
      employment  driven   by   narrow   political   considerations;   wrong
      application  of  staff  placement  policy   resulting   in   wholesale
      promotions of staff at various levels and thinness in terms of  skills
      and competency at managerial and supervisory levels.

7.4   Organised Labour:  The  municipal  transformation  and  organisational
      development challenges raised by the South African  Municipal  Workers
      Union (SAMWU) representative related to the non-functionality  of  the
      labour forum and the non-implementation of labour related decisions.

(B).  Basic Service Delivery

7.5   Administrator: Some of the service delivery  crisis  reported  by  the
      Administrator related to the huge backlogs  identified  in  water  and
      sanitation; stalling of housing projects; lack of clarity on  how  the
      list of beneficiaries of  free  basic  services  for  electricity  was
      compiled; poor maintenance of infrastructure and municipal buildings.

7.6   Rate Payers Association: The Rate Payers Association  raised  concerns
      related to the lack of service delivery and shortage of running  water
      in the municipal  jurisdiction,  especially  in  areas  like  Tsakani.
      Equally,  they  emphasized  the  importance  of   rendering   services
      efficiently by the Municipality.

(C).  Local Economic Development (LED)

7.7    Bergville  Chamber  of  Business:  The  Chamber  reported  that   the
      Municipal  Council  did  not  recognized  business  as  an   important
      stakeholder for LED and job creation. It was indicated that  political
      interference was highly prevalent in the supply  chain  management  of
      the  Municipality.  Furthermore,   they   also   divulged   that   the
      developmental approach of the Municipal Council lacked a  vision,  and
      did not have budget commitments.

(D).  Municipal Financial Viability and Management

7.8   Administrator: The  Administrator  reported  that  there  was  serious
      challenges since expenditure was not backed  by  authentic  supporting
      documents; there was a lot of disappearance of  supporting  documents;
      misstatements in Annual Financial Statements (AFS); lack of supporting
      documents on investments recorded in the AFS  and  Conditional  Grants
      have been utilised for purposes other than those for which  they  were
      intended.

7.9   Administrator: The other financial  viability  and  management  crisis
      reported by the Administrator related to asset register which was  not
      updated and assets not physically verifiable;  individual  members  of
      staff  often  by-passed  supply  chain  management  processes  without
      censure; over-expenditure on votes; blurring of segregation  of  roles
      and duties and ineffective Internal Audit and Audit Committee.

7.10  Administrator: In order to deal with the above-mentioned  crisis,  the
      Administrator reported that the turn- around strategic plan  has  been
      developed to focus on the preparation of the Annual Report in terms of
      section 121 of the Municipal Finance Management Act (MFMA); submission
      of the Mid-Year Budget and Performance Assessment by the 25th  January
      2010 in terms  of  section  72  of  the  Act;  preparation  of  Budget
      Adjustment and identification and resolving of all  obstacles  to  the
      implementation of the MPRA.

7.11  Organized Labour: In order to deal with municipal financial  viability
      and management, the representative of SAMMU appealed to the Provincial
      Department to provide the Municipality with the  financial  assistance
      and the rate payers to pay for the services due.

(E).  Good Governance and Public Participation

7.12  Administrator: Some of the governance  related  concerns  reported  by
      the  Administrator  included  the  ineffective  Ward  Committees   and
      Community Development Workers (CDWs). It was also indicated  that  the
      Integrated Development Plan (IDP) of Okhahlamba Local Municipality has
      been ranked as falling amongst the worst IDPs of all municipalities in
      KwaZulu-Natal Province. There are indications that the  same  IDP  has
      been submitted twice without review, the only change being the year of
      submission. Similarly, the input of  the  Provincial  Departments  and
      other Agencies were evidently absent - a signal of poor  participation
      of Departments in the IDP process.

7.13   Administrator:  The  other  governance   crisis   reported   by   the
      Administrator related to the non-clarification of the different  roles
      of  functionaries   and   officials;   Intra-party   and   inter-party
      contradictions had manifested through the attempts to unseat both  the
      Mayor  and  the  Speaker;  non-functioning  of  internal  audit,  non-
      functioning of the Shared Services Model with  the  District  and  the
      poor working relations by the Municipality with the District.

  14. Ward Committees:  Some of  the  governance  and  public  participation
      concerns  raised  by  Ward   Committees   Members   related   to   the
      non–functioning of  Ward  Committees;  lack  of  consultation  between
      Councillors and Ward Committee Members; Councillors appointing  people
      not elected  by  the  respective  communities;  lack  of  co-operation
      between the Councillors and Traditional Leaders.

  15. Organized Labour: Some  of  the  governance  concerns  raised  by  the
      representatives of SAMMU related to the disfunctionality of the labour
      forum, as well as the implementation of its decisions.

  16.  Philakahle  Working  Centre:   This   non-governmental   organisation
      indicated that public consultation did not exist in the  Municipality,
      especially on consultative issues like the IDP. They recommended  that
      the Municipal Council to immediately implement government programmes.

8.    Committee Observations and Opinion

8.1   The Delegation of the Committee has observed that since the  placement
      of the Municipality under  section  139  (1)(b)  of  the  Constitution
      significant progress has been made in respect of the development of  a
      turn- around strategy; development  of  financial  recovery  plan  and
      development of rate payers policy.

8.2   The Municipality has through  the  appointment  of  the  Administrator
      developed a best diagnostic analytical tool focusing on the  strategy;
      governance; finance; service delivery; human  resources  and  capacity
      development support analysis.

8.3   The Municipality has put in place a  plan  to  address  irregularities
      related to the forensic audit investigation,  criminal  investigations
      pursued  by  the  Hawks;  disciplinary  actions  against  the  Tourism
      Manager,  Cashier  Supervisor;  suspension  of   Director:   Corporate
      Services; consideration of legal options to review the 99  Year  Lease
      Agreement and the recovery of R600 000  paid  as  a  deposit  for  the
      cemetery land.

9.    Acknowledgement

9.1   The Committee Delegation acknowledged the varied contributions of  the
      parliamentary staff who participated in the oversight visit  in  their
      various capacities.  A word of appreciation is also  extended  to  all
      the  internal  and  external  stakeholders  of  the  municipality  who
      interacted and had robust  engagements  with  the  delegation  of  the
      committee on matters related to  the  placement  of  the  municipality
      under section 139 (1) (b) of the Constitution.

10.   Recommendations

10.1  Having conducted the oversight visit to Okhahlamba Local  Municipality
      and interacted with internal and  external  stakeholders,  the  Select
      Committee  on  Co-operative   Governance   and   Traditional   Affairs
      recommends as follows:

      10.1.1       The  National   Council   of   Provinces   approves   the
           intervention as issued by the Provincial  Executive  Council  in
           terms of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution.


      10.1.2       The  Administrator  should  fast-tract  the  process   of
           appointing  Section  57  Managers,  the  implementation  of  the
           financial recovery plan and the municipal turn-around strategy.


      10.1.3      The Administrator should resolve the problems  related  to
           the non-functionality of the Ward  Committees  and  ensure  that
           Local  Economic  Development  takes  place   through   community
           consultation and participation.


      10.1.4      The Administrator should assist the Municipality  and  the
           District  in  strengthening  the   District   Inter-Governmental
           Relation  Forum  (IGR),  in  order   to   achieve   co-operative
           governance.


      10.1.5      The KwaZulu-Natal  MEC  for  Co-operative  Governance  and
           Traditional Affairs should table quarterly progress  reports  to
           the NCOP and the Provincial Legislature on  the  status  of  the
           intervention   in   the   Municipality,   including   challenges
           encountered.

      10.1.6      The South African  Local  Government  Association  in  co-
           operation with Local Government Sector  Education  and  Training
           Authority should facilitate the training and  capacity  building
           for Municipal Councillors; to further deepen their understanding
           of the oversight role; legal framework and policies that  govern
           the activities of the Municipality.


      10.1.7      The South African Local Government Association should also
           facilitate an Executive Training  Programme  for  the  municipal
           officials.

        8. The approved report by the NCOP should be shared  with  all  the
           internal  and  external   stakeholders   of   Okhahlamba   Local
           Municipality  whom  the  Committee  Delegation  interacted  with
           during the oversight visit.

        9. The Select Committee on Co-operative Governance and  Traditional
           Affairs in co-operation with the relevant Portfolio Committee in
           KwaZulu-Natal Provincial Legislature would conduct  a  follow-up
           visit to the Municipality, three months after  the  intervention
           has ended in order to monitor through interaction with  internal
           and external stakeholders,  progress  made  in  respect  of  the
           intervention in the Municipality.

Report to be considered.

                             MONDAY, 10 MAY 2010

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Report of the Select Committee on Finance on the  oversight  visit
   to Northern Cape’s Municipalities from 02-04 March  2010,  dated  07  May
   2010

1.    Introduction

The Select Committee on Finance (SCoF) was established in terms  of  section
4(1) of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act,  No.  9
of 2009. In terms of section 4(2) of this Act, the SCoF has the  powers  and
functions conferred to it by Constitution, legislation, the  standing  rules
or resolution of a House, including considering and reporting on:
     a) the national macro-economic and fiscal policy;
     b) amendment to the fiscal framework,  revised  fiscal  framework  and
        revenue proposals and Bills;
     c) actual revenue published by the National Treasury; and
     d) any other related matter set out in this Act.

On the other  hand,  the  Select  Committee  on  Appropriations  (SCoA)  was
established in terms of section 4(3) of the Money Bills Amendment  Procedure
and Related Matters Act, No 9 of 2009. In terms  of  section  4(4)  of  this
Act, the  SCoA  has  the  powers  and  functions  conferred  to  it  by  the
Constitution, legislation, the standing rules or a resolution  of  a  House,
including considering and reporting on:
     a) spending issues;
     b) amendments to the Division of Revenue Bill, the Appropriation Bill,
        Supplementary Appropriations  Bill  and  Adjustment  Appropriations
        Bill;
     c) recommendations of the Financial and Fiscal  Commission,  including
        those referred to in the Intergovernmental  Fiscal  Relations  Act,
        No. 97 of 1997;
     d) reports on actual expenditure published by the  National  Treasury;
        and
     e) Any other related matter set out in this Act.

Furthermore, the mandate of the Select Committee on Appropriations  and  the
Select Committee on Finance  (henceforth  referred  to  as  the  Committees)
encompasses the Committees’ functions to  legislate,  conduct  oversight  of
the  Executive;  promote  public  participation,  facilitate   international
agreements and review matters of public interest  in  relation  to  National
Treasury and its entities, and the South African Reserve Bank.

1.1   Delegation
The oversight visit took place from 02 to 04 March 2010. Meetings were  held
at Kimberly (Protea Hotel) and Upington (Protea Hotel) in Northern Cape.

The delegation consisted of:
         • Hon. CJ de Beer (ANC) (Chairperson of SCoF);
         • Hon. TA Chaane (ANC); (Chairperson of SCoA)
         • Hon. SD Montsitsi (ANC);
         • Hon. BL Mashile (ANC);
         • Hon. JJ Gunda (ID);
         • Hon. Lees (DA); and
         • Hon. TD Harris (DA).

Northern Cape’s Provincial Legislature Members
    • Hon. D. P. Dikgetsi;
    • Hon. S Lubbe;
    • Hon. D  Stubbe; and
    • Hon A.J Beukes.

The parliamentary officials that  accompanied  the  delegation  are:  Mr.  L
Nodada (Committee Secretary), Mr. M Mkhize  (Content  Advisor),  Mr.  M  Tau
(Researcher), and Mr. V Makubalo (Committee Assistant).

1.2   Terms of reference
The  visit  formed  part  of  the  Committee’s  ongoing   interaction   with
municipalities to monitor collaboration and coordination pertaining  to  the
provision of municipal services  and  support  given  to  municipalities  by
provincial and national departments. The  municipalities  in  Northern  Cape
that  were  identified  for  the  visit  are:  Sol   Plaatje   Municipality,
Renosterberg  Municipality;  Siyancuma  District  Municipality;  Thembelihle
Municipality; Kgatelopele Municipality; Dikgatlong Municipality;  Siyathemba
Municipality; Phokwane Municipality; Emthanjeni  Municipality;  Richtersveld
Municipality, Kamiesberg Municipality; Karoo Hoogland Municipality,  Siyanda
Municipality and Mier  Municipality.  The  Renosterberg  Local  Municipality
could not attend the oversight  meeting  and  no  apology  nor  reasons  for
inability to attend were provided to Parliament.

The  stakeholders  (including  national  and  provincial  departments)  that
accompanied  the  Committee  on  this  visit  are:  National  Department  of
Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Northern  Cape’s  Provincial
Treasury, South African Local Government Association, Provincial  Department
of  Energy,  Financial  and  Fiscal  Commission,  Provincial  Department  of
Cooperative Governance, Human Settlements and Traditional Affairs,  National
Department of Water and Environmental Affairs,  National  Treasury,  Auditor
General, Development Bank of Southern Africa, and ESKOM.


1.3   Purpose of the Visit
The purpose of the oversight visit was to engage  with  the  above-mentioned
municipalities  along  with  national  and  provincial  departments  on  the
following areas:
    • Development and implementation of municipal budgets;
    • Municipalities’ compliance with the Municipal Finance Management  Act,
      Number 56 of 2003;
    • The spending and performance of the  municipalities  with  regards  to
      conditional grants;
    • The municipalities’ relations and collaboration with various  national
      and provincial departments and entities;
    • Capacity constraints of the municipalities (if any);
    • The extent to which municipal services are provided; and
    • The alignment of  municipalities’  Integrated  Development  Programmes
      with the Provincial Growth and Development Strategy.


2.    Auditor General’s overall presentation on identified Municipalities

The Office of the Auditor General (AG) briefed the Committee on the  2008-09
audit outcomes of the selected  municipalities  in  Northern  Cape.  The  AG
reported that the audit  opinions  of  11  municipalities,  who  received  a
disclaimer  in  the  previous  financial  year,  did   not   change.   These
municipalities include: Sol Plaatje  Municipality;  Siyancuma  Municipality;
Thembelihle    Municipality;    Kgatelopele     Municipality;     Dikgatlong
Municipality; Siyathemba Municipality; Emthanjeni  Municipality;  Kamiesberg
Municipality; Karoo Hoogland Municipality,  Siyanda  Municipality  and  Mier
Municipality.

The AG informed the Committees that municipalities were expected  to  submit
their financial statements on 31 March 2010. However, the  AG  informed  the
Committees that Phokwane  and  Renosterberg  Local  Municipalities  did  not
submit their  financial  statements.  In  the  prior  year,  Phokwane  Local
Municipality also submitted their financial statement after  the  legislated
deadline. The late submission of Phokwane’s audit financial statement  (AFS)
was due to the absence  of  the  CFO  without  the  acting  chief  financial
officers (CFO),  accounting  difficulties  were  experienced  and  the  late
appointment of a consultant  to  compile  the  financial  statement  further
contributed to late submission of financial statements.

The AG informed the  Committees  that,  in  July  2008,  Renosterberg  Local
Municipality changed  to  a  new  financial  accounting  system  called  the
General Recognized Accounting Practices (GRAP). However, due  to  unforeseen
reasons, the implementation of GRAP was not completed by 30 June 2009  –that
is a year later. The AG further informed the Committees that by the  end  of
November 2009, the municipality, through a third party, was  still  expected
to  perform  the  following  activities:   balancing   of   cashbook,   bank
reconciliation, debtors’ reconciliation and clearing of suspense accounts.

The Committees were  told  by  AG  that  from  the  11  municipalities  that
received disclaimers it is evident  that  chief  financial  officers  (CFOs)
have  not  implemented  basic  accounting  practices.  AG   explained   that
disclaimer of opinions are expressed when the effect of  the  limitation  is
pervasive to the financial statements as a whole. The  AG  added  that  this
implies that the majority of financial statement  items  did  not  pass  the
test. The AG informed the Committee that only 1  municipality,  Richtersveld
Municipality, from  those  visited,  had  a  financially  unqualified  audit
opinion due to  the  effective  use  of  consultants,  and  no  municipality
attained a clean audit opinion.

The AG outlined the following  as  the  main  contributing  factors  to  the
negative audit outcomes:
      • Failure by  the  CFOs  to  ensure  adherence  to  basic  accounting
        disciplines at most municipalities;
      •  Lack  of  Proper  Document   Management   Systems   resulting   in
        municipalities not being  able  to  provide  documents  to  support
        transactions processed in their accounting record;
      • Ineffective utilization and management of consultants. 11 of the 11
        municipalities with disclaimer of opinion used  consultants  during
        2008/09 for day to  day  accounting  functions  and/or  to  compile
        annual financial statements;
      • Lack of effective monitoring of the implementation of action  plans
        to  address  prior  year  findings.  This   is   largely   due   to
        municipalities  not  having  effective  internal  audit  and  audit
        committee structures capable of monitoring management’s  (Municipal
        Managers, CFOs and Financial  Managers)  implementation  of  action
        plans and reporting to those charged with  governance  (Mayors  and
        Councils) progress, highlighting red flags where necessary; and
      • There was a lack of technical support from Provincial Treasury  and
        the Department of Cooperative Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs
        (COGTA) due to capacity constraints and skills shortage.


The Auditor-General reported that the drivers to improve audit outcomes  are
leadership monitoring and oversight,  financial  management,  and  effective
governance  structure.  With  respect  to  monitoring  and  oversight,   the
Committees were told by the AG  that  adequate  leadership  involvement  and
oversight must set the right tone from the top  and  create  an  environment
conducive to good financial management and service delivery.

On  financial  management,  the  AG  proposed  that  the  leadership  should
consider applying section 171 of the  Municipal  Financial  Management  Act,
Number 56 of 2003 (MFMA). This section provides disciplinary proceedings  in
case of financial misconduct by municipal officials. The AG stated that  the
CFOs need to ensure that basic  accounting  principles  are  implemented  at
each municipality in order to mitigate the high incidence of  disclaimer  of
opinion and  qualified  opinions  and  improve  basic  financial  management
within municipalities. The AG highlighted a critical  process  of  preparing
monthly trial balances and validating the information included in the  trial
balance to supporting documentation and supporting schedules. The AG  argued
that this monthly process must be supported by the daily and  weekly  review
processes inclusive of confirming the correct application  of  the  relevant
accounting policies. The AG explained  that  performing  and  reviewing  the
required  reconciliations  (such  as  bank,  debtors,  asset  and  creditors
reconciliations) and relating this information to the  capital  and  current
budget  as  approved  by  council  is  crucial.   The  AG  reported  to  the
Committees that decisive  leadership  intervention  is  required  to  ensure
proper record keeping and records management,  namely:  the  documents  that
are supporting the financial statements must be properly  filed  and  easily
retrievable –that is perpetuating the culture of accountability.

With respect to the effectiveness of governance structure, namely:  internal
audit and audit committees,  the  AG  reported  that  seven  of  the  eleven
municipalities did not have an audit committee in operation  throughout  the
year and six of the eleven municipalities did not  have  an  internal  audit
function throughout the year. Six audit committees did not operate in  terms
of  written  terms  of  reference  and  eleven  audit  committees  did   not
substantially fulfill their responsibilities as provided in section  166  of
the MFMA. Six internal audit units did not operate  in  accordance  with  an
approved  internal  audit  plan  and  ten  internal  audit  units  did   not
substantially fulfill their responsibilities  as  per  section  166  of  the
MFMA. The AG stated that the effectiveness of internal audit was  negatively
affected by capacity constraints and inadequate  scope  of  work.  Moreover,
the AG  proposed  that  risk  assessments  should  be  conducted  and  fraud
prevention plans or plans mitigating risks should be  designed,  implemented
and monitored on an ongoing  basis.  The  AG  advised  that  internal  audit
should include responsibilities to assist with providing  assurance  in  the
financial statement and other reporting  processes  to  those  charged  with
governance.


The AG reported to the Committees that all municipalities have been  engaged
including Phokwane  Municipality,  and  Renosterberg  Municipality.  The  AG
commented that Phokwane Municipality does not  have  a  CFO  and  relied  on
consultants to do day to day financial management.  The  AG  reported  that,
Renosterberg Municipality has changed its accounting system and  has  a  CFO
but  basic  financial  management  systems  are   not   adhered   to.   Both
municipalities have been sensitized by their lack of  adherence  to  section
126 and section 136 of the MFMA. The Committees were told  by  the  AG  that
small municipalities rely on consultants. Furthermore, the AG added that  it
depends on the degree of the use  of  consultants  but  in  most  cases  the
municipalities that use consultants at a lesser extent  are  the  ones  that
show some signs of improvements.


The AG reported  that  there  is  lack  of  cooperation  between  Provincial
Treasury, Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Department  of  Cooperative
Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs,  and  Auditor   General   to   assist
municipalities as a result there is an element of  overlapping  on  services
provided to municipalities.

3.    Municipal Performances and Analysis
 1. The Sol Plaatje Local Municipality
The Sol Plaatje Local Municipality (SPLM)  reported  that  it  has  received
funding from National  and  Provincial  governments  as  well  as  from  the
Frances Baard District Municipality. Most of these receipts are  conditional
as indicated in Division of  Revenue  Act  (DoRA)  and  the  provincial  and
district  grants  are  project-proposal-based.   The   SPLM   informed   the
Committees  that  the  bulk  of  the  grant  received  from   the   district
municipality  was  set  aside  for  the  rehabilitation  of  the  wastewater
treatment  works.  Other  projects  that  the  SPLM  reported  on   involved
streetlights and high  mast  lights  installation;  sanitation  reticulation
infrastructure, and paving of streets.

The SPLM presented that the mid-year adjustments were confirmed  in  January
2010 which the SPLM will  spend  by  June  2010.  The  SPLM  said  that  the
available funds would  be  spent  on  upgrading  of  streets;  revamping  of
business centers and maintenance of parks in Galeshewe. The SPLM added  that
feasibility studies have been completed. For example, more than 21  feasible
projects have been identified. But no funds for  these  projects  have  been
transferred to the SPLM.

With respect to intergovernmental  relations  and  collaboration,  the  SPLM
informed the Committees that it is part of Frances  Baard  Intergovernmental
Forum.  Furthermore,  the  SPLM  reported  that  the  Executive  Mayor   and
Municipal  Manager  attended  Integrated  Development  Plan  (IDP)  District
Steering  Committee  which  is  comprised  of  4  local  municipalities  and
Provincial IDP Coordinator. The Steering Committee meet once per quarter  to
align processes and plans. The SPLM informed the Committees that it is  part
of the annual IDP engagement event with provincial sector departments  which
will be in April/May in 2010.

However, the SPLM said that challenges in IDP  alignment  and  collaboration
still exist but this issue is being addressed. On their side, the Mayor  and
Municipal Manager attended the 5-year Provincial  Strategic  Planning  Forum
and the Premier’s  Inter-Governmental  Relations  Forum  which  meets  every
quarter. The SPM reported that  there  is  little  direct  participation  by
sector departments in IDP. The Committees were  told  that,  after  the  IDP
Engagement event, there is little follow-up  until  the  next  event  except
when Members of Executive  Council  (MECs)  comment  on  draft  IDP  on  the
ccommitments made by Provincial Sector Departments  (namely,  Department  of
Tourism, Department of Water and  Environment  Affairs,  and  Department  of
Cooperative Government and Traditional Affairs). The SPM said that there  is
sufficient participation by public entities and others on  an  ad-hoc  basis
in terms of IDP.

The SPLM reported that a lot of issues are being addressed in the  so-called
Municipal Turnaround Strategy. These include: stabilising the  finances  and
administration of the SPM; producing a ‘credible’ IDP informing the  budget;
signing of  performance  agreements  by  the  Municipal  Manager  and  other
section 57 (of  the  Local  Government:  Municipal  Systems  Act)  managers;
implementing Operation Clean Audit  Report  (OPCAR)  which  will  include  a
detailed  action  plan  to  address  AG’s  queries;  and  development  of  a
Municipal  Infrastructure  Investment  Framework.  According  to  the  SPLM,
Municipal Infrastructure Investment  Framework  includes  infrastructure-led
growth, bulk infrastructure capacity replace, refurbish and maintain  ageing
infrastructure, and municipal  fleet  enhancement).  Furthermore,  the  SPLM
reported  that  it  aspires  to  enhance  service   delivery   through   the
improvement of public consultation process by providing free basic  services
and better indigent management.

The SPLM added that the issues that are being  addressed  in  the  Municipal
Turnaround Strategy include: accreditation of housing delivery agent;  draft
Integrated Human Settlement Plan  to  guide  housing  delivery;  building  a
strong well-managed and  performance-oriented  institution;  and  integrated
communication  strategy  which  will  strengthen   internal   and   external
communication  channels,  public  participation   and   ward/community-based
planning, development and monitoring system.

The Sol Plaatje Local Municipality reported  that  it  is  a  high  capacity
municipality  and  is  expected  to  comply  with  both  Municipal   Finance
Management Act (MFMA) and Accounting Reporting Standards. Within  the  SPLM,
an MFMA Implementation Plan has been developed and this  plan  focuses  both
on compliance issues and directorates with an aim to ensure that  respective
directorates take responsibility and accountability in as far as  compliance
is concerned. The SPLM added that asset  management  regulations  have  been
presented to management and steering committees as required.

The SPLM acknowledged that it is struggling to meet deadlines  with  regards
to annual report submissions. The SPLM revealed that  it  is  struggling  to
comply with  included  certain  reporting  requirements  in  terms  of  MFMA
including compliance with  supply  chain  regulations  and  policy,  General
Recognized  Accounting  Practices  (GRAP)  compliance,  GRAP  16  Investment
Property, GRAP 17, Property Plant and Equipment (PPE), GRAP  102  Intangible
Assets,  and  International  Accounting  Standard  19  (IAS   19)   Employee
Benefits. However, the SPLM reported that corrective actions have  been  put
in place and are being monitored on a monthly basis.

The SPLM reported that supply chain management policies have  been  reviewed
and  procedure  manuals  were  developed  to  give  guidance  in  terms   of
implementation  and  execution  of   these   policies.   In   addition,   an
organizational structure for the  supply  chain  management  unit  has  been
reviewed  to  further  support  the  implementation  of  the  policies   and
procedures -ensuring compliance with policies. Furthermore, it was  reported
to the Committees that supply  chain  management  procurement  function  has
been  centralized  –as  the  decentralized  approach  did  not  produce  the
intended results. The SPLM added that  the  training  of  all  supply  chain
management personnel will be facilitated by the Northern  Cape’s  Provincial
Treasury and the Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA). These  trainers
shall capacitate municipal bid committees as well. The SPLM  explained  that
this is aimed at improving the functionality of both staff  and  committees,
and improve reliability by both  internal  and  external  stakeholders.  The
SPLM added that the terms of reference for each committee  will  be  drafted
and  the  SPLM  will  encourage  continuous  training  and  development   of
personnel in the supply chain management units and others.

The Sol Plaatje Local Municipality reported that it submits its  section  71
(of MFMA) reports to National Treasury Database (called lgdatabase)  by  the
tenth of each month.  But  problems  are  experienced  whereby  reports  are
uploaded onto the database and confirmation reports are  received,  but  the
system shows that reports are outstanding. The SPLM said  the  same  reports
submitted are forwarded to the Northern  Cape’s  Provincial  Treasury,  MFMA
Compliance Directorate and Frances Baard District Municipality.

The SPLM reported that the internal audit committee was established in  1999
prior to the promulgation of the MFMA. The reporting  is  done  directly  to
the Municipal Manager and  to  the  Audit  Committee.  Audits  are  done  in
accordance with a risk-based plan approved by the Audit Committee. The  SPLM
said that the internal audit reports to the Audit Committee on  a  quarterly
basis and internal audit committee assists management with the  facilitation
of risk assessments.

The Committees were told by the Sol Plaatje Local Municipality that, in  May
2008, the SPLM’s Council appointed an audit  committee  which  comprises  of
three qualified and experienced independent members. The SPLM said that  the
audit committee performs its duties  in  line  with  the  approved  auditing
charter. The audit committee’s meetings are held on a quarterly  basis  and,
if necessary, on special  requests.  The  audit  committee  reports  to  the
Council on a quarterly basis.
The SPLM reported that the annual report for 2009 has been tabled  to  their
Council. Auditor-General has commented on  the  standard  of  the  financial
statements and the audit report is included in the annual report.  The  SPLM
added that the process of Oversight Committee on Annual Report  has  started
and recommendations to Council by this committee are expected to take  place
by no later than 31 March 2010.

With respect to the performance in service delivery, the SPLM reported  that
the Council resolved that one standard of service (full  services)  will  be
provided to all residents. This intends  to  address  the  present  backlogs
(households) in basic services such as water  (estimated  at  1  215  formal
households and 8 400 informal households); sanitation (estimated  at  5  645
formal households and 8 400 informal households); electricity (estimated  at
7 686 households); and housing (estimated at 13 908  households).  The  SPLM
reported that  serious  financial  constraints  exist  with  regard  to  the
provision of bulk infrastructure  (mainly  sewer  outfall  works),  replace,
refurbish and maintaining ageing infrastructure  and  to  create  productive
new infrastructure.

The Sol Plaatje Local Municipality (SPLM) informed the  Committees  that  it
has a process of identifying qualifying indigents. The  SPLM  reported  that
verified indigents are subsidized for free  basic  services  such  as  water
(that is 12 kilolitres per  month);  electricity  (that  is  50  kilowatts);
refuse removal once a week; and sanitation. The SPLM further  reported  that
a budget of R20 million was set aside for 2009/2010 for free basic  services
and R7 million was spent as at 31 January 2010. A total of 8  900  indigents
were verified versus a target of 16  000  in  the  2010/11  financial  year.
Furthermore, the SPLM reported that the indigent policy is  being  reviewed.
However, a new approach to identify indigents is being implemented which  is
similar to ‘best practice’ investigation by other municipalities.

The SPLM reported that it has some financial constraints  caused  partly  by
its revenue-generating activities. For example, there are low  payments  for
services rendered to government departments, and there are  high  levels  of
poverty. Other  areas  of  concerns  are  cost  and  management  accounting,
financial  accounting,  bid  committees,   performance   measures,   project
management, and resource management to ensure  efficiency.  The  SPLM  added
that there is an increasing demand for infrastructure  maintenance  (due  to
ageing infrastructure)  and  maintenance  costs  are  escalating.  The  SPLM
reported that skills shortage is prominent  mainly  in  scarce  skills  like
engineering and artisans.
The Sol Plaatje Local Municipality (SPLM) reported that it practices  multi-
year budgeting including capital budgets. The budget  process  is  aimed  at
involving the Councillors and the community at early stages of  both  budget
and IDP processes. Budget and IDP timetables are tabled to  the  Council  by
August each year and performance is reviewed  monthly  to  monitor  progress
and compliance. The SPLM added that  the  2008/2009  financial  year  was  a
challenging period for most  municipalities  in  South  Africa  due  to  the
economic recession which led to job cuts and other  difficulties.  The  SPLM
informed the Committees that it  was  affected  by  this  economic  meltdown
whereby  their  debt  collection  rate   were   declining,   reserves   were
diminishing and cash-flow was tremendously under pressure to a  point  where
re-prioritization of payments inevitable. However, the  SPLM  reported  that
they maintained their bills payment within 30 days as per policy.

The Committees were told by the SPLM that employee-related costs  are  35.74
per cent of the total operating budget, maintenance is 5.46 per cent of  the
total operating budget. The SPLM reported  that  the  capital  programme  is
financed as follows: own funds amount to  11.22  per  cent;  borrowed  funds
amount to 7.89 per cent and grants amounts to 80.89 per cent.

3.2   The Siyancuma Local Municipality
The Siyancuma Local Municipality (SLM) reported  that  it  did  not  have  a
Chief Financial Officer (CFO) and they rely on the accountant to  deal  with
the day-to-day issues  in  financial  management.  The  SLM  said  that  the
absence of the CFO has negatively affected them. The  SLM  further  reported
that the CFO will be appointed in the near  future.  At  the  SLM,  salaries
amount to 46 per cent of the total operating costs but  when  the  Council’s
salaries are added, this figure  goes  up  to  56  per  cent  of  the  total
operating costs.

The SLM reported that it received an equitable share  (ES)  of  R20  million
and currently  it  is  owed  R23  million  by  sector  departments  and  the
community for services rendered.  Capital  grant  is  the  major  source  of
income  for  the  SLM.  The  Committees  were  informed  that  the   revenue
collection is a challenge for the SLM because people do not  afford  to  pay
for the services that the SLM has rendered. The SLM added that its fleet  of
vehicles is old and they have two tractors only. The SLM  is  struggling  in
terms of administrative issues and the asset registers,  and  the  Municipal
Manager is attending to these issues.

With  respect  to  intergovernmental  relations,  the  SLM   reported   that
participation by stakeholders in Integrated Development Plans (IDPs)  is  at
an  acceptable  level.  The  IDP  monitoring  unit  of  the  Department   of
Cooperative Governance and  Traditional  Affairs  (COGTA)  participates  and
advises on the IDP.  Inputs are made by all  other  sector  departments  who
are involved in the IDP process but there are some challenges  with  respect
to the attendance of meetings and submission of inputs. The  SLM  said  that
other  participants  include   Eskom,   South   African   Local   Government
Association, provincial departments and community members.

The SLM reported that it is trying its  best  to  deliver  services  to  the
people including building houses which is one of the key  functions  of  the
province. The SLM reported that Eskom has electrified all the houses.  Under
the Expanded Public Works Programme, two  access  roads  were  targeted  for
upgrading.

The SLM informed the Committees that Development  Bank  of  Southern  Africa
has deployed a technical expect to assist within the municipality under  the
Siyenza Manje programme and, other programmes within  the  municipality  are
benefiting.

It was reported to the Committees that the  IDP  of  the  SLM  is  currently
under review and all efforts will be made to  align  it  to  the  Provincial
Growth Development Strategy (PGDS). Furthermore, the SLM  reported  that  it
intends to convene a  strategic  management  session  in  order  to  discuss
strategic issues. The SLM said  that  it  has  started  with  a  process  of
developing a municipal turnaround strategy. The first thing targeted in  the
turnaround strategy is  the  sound  financial  management  within  the  SLM.
Towards this sound financial management, the SLM reported that an  effective
system of expenditure control has been implemented.

The SLM assured the Committees that it strives to  abide  by  the  MFMA  and
comply with procurement procedures. The  SLM  told  the  Committees  that  a
request was made  to  the  Northern  Cape’s  Provincial  Treasury  to  train
management  on  financial  management  issues  which  included  establishing
financial management unit, asset management,  and  accounting  systems.   In
addition, the SLM and its Council held workshops  with  the  Auditor-General
on how to manage financial resources.

The SLM reported that  it  tries  hard  to  comply  with  all  the  existing
legislations. In compliance with the MFMA, the SLM said  that  the  drafting
of the supply chain management policy is underway. The SLM reported that  it
has an adjudication committee which  enforces  and  advises  on  procurement
procedures and awarding of contracts  by  the  SLM.  The  SLM  informed  the
Committees that a bid committee has been established  and  it  comprises  of
senior municipal officials. The SLM reported that the  budget  and  treasury
office (BTO) and budget committee do not exist  and,  instead,  the  CFO  is
responsible for the  budgetary  and  treasury  function.  The  SLM  said  it
utilizes municipal shared services in the district municipality.

The SLM reported that an internal audit and audit committee are  yet  to  be
established. The Committees were informed that, for  functions  of  internal
audit and audit committee, the SLM makes use of  municipal  share  services’
internal audit and the district municipality assist on  a  quarterly  basis.
The SLM reported that, although is does not  have  an  AC,  it  shares  such
function with the district municipality and intends to establish one in  the
near future.

The Siyancuma Local Municipality reported that annual  financial  statements
were submitted on time to the AG’s office. The  SLM  reported  that  it  has
just started presenting an annual report to its Council. The SLM  said  that
submissions of section 71 (of MFMA)  reports  are  done  in  time.  The  SLM
informed the Committees that the  annual  report  was  compiled  and  tabled
before the Council on 23 February 2010 and its Council has adopted it.

With respect to service delivery and capacity constraints, the SLM  reported
that the process of providing  services  (such  as  water,  electrification,
sanitation, development of infrastructure and so forth) to the people is  on
track. The SLM said  that  it  does  not  have  adequate  fleet  to  deliver
services faster. However, the SLM said that it is maintaining an  acceptable
service level. The SLM reported that the  government  subsidy  is  spent  on
addressing some of  the  electricity  challenges.  The  SLM  said  that  the
subsidy is not enough to provide electrification costs  per  connection  and
the SLM partly pays for electrification costs. The SLM added that  it  still
has some electricity backlogs, a total  of  2  220  households  need  to  be
electrified. The SLM relies on Eskom for electrification.

The SLM said that it has budgeted for replacing its  ageing  infrastructure.
Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG) funding will  be  utilized  to  address
this challenge. The SLM reported that MIG funding  is  R10  million  but  it
requested R44.7 million for 2010/11 financial year.  Therefore,  this  means
that it is going to delay some of its old infrastructure replacements.

The SLM reported that its roads are mostly gravel because the SLM is  vastly
rural. The upgrading of access roads which was  done  in  2009  covered  800
kilometers at an estimated cost  of  R4.3  million.  The  SLM  informed  the
Committees  that  it  is  struggling  to  finance  new  projects   in   road
infrastructure.

With respect to housing, the SLM reported that a sum  of  R2.4  million  has
been allocated for town planning and a process of building  100  houses  has
started in Smithdrift.

3.3   Thembelihle Local Municipality
The Thembelihle Local Municipality (TLM) reported that most of  its  targets
have been reached and that the number indigents is high and  it  is  putting
pressure on the Local Government Equitable Share.

The Committees were told that participation by  sector  departments  in  the
IDP processes remains a challenge. The TLM reported that sector  departments
usually do not attend IDP Representative Forums or,  if  they  attend,  they
send junior officials who are unable to  make  valuable  contributions.  The
Committees were informed that commitments to IDP  are  often  received  late
and does not compliment smooth planning processes. The  TLM  added  that  it
has good relationships with both DBSA and ESKOM  and  that  Eskom’s  Service
Level Agreement will be reviewed to address revenue enhancement strategy.

The Committees were told that the IDP of the Thembelihle Local  Municipality
is aligned to PGDS. The Provincial Departments of  Safety  and  Liaison  and
Environmental Affairs are honouring their commitments to the IDP.


The TLM reported that  the  Council  adopted  the  supply  chain  management
policy on 11  May  2007.  The  TLM  assured  the  Committees  that  all  bid
committees are in place and active. The TLM added that a training  programme
is being developed for all relevant staff members. The SCM unit of  Northern
Cape’s Provincial Treasury is currently working on a training programme.

The TLM reported that a full compliment of staff is needed  for  the  budget
and treasury office (BTO) but as of now it is not met. Although the work  is
being done, the lack of capacity and skill is evident. The BTO is headed  by
a CFO, who was appointed on 01 January 2008. The  TLM  told  the  Committees
that, in February 2009, the Accountant went on pension and  the  Budget  and
Expenditure Officer is an acting Accountant. The TLM added  that  there  are
three interns of which one resigned after just  two  months  of  internship.
Therefore, there is  severe  pressure  on  the  few  staff  in  the  Finance
Directorate who is expected to perform at their peak as well  as  trying  to
comply with MFMA regulations.

The Committees were told by the TLM that  the  annual  financial  statements
for 2008/09 financial year have been submitted one month  late  due  to  the
late submission of quotations by service providers. The lack  of  staff  had
hampered the possibilities  of  the  CFO  compiling  the  audited  financial
statement on time. The TLM reported  that  all  section  71  (of  the  MFMA)
reports get submitted on a monthly basis to the relevant  treasury  offices.
The TLM told the Committees that it makes use of the  Shared  Services  Unit
of the district municipality for both the internal  audit  as  well  as  the
audit committee. The TLM  emphasised  that  both  of  these  committees  are
active and functional. The TLM reported that its Council adopted the  annual
report for the 2008/9 financial year  on  Thursday,  28  January  2010.  The
annual report gives a broad overview of the functionality  and  performances
of the municipality  over  the  previous  year.  It  covers  the  financial,
corporate service, technical services as well  as  executive  administration
of the TLM.

With respect to service delivery and capacity constraints, the TLM  reported
that the Star station, which provides electricity, needs to be  upgraded  at
a cost of R20 million. This urgent upgrading is needed to  improve  capacity
from 1.8 Mva to 3  Mva  since  the  current  station  is  running  at  over-
capacity. The TLM added that its network is in a fair condition  after  some
refurbishments, although it needs full upgrading  due  to  the  age  of  the
network.

The TLM  told  the  Committees  that  it  took  a  R3.6  million  loan  from
Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA) to finance strategic projects  of
the TLM. Furthermore, the TLM  reported  that  it  needs  to  secure  R  1.5
million surety with Eskom.

The TLM reported that the capacity of water  treatment  plant  is  small  to
purify enough water for the growing community. Currently, the plant is over-
utilised. A municipal infrastructure grant (MIG) application  was  submitted
to National Treasury for an amount of R12 million for  the  supply  of  bulk
water to  Steynville  area  including  a  bulk  line,  lifted  water  tower,
reservoir and reticulation system. Another application for  R2  million  was
made for the  River  pump  station  upgrading.  The  TLM  reported  that  it
extracts polluted water where the pumps are  situated,  and  that  increases
its  running  costs  of  purification.  The  TLM  reported  that  the  water
treatment system’s upgrading was registered under the Pixley  ka  Seme  Bulk
Water Scheme (scheme 5). The TLM added  that  the  Implementation  Readiness
Plan  was  registered  and  approved  by  the  Department   of   Water   and
Environmental Affairs (DoWEA) for R37  million.  The  Committees  were  told
that the reticulation networks are dating back to  1950’s  and  is  of  poor
condition. Water pipes made of asbestos burst daily,  and  it  is  a  costly
exercise since asbestos is no longer available on the market. The  TLM  said
that Strydenburg has a big water problem due to the Abattoir  in  that  area
and that boreholes are being explored as  one  of  the  solutions  to  water
challenges. The TLM added that Strydenburg is included  in  the  Bulk  Water
Supply Scheme to get water via a pipeline from Hopetown to town.

The TLM reported that it  is  currently  constructing  a  7  pond  oxidation
system, to provide  needy  communities  with  sanitation.  The  TLM  further
reported that the dam is being built at a  cost  of  R11  million  with  MIG
funds and the old dams are  overflowing,  but  precaution  measures  are  in
place to prevent water wastage. The TLM expects  the  water  project  to  be
completed by June 2010. The Strydenburg area has a 5 pond  system  in  place
for 2 years and is in a good condition.

The TLM reported that VIP toilets and  septic  tanks  are  a  big  challenge
because they are not maintained  by  the  owner.  It  was  reported  to  the
Committees that a new Solid Waste Site was established at the  end  of  2009
and that the old site will be closed down and rehabilitated.  The  TLM  told
the  Committees  that  Strydenburg  needs  to  upgrade  its  waste  site  in
accordance with the IDP.

The TLM reported that their roads are in a bad state as  a  result  of  poor
funding. Although an MIG application was tabled by the  TLM,  MIG  funds  do
not fund the upgrading of infrastructure. Business plans were  presented  to
the Department of Roads, but only money for the previous disadvantaged  area
was allocated. Business plans will  be  presented  to  the  Expanded  Public
Works Programme as well. The TLM added that its motor vehicles are in a  bad
shape. The Municipality added that a loan of R1.8  million  was  taken  from
DBSA  to  replace  critical  vehicles.  Most  needed  vehicles  are  trucks,
tractors and graders. Currently, the TLM cannot afford to buy  them  due  to
budget constraints.


The TLM reported that growth in the  budget  is  influenced  by  the  yearly
increases in the normal tariffs, such as services (sewerage,  refuse,  etc.)
as  well  as  water  supply.  Electricity  tariff  increases   is   normally
determined by the Nersa and communicated to  the  municipality  by  National
Treasury.

The TLM reported that salaries, on average, amount to R812  749  per  month,
excluding the bonus month of December. This  equals  to  4.77  per  cent  of
total  expenditure   (including   capital   expenditure   financed   through
conditional grants). In comparison with own  revenue  of  R5  765  340,  the
percentage of personnel expenditure is 84.58 per cent.

3.4   Kgatelopele Local Municipality
The  Kgatelopele  Local  Municipality  (KLM)  reported  that  the  following
projects have been completed during the previous financial years:  valuation
roll, training of Councillors’ and  officials,  appointment  of  interns  to
assist the finance department, and conversion from  Institute  of  Municipal
Finance  Officers  (IMFO)  to  Generally  Recognised  Accounting  Principles
systems.  Through  Municipal  Systems  Improvement  Grant  (MSIG),  the  KLM
reported that it implemented a new financial system,  new  pre-paid  system,
leave system and an archive system.

The KLM reported that there is a good relationship  with  Eskom  as  regular
meetings and visit takes place between Eskom and the KLM.  The  KLM  further
reported that regular meetings are also held with DBSA  who  issued  a  R1.8
million loan to the KLM to acquire new vehicles. The KLM reported that  DBSA
has seconded  an  expert  to  the  KLM  to  assist  with  financial  matters
regarding the MFMA. Currently, the seconded official assists the  KLM  three
days per week.

The KLM reported that regular meetings take place with the  local  SAPS  and
the Council is represented in the forum. The Department of  Health,  through
the local clinic, does participate on the  IDPs.  The  KLM  added  that  the
Department of Social Services has a local office and regular  communications
between the office and the Council takes place. The  KLM  reported  that  it
hold  quarterly  meetings  together  with  the  Department  of   Cooperative
Governance and Traditional Affairs regarding the housing  projects  and  the
future  development  of  erven.  The  KLM  added  that  the  Department   of
Environment and Tourism assists within  various  issues  like  the  National
Water  Week,  Earth-Hour  and  Climate  change.  On  the  other  hand,   the
Department  of  Justice  has  just  built  a  new  court  for   Danielskuil.
Furthermore, the KLM reported  that  the  Department  of  Sports,  Arts  and
Culture has started with the first phase of extension of  library.  However,
the KLM added that sector departments are invited to the  IDP  meetings  but
not all of them attend, some send junior officials who can not take  serious
decisions. Participation of sector departments takes place once a year  when
the IDPs of municipalities are  assessed  by  sector  departments.  The  KLM
reported that, to give effect to  the  development  vision  and  development
objectives, its IDP is aligned to  the  Provincial  Growth  and  Development
Strategy (PGDS) which is derived from the millennium development goals.

The KLM reported that the supply chain  policy  has  been  approved  by  the
Council and it complies with National Treasury regulations.  The  KLM  added
that the financial policies will be  reviewed  after  the  approval  of  the
annual budget. The KLM told the Committees  that  there  was  no  functional
supply chain management unit  in  the  KLM  until  January  2010.   The  KLM
further reported that  a  supply  chain  official  has  been  appointed  and
training of this official has been facilitated by one of the  mining  houses
in Kgatelopele. The KLM assured the Committees  that  a  bid  committee  has
been established and is functional.

The Kgatelopele Local Municipality reported to the Committees that  it  does
not have a budget and treasury office (BTO). However, an  advertisement  has
been placed in the newspapers for a BTO’s official. The additional  cost  to
appoint the BTO’s official has been approved by the Council. The  KLM  added
that it has  appointed  an  internal  auditor.  However,  this  official  is
inexperienced and needs training. The KLM told the Committees  that  skilled
audit committee members were head-hunted from the mining companies in  KLM’s
municipal area and the first audit committee  meeting  was  held  on  the  4
February 2010.

The KLM told the Committees that it has submitted the  financial  statements
to the AG on time. The KLM added that all the section 71 (of  MFMA)  reports
have been submitted to Provincial and National Treasury.  The KLM said  that
provincial treasury plays an  important  role  in  helping  the  Kgatelopele
Local Municipality to complete section 71 of (MFMA) reports. The  KLM  added
that it submitted its annual report to the Council  on  time  and  that  the
oversight committee will consider the annual report. At  the  end  of  March
2010, the oversight committee will make recommendations to  the  Council  to
approve or not to approve the annual report. The KLM further  reported  that
an action plan to address the audit  findings  is  included  in  the  annual
report.

With respect to service delivery and capacity constraints, the KLM  reported
that 11 566 households in the KLM have access to electricity; and 120  erven
of the 287 erven developed received electricity  in  the  2009/10  financial
year. The KLM added that the Council is experiencing high  losses  on  water
due to water pipes that burst because the network is old and has passed  its
life span. The KLM said that the Council cannot afford the high  expenditure
on repair and maintenance of these pipes and the projected cost  to  replace
the water network will be R22 million.

The  KLM  informed  the  Committees  that  the  Council   experiences   high
expenditure on the maintenance of sewage pumps and that the oxidation  ponds
need to be upgraded.   The  KLM  reported  that  the  gravel  roads  in  the
residential areas are in a bad condition and the Council does not  have  the
necessary equipment to maintain these  roads.  The  KLM  reported  that  the
business plan for the EPWP  fund  was  approved  and  will  be  implemented,
starting from March 2010.

3.5   Dikgatlong Local Municipality
The Dikgtlong Local Municipality (DLM) reported that, through a MIG, it  has
constructed roads and upgraded storm water in Windsorton and Proteahof,  and
water reticulation in Rooirand. The DLM added that it  upgraded  bulk  water
in Barkly West. The  DLM  further  reported  that  it  had  prepared  annual
financial statements without using consultants for past four years. The  DLM
added that property valuations roll was completed and implemented.  The  DLM
reported that a  strategic  planning  and  implementation  session  is  done
continuously. The DLM further reported that the FMG was  utilised  to  train
interns and other personnel on pre-paid electricity system  and  information
technology upgrading to reduce expenses and cost.

The DLM reported that it has good relations with  the  Department  of  Water
and Environmental Affairs and Sedibeng water. The DLM further reported  that
approximately R28 million for water is owed by the DLM  and  a  meeting  was
held with the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs in  Pretoria  to
address the payments terms. Furthermore, the DLM reported that it  had  owed
Eskom a certain amount of money which was fully paid in  January  2010.  The
DLM reported that it has raised the following three loans from the DBSA:  an
amount of R1 million for the upgrading of Electricity Network I;  an  amount
of R2.1 million for the upgrading of Electricity Network II; and  an  amount
of R2.6 million for the financing of vehicle fleet.

The DLM reported that its public participation is limited to  local  offices
but regular meetings and information sessions are  held  at  the  provincial
level. The DLM informed the  Committees  that  Eskom  and  DBSA  are  always
absent during the IDP process.
The Committees were  informed  by  the  DLM  that  sector  departments  have
implemented some projects in the  local  communities.  These  include  still
water reticulation; the establishment  of  a  taxi  rank;  the  pavement  of
sidewalks through the EPWP; the establishment of a  new  library  in  Barkly
West by the Department of Arts and Culture; and the construction  of  a  new
hospital in Barkly West by the Department of Health.

The DLM assured the Committees that its IDP  is  aligned  to  the  PGDS.  To
ensure compliance with the MFMA,  the  DLM  reported  that  a  supply  chain
management policy was approved by the Council as per  SCM  regulations.  The
DLM reported that a bid  committee  is  in  place  and  it  is  periodically
evaluated by provincial treasury’s SCM unit. The DLM reported that  it  does
not have a budget and treasury office and BTO’s functions are  performed  by
its Chief Financial Officer. The DLM does not have  an  internal  audit  and
audit committee and it uses  shared  services  function  with  the  district
municipality.

The Dikgatlong Local Municipality (DLM) reported that its annual report  for
2008/2009  was  approved  and  submitted  to  AG,  Francis  Baard   District
Municipality and the  National  Department  of  Cooperative  Governance  and
Traditional Affairs. The DLM reported that, for the  previous  three  years,
it had submitted its annual financial statements to  AG  on  time.  The  DLM
reported that it has not submitted its section 71 (of  MFMA)  reports  since
July 2009. Furthermore, the Dikgatlong Local Municipality reported  that  it
has implemented a  new  E-Venus  system  to  facilitate  processing  of  its
backlog in transaction execution.

The DLM reported that it has an inadequate and ageing  fleet  and  that  the
high level of debt limits the ability of the DLM to acquire new vehicles  or
maintain existing ones.  The  Committees  were  told  that  new  residential
development put pressure on the  current  fleet  and  that  hampers  service
delivery drastically. The DLM added that cash flow  constraints  hinder  the
application for loans to  renew/expand  the  fleet.  The  DLM  informed  the
Committees  that  three  main  towns  and  various  rural   areas   (namely:
Longlands,   Gong-Gong,   Smitsmine,   Stillwater,   Pniel,    Holpan    and
Koopmansfontein) require many vehicles per area due  to  a  larger  distance
amongst households.

With respect  to  the  infrastructure,  the  Dikgatlong  Local  Municipality
reported that the main road in Barkly  West  carry  heavy  traffic,  Afrisam
products are transported through this road and that damages this  road.  The
DLM further reported that roads are deteriorating and streets in and  around
towns and rural townships are in a  poor  condition.  Furthermore,  the  DLM
reported that its tarred roads because there are no funds  to  reseal  them.
The DLM expressed  their  concerns  that  capital  projects  are  introduced
without a budget for repairs and maintenance costs.  The  DLM  informed  the
Committees  that  there  is   lack   of   proper   equipment   to   maintain
infrastructure and that the  DLM  is  under-staffed  in  the  infrastructure
department.

The DLM reported that many factors have negatively affected its budget.  For
example, capital projects are mostly in indigent areas and the  income  base
is minimal; and salary increases negotiated by bargaining  council  and  job
evaluation implementation constituted a large percentage of its budget.  The
DLM reported  that  its  ageing  infrastructure,  equipment  and  fleet  are
expensive to maintain.  The  recession  and  inflation  resulted  in  higher
maintenance of these capital projects.  The  Dikgatlong  Local  Municipality
reported that incorrect allocation of the equitable share  due  to  outdated
population figures hampers the  development  of  rural  areas  and  indigent
communities like Holpan, Stillwater and Longlands.

The Dikgatlong Local Municipality (DLM) added that, although it has a  small
budget, there are capital projects that it had managed to implement  in  the
past and these projects include:  the  construction  of  streets  and  storm
water in Proteahof (its second phase); the  upgrading  of  roads  and  storm
water at Windsorton; water reticulation network (in 228 sites) at  Rooirand;
the upgrading of bulk water  supply  at  Barkly  West;  the  landfill  sites
feasibility studies for Holpan, Longlands  and  Stillwater  were  conducted;
the  water  reticulation  (in  50  sites)   at   Barkly   West   Town;   and
electrification of the Spitskopsweg Housing Project and Longlands.

The DLM reported that its  budget  expenditure  is  as  follow:  operational
grant dependency is 43 per cent; capital grant dependency is 100  per  cent;
debt collection as at 30 June 2009  is  49  per  cent;  and  salaries  as  a
percentage of the total operating budget is 41 per  cent  (including  3  per
cent attributable to the Councillors).

3.6   Siyathemba Local Municipality

The Siyathemba  Local  Municipality  (STLM)  reported  that  ESKOM  supplies
electricity in Prieska, Marydale and Niekershoop areas and that  electricity
accounts are paid on a monthly basis. The STLM reported that the  DBSA  gave
them a R3.5 million loan and it was repay in full. The  STLM  reported  that
it has good relations with the Department  of  Public  Works  regarding  the
construction of access roads. The  STLM  reported  that  the  Department  of
Water and Environmental Affairs assisted it with the  maintenance  of  water
systems.

The  Siyathemba  Local  Municipality  added  that  cooperation  from  sector
departments in the IDP process could be enhanced because there  is  no  full
involvement and/or commitment from  certain  sector  departments.  The  STLM
reported that, to ensure that its IDP is aligned to the PGDS,  it  uses  the
button–up consultation approach. The STLM added that the formulation of  the
objectives  of  the  IDP  is  based  on  the  priorities  of  the   national
government.

In compliance with  the  MFMA,  the  STLM  reported  that  it  has  a  fully
functioning supply chain management unit with a sound  supply  chain  policy
which was approved by the Council. In addition, the STLM  reported  that  it
has  three  bid  committees,  namely:  the  Specification   Committee,   the
Evaluation Committee and the Adjudication Committee. The STLM reported  that
a budget and treasury office (BTO) was established in October 2008  and  the
BTO office is functional.

The Committees were  informed  that  the  annual  financial  statements  are
submitted on time to AG for audit purposes. However, the STLM  has  received
a disclaimer audit opinion for the 2008/09 financial  year.  The  STLM  said
that it has  received  a  disclaimer  audit  opinion  as  a  result  of  the
conversion from IMFO to GRAP.

With respect to the establishment and functionality of internal  audits  and
audit committee, the STLM reported that it uses a shared  services  function
of Pixley Ka Seme District Municipality for internal  audit  since  only  an
audit committee was established. The STLM informed the Committees  that  the
annual report was approved by the Council.

The STLM reported that there are service delivery and capacity  constraints.
For example, water management and maintenance is a challenge since there  is
no knowledge of water pipe system in Marydale.  The  STLM  further  reported
that the pipe system, bore holes and reservoirs are in a poor state and,  in
Prieska,  there  are  no  yard  connections  because  it  is   an   informal
settlement. Furthermore,  the  STLM  reported  that,  in  Marydale,  20  VIP
toilets structures collapsed due to soil erosion, and regrettably 85  formal
and 35 informal households are still using the bucket systems.

The Committees were told by the STLM that it requires  6  high  mast  lights
and it needs to upgrade two areas in order to supply them with  electricity.
The STLM reported that it is struggling to conduct refuse removal and  solid
waste disposal although it purchased a compactor  machine  and  appointed  a
contractor to do the earth works. Furthermore, the STLM reported  that  they
have two access and maintenance of roads projects.  In  addition,  the  STLM
reported that formalization of informal settlements in Marydale is on  track
but only 19 of 43 (44 per cent of) houses are incomplete.

The Siyathemba Local Municipality reported that a  total  number  of  2  075
indigents have been registered in  Prieska  (with  1  508  individuals);  in
Marydale (with 339 individuals); and  Niekerkshoop  (with  228  individuals)
and are being subsidized as  follows:  R40.00  per  month  for  electricity;
R60.80 per month for water; R80.95 per  month  for  sanitation;  R57.25  per
month for suigtenk; R22.80 per month for VIP and so forth.

The STLM reported that its budget  performance  has  been  affected  by  the
increase in the Eskom tariff which has  led  to  an  increase  in  sales  of
electricity. The STLM further reported that water sales were  increased  and
that other sales for services provided have  increased  as  well.  The  STLM
informed the Committees that their capital budget amounts  to  R6.3  million
of which R4.3 million will be  spent  on  road;  and  the  remainder  of  R2
million will be spent  on  high  mask  lighting.  The  STLM  explained  that
capital expenditure is funded  by  the  MIG.  The  STLM  reported  that  the
operational grant dependency is 27.63 per cent,  capital  grants  dependency
is 100 per cent, and salaries as a percentage of the total operating  budget
is 42 per cent.  Furthermore, the STLM reported that repair and  maintenance
expenditure budget amounted to R2.6 million.

3.7   Phokwane Local Municipality
The Phokwane Local Municipality (PLM)  reported  that  it  has  insufficient
number of machinery and equipments; its bulk infrastructure  is  ageing;  it
finds it difficult to retain and attract  skilled  technical  and  financial
personnel; its road infrastructure  requires  maintenance  and  development;
the provision of  services  to  rural  farm  dwellers  is  challenging;  the
provision of recreational facilities is a challenge due to  lack  of  funds;
there is slow delivery of  houses  due  to  insufficient  funding.  The  PLM
reported that, due to policy contradictions, it is  difficult  to  electrify
all households and that Eskom electrification approach  and  local  economic
development is an ongoing challenge due to lack of sustainable employment.

The Committees were of the view that the PLM’s  presentation  was  poor  and
inadequate.  The  PLM  was  advised  by  the  Committees  to  rework   their
presentation and reappear before the Committees in Parliament  in  the  near
future.

3.8   Emthanjeni Local Municipality
The Emthanjeni Local Municipality (ELM) reported that its  action  plan  has
been drafted and tabled before the Council, but  the  action  plan  was  not
adopted because the Council felt that it lacked certain specifications.

The  Emthanjeni  Local  Municipality  informed  the  Committees  that   many
households owe it money  for  services  provided  and  it  is  difficult  to
collect revenue  from  these  households.  The  ELM  reported  that  it  has
insufficient funds to spend on new projects.

The  Emthanjeni  Local  Municipality  (ELM)  admitted  that  its  Integrated
Development Plan  (IDP)  was  not  credible  owing  to  insufficient  public
participation hence the Council did not approve  it.  In  order  to  address
that  challenge,  the  ELM  said  that  it  captured  all  the   outstanding
information  but  the  plan  is  yet  to  be  considered  by  the   Council.
Furthermore, the ELM reported that it  did  not  have  sufficient  funds  to
provide water to all households.

The ELM admitted that the annual report has not been submitted  to  the  AG.
The ELM said that the Generally Recognized Accounting  Practice  (GRAP)  has
certain basic accounting principles that should be adhered to  and  the  ELM
is of the opinion that best way is to start working on GRAP’s principles  is
at the beginning of the financial year. On behalf  of  the  ELM,  the  Chief
Financial Officer reported that the financial statement  will  be  converted
to the GRAP system and that is in accordance with the  direction  that  low-
capacity municipalities should, at least, convert from IMFO to GRAP  in  the
2010/11 financial year.

The Emthanjeni Local Municipality reported that it has a R50  million  which
was written off and this was approved by the Council. The ELM  informed  the
Committees that the South African Lotto company will give  them  R9  million
and the ELM plans to use this  donation  for  improving  services  to  local
communities. The ELM admitted that it has huge  service  delivery  backlogs;
some of which were inherited from  the  past.  The  ELM  reported  that  the
donation from the South African Lotto company will be used to  address  some
of these backlogs since some households do not have  water  and  electricity
and it was difficult  for  the  ELM  to  address  these  challenges  due  to
insufficient funds.

The ELM reported that the sector departments that owe it money for  services
rendered on them include the Department of Public Works, the  Department  of
Education and the Department of Health. The ELM further reported that  these
sector departments do not pay  for  municipal  services  on  time.  The  ELM
disclosed that 32 per cent of its total operating budget  is  for  salaries,
the share of the repair and maintenance costs is 6 per  cent  of  the  total
operating budget. The ELM reported that debtors, who  are  on  arrears,  are
allowed to pay the outstanding amount without an interest  charge  and  this
provision aims to encourage people to settle their overdue accounts.

The ELM reported that its proposed action plan aims to conduct  verification
of assets that could not be verified in  the  past,  which  is  one  of  the
priorities of the ELM. The ELM committed itself to the proper management  of
asset register, and proper management of supporting documents  for  internal
use and audit purposes. The ELM acknowledged that it  has  failed  to  fully
provide the above-mentioned activities in the past.

The ELM acknowledged that its annual report was submitted late  to  the  AG.
The  ELM  argued  that  poor  bank  reconciliations  led  to  the  delay  of
submission of the annual report to the AG.  The  ELM  reported  that  it  is
working hard to improve on procurement processes. The ELM admitted  that  it
is faced with a major challenge of attracting and, mainly  retaining  scarce
skills personnel for sections  like  finance.  The  ELM  reported  that  the
Finance  department  has  serious  capacity  constraints  and  this  hampers
service delivery.

Nevertheless, the ELM reported that it appreciates  the  initiative  by  the
DBSA, through the Siyenza Manje programme, to supply them  with  experts  in
the field of finance and other technical areas. The  ELM  added  that  there
are challenges with training  sessions  since  they  do  not  appear  to  be
effective.

3.9   Richtersveld Local Municipality
The Richtersveld Local Municipality (RLM) reported to  the  Committees  that
it  received  three  grants  from  National  Government,  namely:  Municipal
Finance Management Grant (MFMG), Municipal Systems Improvement Grant  (MSIG)
and Municipal Infrastructure  Grant  (MIG)  -including  the  MSIG  roll-over
amount of R142 685.

With  respect  to  intergovernmental  relations  and  relations  with  other
institutions / entities such as Eskom and DBSA, the  RLM  reported  that  it
regularly hold meetings with Eskom. The RLM reported that the DBSA,  through
the Siyenza Manje programme, has seconded the experts to the RLM  to  assist
with infrastructure and/or technical  services.  The  RLM  further  reported
that it has employed a young professional in the finance department on  two-
year contract.

The Richtersveld Local Municipality reported that  there  are  factors  that
had an effect on its economy. These are downscaling of mines leading to  job
losses. For example, De Beers company retrenched 300 workers last year.

The RLM reported that sector departments are involved in  the  IDP  process.
To support this  claim,  the  RLM  reported  that  a  quarterly  stakeholder
meeting  is  held  with  sector  departments,  non-government  organizations
(NGOs), mine houses, ward committees and community development  workers  and
that these are stakeholders that participate in the IDP review  as  well  as
budget processes. However, the RLM argued that it is of the  view  that  the
commitment that is shown  by  sector  departments  is  inadequate  and  this
challenge needs to be addressed.

The Richtersveld Local Municipality (RLM) reported that its IDP  is  aligned
to the Provincial Growth and Development  Strategy  (PGDS).  The  RLM  added
that the Mari-Culture Park development is one  of  the  projects  that  came
from the PGDS. However, the RLM informed the Committees  that  this  project
is delayed by the fact that the RLM is awaiting additional funding from  the
national and provincial governments.

In compliance with the MFMA, the RLM reported that it  does  have  a  supply
chain management policy  which  was  implemented  in  April  2009.  The  RLM
further reported that it has a credible asset register which was started  in
2007 and completed in 2009.  Furthermore, the RLM reported  that  it  has  a
bid committee but establishing other committees is a challenge.
The Richtersveld Local Municipality added that a budget and treasury  office
has been established but the CFO position is vacant. The  RLM  argued  that,
due  to  the  resignation  of  the  Chief  Financial  Officer,  the  2008/09
financial statements was not submitted two months after  the  closing  date.
But, the section 71 (of the MFMA) reports were submitted to the  Mayor,  the
Provincial and National Treasury. The RLM further reported that  the  annual
report was approved by the Council.

With respect to the subject of  establishment  of  the  functional  internal
audit and audit committee, the RLM  reported  that  it  advertised  for  the
establishment of an internal audit committee but without  any  success.  The
District Area Finance Forum (DAFF) is currently in the  process  of  setting
up terms of reference for a shared service Audit Committee  in  the  Namakwa
District Municipality.

With respect to the service  delivery  and  capacity  constraints,  the  RLM
reported that the rural towns of the  Richtersveld  Local  Municipality  are
supplied with electricity directly by Eskom. However, the RLM reported  that
the Eksteenfontein area  is  constantly  experiencing  electricity  outages,
even though the electricity station is upgraded. The RLM added that, in  the
Port Nolloth area, the electricity is supplied in bulk by Eskom to the  town
and directly to the Sizamile area,  whose  residents  make  use  of  prepaid
meters. The RLM reported that, In  the  Port  Nolloth  area,  there  is  low
tension network and it needs upgrading or to be replaced.

The Richsterveld Local Municipality reported that  refuse  and/or  waste  in
the Port Nolloth area is collected once a week using a compactor truck.  The
RLM argued that this truck is old and needs to be  upgraded.  In  the  rural
towns, waste is collected in open trucks  except  for  the  Lekkersing  area
which has a roof-covered truck. The RLM informed the Committees  that  there
are  recycling  operators  operating  from  the   Port   Nolloth   dumpsite.
Furthermore, the RLM said that a waste management system  has  been  set  up
for it in accordance with the white paper on Integrated Pollution and  Waste
Management for South Africa. The RLM added  that  an  application  has  been
made through the De Beers Social and Labour Plan for such  a  system  to  be
put in place and for the improvement of the landfill site infrastructure.

The RLM reported that the road from Alexander Bay to Kuboes  and  Sanddrift,
which is in a  poor  condition,  is  the  main  route  to  the  Richtersveld
National Park and that Trans Hex vehicles utilize it daily. The  RLM  argued
that the tarring of the afore-mentioned road  would  be  strategic  for  its
road users. The RLM reported that, due to  heavy  rainfalls,  the  roads  to
Eksteenfontein, Lekkersing and Kuboes are in a poor condition  in  such  the
way that they are not usable. The RLM further reported that potholes in  the
Port Nolloth area are a huge challenge and roads have to be maintained on  a
regular basis but procuring tar from the company called Road Mix in  Gauteng
and that working  with  a  company  from  Gauteng  is  very  expensive.  The
Richtersveld Local Municipality further argued that  the  Pretoria  Portland
Cement (PPC) trucks which carry heavy loads to  and  from  the  neighbouring
mines; and the Burger  and  Slabbert  trucks  that  are  transporting  scrap
materials from Oranjemund, damage the roads severely.

Regarding the budget performance, the RLM reported that the  capital  grants
dependency is 100 per cent; the operation grant dependency is 22  per  cent;
revenue collection for rates and debtors is  76  per  cent;  salaries  as  a
percentage of the total operating budget is 34 per  cent;  and  repairs  and
maintenance costs  is  R720.508  out  of  a  budget  of  R2.2  million.  The
Richsterveld Local Municipality reported  that  there  are  1  045  indigent
households registered in the the Richtersveld municipal area.

3.10  Kamiesberg Local Municipality
The Kamiesberg Local Municipality (KLM) reported that the  total  amount  of
grants (namely, Financial Management Grant,  Municipal  Systems  Improvement
Grant and Municipal Infrastructure Grant) allocated to it  as  per  Division
of Revenue Act (DoRA) is R7.7 million and R4.2 million of this total  amount
has been received and the expenditure as at 04 March 2010 is  R2.4  million.
The KLM  explained  that  the  reason  for  variance  on  MIG  is  owing  to
administrative delays. The KLM  promised  to  address  this  discrepancy  by
loading the information onto the system at Namaqua District Municipality.

The KLM reported that its  achievements  include  the  construction  of  the
Multi-Purpose Resource Centre for Lepelsfontein which is more  than  60  per
cent  complete.  The  KLM  further  reported  that  the  buildings  for  new
desalination plants are already built and equipped.  On  the  FMG,  the  KLM
reported that it has spent FMG on five interns  who  underwent  training  on
regular basis. Out of the MSIG, the KLM said that it paid service  providers
for financial statements and for its recovery plan.

The  Kamiesberg  Local  Municipality  reported  that  the  intergovernmental
relations and relations with other institutions like  public  entities  such
as Eskom and DBSA are at an acceptable level. However, participation in  the
IDP process by sector departments, mainly the Department of Health  and  the
Department of Education,  is  minimal.  The  Kamiesberg  Local  Municipality
reported that  the  afore-mentioned  sector  departments  are  reluctant  to
participate in the IDP processes. The KLM reported that  the  DBSA  provides
it with a technical expert as well as  a  financial  expert  on  an  ad  hoc
basis. However, the KLM  said  that  it  would  like  to  appoint  permanent
finance officials in the near future. The KLM reported  that  the  DBSA  has
assured it that it will contribute 60 per cent of the  total  cost  for  the
conversion from the IMFO to the GRAP reporting systems.

The KLM informed the Committees that the Department of Health  has  built  a
clinic in Hondeklipbaai and the  Department  of  Agriculture,  Forestry  and
Fisheries has implemented land-care projects. The KLM further reported  that
the Department of Public Works committed itself to re-gravel  56  kilometers
of roads in the Kamiesberg Local Municipality.

The  Kamiesberg  Local  Municipality  reported  to   the   Committees   that
commitments which were made by sector departments and  other  entities  were
implemented. These included the support that the KLM  is  getting  from  the
Provincial Treasury as a result of the  resignation  of  the  CFO.  The  KLM
further reported that the Department of Energy indicated that it  will  make
available an amount  of  R1.7  million  which  is  reflected  in  the  draft
Division  of  Revenue  Bill  (DoRB)  instead  of  R2.3  million  which   was
previously agreed on. Therefore, the KLM said that it would not be  able  to
complete the electrification  of  the  Lepelsfontein  area  with  only  R1.7
million. The KLM assured the Committees that  its  IDP  is  aligned  to  the
PGDS.

With respect to compliance with the MFMA, the KLM  reported  that  both  the
supply chain management policy and bid committee are in place, but there  is
no budget and treasury office  (BTO)  and  the  functions  of  the  BTO  are
performed by the finance unit. The  Kamiesberg  Local  Municipality  assured
the Committees that the BTO will be established after  the  Chief  Financial
Officer and the Head of Treasury Office  are  appointed.  The  KLM  reported
that both  internal  audit  and  audit  committee  are  not  in  place,  but
negotiations about  shared  services  with  the  district  municipality  are
ongoing.

The KLM informed the Committees that its annual financial  statements  (AFS)
are always submitted on time and the current one will  be  submitted  on  31
August 2010. The KLM added that its section 71 reports are  submitted  every
month to National Treasury. The KLM reported  that  its  annual  report  was
adopted by the Council and it has since been  submitted  to  the  Provincial
and  National  Treasuries,  the  Auditor  General  and  the  MEC  for  Local
Government in the Province and the Provincial Legislator.

With regard to service delivery and  capacity  constraints,  the  Kamiesberg
Local Municipality reported that all  households  in  their  municipal  area
have access to electricity with the  exception  of  those  residing  in  the
Lepelsfontein area. The KLM further reported that households  highly  depend
on bore-hole water and 90 per cent  of  households  have  access  to  water.
Furthermore, the KLM reported that households have 100 per  cent  access  to
sanitation. The KLM further reported that all households  in  its  municipal
area have access to refuse removal and solid  waste  disposal,  but  dumping
sites  in  the  Hondeklipbaai,  Lepelsfontein  and  Garies  areas  are   not
registered. The KLM reported that its roads are in a poor condition  because
there is no budget for maintenance and/or upgrading of roads.  However,  the
KLM has applied for MIG funding to address  roads  infrastructure.  The  KLM
reported that is has a total number of 1 469 registered indigents.

The Kamiesberg Local Municipality reported that  the  growth  in  the  total
budget over the  2008/9  to  2009/10  period  is  6  per  cent  and  factors
contributing to this growth in the total budget are due to new  appointments
and inflation.

3.11  Karoo Hoogland Local Municipality
The Karoo Hoogland Local Municipality (KHLM) reported that part of  the  FMG
will be utilised for GAMAP/GRAP conversion and that  the  conversion  tender
to the value of R875 000 was awarded to Mubesko Africa company  in  December
2009. The KHLM added that the rest of the FMG grant  will  be  utilised  for
the upgrading of the communication network and  the  electronic  linking  of
the satellite offices with an aim  to  integrate  the  financial  management
system. Tenders inviting potential service providers have been sent out  and
the awarding of tender shall take place in March 2010. The KHLM  highlighted
that both projects have been identified as  focal  areas  in  the  municipal
turnaround strategy.

The KHLM said that the balance of the MSIG grant has been reserved  for  the
revision of the new valuation roll which was implemented in July 2009.   The
KHLM reported that all claims of the contractors  and  consulting  engineers
have been paid using the MIG. However, the KHLM reported  that  the  project
has been delayed due to a rock  formation  which  was  found  while  it  was
excavating the soil. The consulting engineering company, called  KV  3,  has
indicated that the project will be delayed for a long period.

The KHLM committed that, by the end of 2009/10 financial year,  it  will  be
GAMAP/GRAP compliant and that  the  previous  non-compliance  was  the  main
reason for the disclaimer opinion that was given by the AG for  the  2008/09
financial year. The KHLM reported that the wide  area  network  (WAN)  which
will be in place by the end of  the  2010/11  financial  year  will  enhance
service delivery and financial management.

The KHLM reported that it has good and  active  intergovernmental  relations
with specifically the departments of COGTA,  National  Treasury,  Water  and
Environmental Affairs, and Economic Affairs and Tourism. The KHLM said  that
COGTA and Provincial Treasury were directly involved with interventions  and
corrective measures which were put in  place  in  2008  when  the  KHLM  was
experiencing service delivery challenges. The KHLM added that it has a  good
and direct working relationship with the DBSA  which  seconded  a  financial
expert to the KHLM since February 2008.

The KHLM reported that it  does  not  have  direct  relation  problems  with
Eskom; but the KHLM argued that it is being  prejudiced  by  the  fact  that
Eskom is the sole electricity provider  to  approximately  40  per  cent  of
consumers in municipal area. The KHLM said that  it  does  not  receive  any
share in the income that Eskom generates  from  their  municipal  area.  The
KHLM added that it competes with Eskom with  regard  to  tariff  structures.
Furthermore, the KHLM said that it does  not  benefit  from  subsidies  that
Eskom receives from government for capital projects and developments.

The KHLM reported that  sector  departments  who  operate  in  its  area  of
jurisdiction were actively involved in  the  IDP  processes.  Through  their
engagement in the IDP  processes,  they  committed  themselves  to  specific
projects. The KHLM reported that the following commitments were made:  COGTA
committed to support the KHLM with compilation and  implementation  of  IDP,
the compilation of Housing Sector Plan and the training of staff on MIG  and
MIS programme;  the  Department  of  Economic  Affairs  &  Tourism  and  the
Northern Cape Tourism Authority will be involved in drafting Local  Economic
Development  (LED)  Strategy,  and  the  revision  of  Tourism   Plan;   the
Department of Health will construct  a  new  Community  Health  Centre;  the
Department of Road & Public Works is implementing  the  EPWP  Projects;  and
the Department of Social Services and Population Development will  establish
offices to enhance service delivery at local level. The KHLM  said  that  it
will host an IDP Indaba with all sector departments and  other  stakeholders
to strengthen relations and to enhance development in the KLM.

The KHLM reported that, during the  process  of  compiling  a  new  IDP  for
2008/09  financial  year,  special  endeavours  were  made  to  ensure   the
alignment of the IDP to the Provincial Growth and Development Strategy.

With respect to the compliance with MFMA, the KHLM told the Committees  that
supply chain management policy is in place and  that  this  policy  provides
for the establishment of a bid committee. The KHLM  reported  that  it  does
not have a budget and treasury office  (BTO);  as  a  result,  it  does  not
comply with the provisions of section 80 of the MFMA. The KHLM argued  that,
due to limited staff and budget  constraints  in  the  past,  a  budget  and
treasury office could not be established and  the  Chief  Financial  Officer
could not be appointed.  However,  the  KHLM  said  that  its  position  has
improved and the appointment of a CFO has been identified as a  priority  in
their municipal turnaround strategy.

The KHLM reported that the 2008/09 annual financial statement was  submitted
to the AG, and section 71 (of the MFMA) reports are submitted  timeously  on
a monthly basis.
The Karoo Hoogland Municipality reported that it does not have  an  internal
audit and audit committee, and therefore it does  not  comply  with  section
165 of the MFMA. The KHLM added that an endeavour to  establish  a  district
unit was undertaken some years ago, but did not  materialise.  However,  the
KHLM reported that the KHLM and Hantam Municipality have recently agreed  to
establish and co-own a unit in the near  future  and  these  afore-mentioned
municipalities have had discussions with potential  service  providers.  The
KHLM further reported that its annual reports were  submitted  in  terms  of
legislative requirements for the 2007/08 and 2008/09 financial years.

With regard to  service  delivery,  the  KHLM  reported  that  although  all
households have access to electricity, the Fraserburg  reticulation  network
is outdated and has deteriorated to such an extent that it poses  a  serious
danger risk. The KHLM said that it is struggling to obtain funds to fix  the
reticulation network. The KHLM reported that all households have  access  to
sanitation and the bucket system has been eradicated. The  KHLM  added  that
Fraserburg’s and Williston’s oxidation ponds have  been  upgraded  with  MIG
funding and Sutherland’s oxidation ponds are being upgraded with MIG funds.

With respect to access to water, the KHLM  said  that  all  households  have
direct access to water connections and bulk storage  capacity  in  Williston
and  Fraserburg.  The  Karoo  Hoogland  Local  Municipality  said  that  the
upgrading of the bulk storage capacity in Sutherland has been identified  as
a future MIG project. Furthermore, the KHLM reported that the  upgrading  of
internal reticulation networks in all three  towns  under  its  jurisdiction
has been identified as future MIG projects.
The KHLM reported that proper services for refuse removal  are  rendered  in
all three towns  and  that  the  upgrading  of  the  refuse  dump  sites  in
Williston and Sutherland has been identified as future projects.

The KHLM reported that the upgrading of roads and storm water networks  have
been registered as MIG projects. The KHLM reported that  gravel  roads  that
link the three towns needs to be  upgraded  for  tourists’  attraction.  The
KHLM said that it services 3  036  households  including  1  211  registered
indigents. The KHLM reported that it does not have any backlogs in terms  of
the provision of basic services.

The KHLM reported that its audit tariffs increased by 35 per  cent  and  the
South  African  Local  Government  Association   (SALGA)   membership   fees
increased by almost 300 per cent. The KHLM added that electricity  purchases
increased by 20 per cent although the increase in sales does not  correspond
as the seasonal tariffs charged by Eskom which are higher during the  winter
months.

The KHLM reported that it is 100 per cent dependant on external funding  for
its capital budget and  it  relies  mainly  from  the  MIG  and  the  DBSA’s
funding. The KHLM added that 39 per cent of its  operating  budget  goes  to
salary; repairs & maintenance expenditure is 10 per cent of total  operating
expenditure. The KHLM said that emphasis  has  now  changed  from  emergency
repairs to scheduled maintenance. The KHLM claimed that  the  vehicle  fleet
is old and, repairs and maintenance  requirements  are  extremely  high  and
this has a detrimental effect on service delivery.

3.12  Siyanda District Municipality
The  Siyanda  District  Municipality  (SDM)  reported  that,   through   the
financial management grant (FMG), it has  appointed  4  interns;  and  that,
with the MIG funding, the SDM has tarred streets and  constructed  phases  1
and 2 of the sports fields at Riemvasmaak; and that, with the MSIG  funding,
the SDM has conducted property valuations.

The SDM reported that a housing project commenced in January 2010 and it  is
at foundation phase. The SDM added that, in 2009,  the  Council  received  3
awards  for  the  best  performance  in  the  categories  of  operation  and
maintenance unit, alternative energy to households,  and  enhancing  housing
delivery.  The SDM gladly reported that that  it  is  mentoring  the  Cacadu
District Municipality in the areas of operations and  maintenance.  The  SDM
told the Committees that the Council  decided  to  render  municipal  health
services in Kai Garib area as from 01 July 2010.

With  respect  to   intergovernmental   relations,   the   SDM   said   that
participation of sector departments in IDP process  is  poor  and  only  the
Department of Safety & Security and Social Services attend regularly.

In terms of the integrated development policy (IDP), the SDM  reported  that
the Council approved the Siyanda Growth and Development  Strategy  in  2007,
and  that  this  document  is  aligned  with  the  Provincial   Growth   and
Development Strategy.

The Siyanda  District  Municipality  (SDM)  reported  that  a  supply  chain
management policy is fully implemented and it is reviewed on  yearly  basis.
The SDM reported that the bid committee is comprised of  directors  only  as
prescript by legislation. The  SDM  told  the  Committees  that  budget  and
treasury office (BTO) was established in October 2009. The  SDM  said  that,
due to the importance of and willingness  to  comply  with  all  legislative
frameworks, a position of Deputy Chief Financial Officer (CFO) was  created.
The SDM said that the BTO is fully staffed, and compilation  and  submission
of financial reports is its responsibility.
The SDM reported that  section  71  (of  the  MFMA)  reports  are  submitted
timeously to Provincial Treasury and the new format of reporting is  adhered
to. The SDM added  that,  for  three  consecutive  years,  annual  financial
statements were submitted timeously.  Furthermore,  the  SDM  reported  that
section 21 of Municipal Systems Act, Number 32 of 2000  and  section  127(5)
of MFMA, Number 56 of 2003  are  adhered  to.  The  SDM  reported  that  the
2008/09 annual report is currently available on its website and hard  copies
are kept in its  offices  for  public  ‘consumption’;  and  that  the  final
approval of the 2009/10 annual report will be on 25 March 2010.

When reporting on internal audit and audit committee, the SDM said that  its
audit committee exists and it has 3 members but the internal audit  unit  is
not fully functioning due to the lack of expert officials since there  is  1
internal auditor and 3 interns in the SDM.

With respect to service delivery, the SDM reported that  it  takes  part  in
energy forum which is convened by the Department  of  Energy.  In  addition,
the Council approved the supply of solar power in  26  houses  and  provided
solar powered streetlights around Swartkopdam.

With respect to water, the SDM reported that,  in  the  Kenhardt  area,  the
water pipeline is  under  construction;  in  the  Riemvasmaak  mission,  33-
kilometer water pipeline project at a cost of R71  million  is  to  commence
and the funding agreement with the Department of Rural Development and  Land
Reform is to be signed; a feasibility for extension of Kalahari  East  water
pipeline is currently updated; and a Swartkopdam settlement is at the  stage
of registration with MIG water project and this will provide 26 houses  with
gutters and tanks for rain water.

With respect to sanitation, the SDM reported  that  Kai  Garib,  Kheis,  and
Tsantsabane areas have post-1994 backlog needs and there are  projects  that
will be implemented.
The Siyanda District Municipality added that  the  refuse  removal  services
are rendered to all areas within the jurisdiction of the SDM. The  SDM  said
that there are no real challenges experienced  because  the  District  Waste
Management Plan and guidelines are in place.

The SDM reported that  maintenance  of  gravel  roads  is  a  challenge  for
municipalities. The SDM further reported that its  gravel  roads  are  in  a
poor condition and were damaged by recent floods. However, the SDM  reported
that it is expecting to receive R5 million to be spent on re-gravelling  two
major roads, one in North-Eastern Kalahari and another one in Olifantshoek.

The SDM reported that 252 households have water problems during  the  summer
seasons  but  the  SDM  transports  water  to  these  households  with   the
assistance from the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs.  The  SDM
reported that over  106  households  have  no  toilet  facilities.  The  SDM
concluded that it needs to gather information on service  delivery  backlogs
from communities living on farm lands.

The SDM reported that there are  consumer  debtors  for  315  households  in
Riemvasmaak & Swartkopdam and 260 households  are  classified  as  indigent.
The SDM reported that the overall outstanding debt  is  R266  553.  The  SDM
further reported that sundry debtors amount to the  value  of  R6  792  022.
Furthermore, the SDM reported that the sector departments  owe  the  SDM  R5
365 714. In addition, the SDM reported that it has an outstanding  debt  for
3 years to the value of R6 247 369 and this debt is irrecoverable.

The SDM reported that the municipal property rates is R1 003 271 is  levied;
2 468 rate payers were billed; 1 311 accounts were posted out to farmers;  1
157 accounts are without valid addresses; and there  is  a  dispute  between
the Siyanda District Municipality and the farmer unions over tariffs.
The Siyanda District Municipality reported that salaries amounted to 33  per
cent of the operating budget, and repairs and maintenance cost are  2.7  per
cent of the total operating budget.

3.13  Mier Local Municipality
The Mier Local Municipality  (MLM)  reported  that  there  is  a  successful
upgrading of water network from Hakskeenpan to  Klein-en  Groot  Mier;  that
the supply chain management’s  process  is  slow;  and  that  the  Municipal
Systems Infrastructure Grant was used to draft  by-laws  and  conversion  of
accounting systems to GRAP and drafting of the IDP. The  MLM  reported  that
valuation roll is complete. The MLM  further  reported  that  the  financial
management grant was used for the training  of  interns,  the  upgrading  of
financial  system,  and  the  capacity  building   program   for   financial
personnel.

The MLM reported that it received additional  funding  from  the  provincial
departments after the approval of the budget, and the  DBSA  subsidized  the
MLM with R303 200. The MLM further reported that its capital  budget  is  R8
318 000 and the total operating budget is R11 960 547. Furthermore, the  MLM
reported that capital grant dependency is 90  per  cent  and  the  operating
grant dependency is 62 per cent.

The MLM reported that the income generated from levies  is  60.15  per  cent
(including subsidies) of the total income earned by  the  MLM.  Furthermore,
the MLM reported that its salary as a  percentage  of  its  total  operating
budget is 41.48  per  cent,  and  that  repairs  and  maintenance  component
amounts to 0.04 per cent of the total operating budget.

With respect to the  intergovernmental  relations,  the  MLM  reported  that
either  there  is  poor  attendance  by   sector   departments   and   other
stakeholders during the IDP’s meetings or junior officials are sent  to  the
IDP forum and they can not make authoritative decisions.  The  MLM  reported
that, in most  cases,  sector  departments  submit  their  plans  after  the
municipal planning process is complete.  The  MLM  informed  the  Committees
that the IDP is aligned with the Provincial Growth and Development  Strategy
and the draft IDP will be tabled to the Council before 31 March 2010.

In compliance with the MFMA, the Mier Local  Municipality  reported  that  a
supply chain management (SCM) policy was adopted by the Council and  it  has
established the SCM unit. The MLM reported  that  the  budget  and  treasury
office (BTO) will be established before 31 July 2010. The MLM reported  that
the annual financial statement was submitted in time to  the  AG  and  other
relevant departments;  and  that  section  71  (of  the  MFMA)  reports  are
submitted on monthly basis to Provincial Treasury and  the  Mayor.  The  MLM
reported that an internal auditor  is  acting  as  chief  financial  officer
(CFO) and no audit committee is in place. The  MLM  added  that  the  annual
report was tabled to the Council on 1 February 2010  and  a  publication  is
sent to the newspapers inviting public comments.

With respect to service delivery, the MLM reported that Eskom  is  the  sole
service provider for electricity in the Mier area. The MLM further  reported
that, out of 1 900 total households, 1 350  households  have  metered  water
and 550 households do not metered water. Furthermore, the MLM reported  that
there is a problem of old and ageing bulk  water  infrastructure  and  water
quality  is  not  satisfactory;  that  1900  households   have   access   to
sanitation;  that  there  is  no  oxidation  ponds  in   towns   except   in
Rietfontein; that  there  is  only  one  sanitation  truck  for  whole  area
(approximately 2 000 kilometers) of the MLM. The MLM further  reported  that
it has sub-contracted the refuse removal in  three  townships;  that  it  is
responsible to ensure that services are delivered to the community;  and  it
has an informal dumping site.

The Mier Local Municipality (MLM) reported that its roads are mostly  gravel
roads and there  are  informal  streets  in  towns.  The  MLM  informed  the
Committees that the Siyanda District Municipality (mentioned in  sub-section
3.12 above) is maintaining the gravel roads in Mier area.

The Mier Local Municipality (MLM)  reported  that  there  are  300  indigent
households that are receiving subsidies and that the  indigent  register  is
updated in March every year. The MLM revealed  that  it  offers  free  basic
service such as 6 kilolitres of water;  electricity  to  the  amount  of  50
kilowatts; sanitation to the value of R60.58;  and  refuse  removal  to  the
value of R85.83.

Due to the capacity  constraints,  the  MLM  said  that  it  has  identified
training  needs  on  the  following  areas:  Generally  Accepted   Municipal
Accounting Practice  or  Generally  Recognised  Accounting  Practice,  South
African  Municipal   Resource   Administration   Systems,   human   resource
management, administration, supply  chain  management,  project  management,
and water quality management. The MLM explained that project management  and
water quality management was  identified  as  training  needs  in  order  to
address water and sanitation service delivery backlogs.

4.    Comments by Stakeholders
4.1   South African Local Government Association
The South African Local Government Association  (SALGA)  reported  that  the
formula used to allocate the equitable share to  municipalities  has  flaws.
The SALGA proposed that National Treasury should refrain from holding  money
from the under-spending municipalities but,  instead,  give  the  struggling
municipalities targeted assistance in  order  to  achieve  improved  service
delivery.

With respect to the issue of poorly  performing  municipalities,  the  SALGA
reported that Provincial Departments of Cooperative Governance  should  play
an active role with bias  towards  struggling  municipalities  before  these
struggling municipalities reach a service delivery crisis level.  The  SALGA
recommended that section 139 of the Municipal Finance Management Act  should
be used as a last resort. The SALGA raised its concern about  municipalities
that  are  under-spending  MIG  when  the  municipal  infrastructure  is  in
despair.

4.2   National and Provincial Treasury
The National Treasury told the Committees that some municipalities were  not
taking the Auditor-General’s (AG) reports seriously and that  is  why  these
municipalities keet  on  receiving  adverse  audit  opinions.  The  National
Treasury is of the view that these municipalities have a challenge  when  it
comes to financial management hence the annual  reports  are  not  complying
with the MFMA. The National Treasury reported that  most  municipalities  do
not spend their conditional grants on the programmes  they  are  meant  for.
Furthermore, the National Treasury  reported  that  the  municipalities  are
owed by certain sector departments. The National Treasury  further  reported
that another challenge for municipalities is the quality of  their  reports.
However,  the  National  Treasury  assured  the  Committees   that   skilled
officials will be seconded to the municipalities.

The National Treasury reported that Municipal  System  Infrastructure  Grant
is available to municipalities  but  this  grant  is  seriously  under-spent
because some municipalities  failed  to  recruit  ‘trainable’  interns.  The
National Treasury informed the Committees that Provincial  Treasury  and  AG
are available to provide financial skills  to  municipalities  but  in  most
cases, the municipalities are not  requesting  help  and  help  can  not  be
forced to them.

4.3   Eskom
Eskom reported that  they  do  participate  directly  in  the  IDPs  of  all
municipalities due to other responsibilities that Eskom must play  including
the provision of municipal electrification  needs.  Eskom  further  reported
that it is currently upgrading power stations so that they can  be  able  to
provide additional engineering  capacity  and  supply  electricity  to  many
areas  and  this  programme  is  estimated  to  cost  R18.5  million.  Eskom
expressed their dissatisfaction  to  the  Committees  that  although  it  is
working hard to reduce the electrification backlog, informal  settlement  is
being constructed everyday  and  anywhere  in  the  country.  Eskom  further
informed  the  Committees  that  municipalities  are  encouraged   to   save
electricity.

4.4   National and Provincial COGTA
The Department of Cooperative Governance and  Traditional  Affairs  (DoCGTA)
reported that  it  had  identified  poor-performing  municipalities  in  the
Northern  Cape  and  financial  expects  have   been   seconded   to   these
municipalities. The DoCGTA informed  the  Committees  that  a  total  of  62
municipal finance officials are currently being trained  by  the  DBSA.  The
DoCGTA reported that officials from regional offices  will  be  seconded  to
struggling municipalities. But, the DoCGTA expressed  their  dissatisfaction
with the municipalities that are retaining in positions  financial  managers
who are failing to  pull  their  municipalities  out  of  adverse  auditor’s
opinion. The DoCGTA proposed that punitive measures should be considered.

Furthermore,  the  DoCGTA  reported  that  R12  million  was  spent  by  the
municipalities on consultants preparing annual financial statements and  the
value-for-money is  non-existent.  The  DoCGTA  reported  that,  out  of  36
municipalities in the  Province  of  the  Northern  Cape,  only  6  of  them
received unqualified audit opinions.  The  DoCGTA  added  that  a  municipal
turnaround-strategy to address all  challenges  in  the  municipalities  was
being developed.

The DoCGTA informed the Committees that it is about to  embark  in  strategy
which seeks to assist municipalities. The DoCGTA said that it  is  going  to
visit all municipalities preparing for the 2009/10 annual reports.

The DoCGTA added that it, together with the South African  Local  Government
Association, are looking at how people at municipal level can be trained  on
oversight. The DoCGTA added that this training will  capacitate  people  who
sit in audit committees and the  Councilors  to  learn  how  to  conduct  an
effective oversight.

The DoCGTA reported that the Phokwane Local  Municipality  (PLM)  was  doing
everything  by  hand  because  they  lost  their   automated   systems   and
documentation when their buildings were on fire.  The  Development  Bank  of
Southern Africa (DBSA) is assisting the PLM to ensure that all  transactions
are captured in a computerized system.

The DoCGTA highlighted that the issue of  ensuring  that  each  municipality
has a budget and treasury office (BTO) is a challenge  because  low-capacity
municipalities are struggling to establish  them.  The  DoCGTA  advised  the
Committees that, if low-capacity  municipalities  are  forced  to  establish
BTO,  they  will  overspend.  The  National  Treasury   reported   that   60
specialists will be made available to assist all municipalities  across  the
country.

4.5   Department of Energy
The Department of Energy (DoE) informed the Committees that  electrification
is the responsibility of  Eskom.  The  DoE  explained  that  it  is  through
legislation that  this  responsibility  is  drawn  from.  However,  the  DoE
reported that it allocates funds for each municipality as per  their  needs.
The  DoE  explained  this  by  saying  that   if   there   is   an   ongoing
electrification programme in one municipality, the  DoE  does  not  allocate
funds until the project is finished. The DoE  reported  that  municipalities
are invited to attend the Energy forum but municipalities are  reluctant  to
attend. The DoE stressed that Municipal Managers and Technical Managers  are
expected to attend the Energy forum. Furthermore, the DoE reported  that  it
is struggling to get monthly reports from some municipalities.

4.6   The Development Bank of Southern Africa
By way of assisting  the  municipalities,  the  Development  Bank  of  South
Africa (DBSA), through  the  Siyenza  Manje  programme,  have  seconded  its
experts to municipalities. Because municipalities are struggling to  attract
and retain  skilled  CFOs,  the  DBSA  reported  that  it  has  seconded  11
financial expects and 5 young professionals to work  within  municipalities.
The  DBSA  further  reported  that  7  technical   expects   and   2   young
professionals are assisting municipalities with technological issues.

4.7   Fiscal and Financial Commission
The Financial and Fiscal Commission (FFC) commented that there seems  to  be
a challenge on how funds are spent on capacity building  programmes  because
the effectiveness of these training  programmes  is  questionable.  The  FFC
further reported that there are more reasons  for  National  and  Provincial
Treasuries to support the municipalities that are  experiencing  challenges.
Furthermore, the FFC reported that  the  National  Treasury  and  Provincial
Treasury  need  not  duplicate   but   provide   coordinated   services   to
municipalities.

5.    Key Findings
The Committees have identified that smaller  municipalities  seriously  lack
capacity which makes them rely on the use  of  consultants.  Although  these
smaller municipalities make use of the consultants,  there  is  no  evidence
that the audit opinion of municipalities that use consultants is  improving.
Therefore, the Committees are of the view that consultants do  not  transfer
skills to  the  municipalities  that  they  are  assisting.  Municipalities,
mainly those in rural areas, are experiencing skills  flight  and  shortage,
especially in the fields of finance, engineering  and  similar  fields.  The
Development  Bank  of  Southern  Africa  is   assisting   these   struggling
municipalities but it is too much of a task to be carried out  by  a  single
entity and the Committees advise that all sector departments  should  commit
themselves towards assisting these  municipalities  in  carrying  out  their
municipal turnaround strategies.

The Committees are of the view that most municipalities  are  spending  more
funds on salaries rather than on operational programmes. The Committees  has
realized that there is a  correlation  between  lack  of  service  delivery,
which  results  in  community  service  delivery  protests,  and  the   high
percentage  of  municipal  funds  that  go  to  remuneration  packages.  The
Committees noted that municipalities appoint people into  positions  without
relevant skills.

The oversight visit to the Province of the Northern  Cape,  similar  to  the
oversight visit to the Province of Mpumalanga that  has  been  conducted  by
the Committees in 2009, has  revealed  that  many  national  and  provincial
departments owe money to  municipalities  for  services  rendered  by  these
municipalities on behalf of the provincial  and  national  departments.  The
challenge is that provincial and  national  departments  are  providing  all
sorts of excuses for their failure to pay municipalities. These  unfortunate
situations have left  municipalities  with  insufficient  funds  to  finance
other municipal services. In turn, service delivery is grossly  compromised.
The Committees advises all  provincial  and  national  departments  who  owe
money to municipalities to  effect  these  payments  with  immediate  effect
without any further excuses for their inability to pay them.

Some municipalities reported  that  sector  departments  do  participate  in
their integrated development plans (IDP), while other municipalities  report
that sector departments do not attend their IDP meetings. However,  the  sad
fact is that, most of the sector departments, who  attend  IDP  meetings  do
not make adequate contributions to these meetings. Alternatively, they  send
junior officials who can commit their departments to any function  nor  take
authoritative decision  to  assist  municipalities.  Put  differently,  most
sector departments who attend IDP meetings do so in order to  appear  as  if
they participate in these IDP meetings.  Even  worse,  some  of  the  sector
departments who participate in IDP do not  honour  their  commitments.  Only
few municipalities are happy with the participation  of  sector  departments
in  their  IDP  forums.  The  Committees  encourage  sector  departments  to
participate in IDP discussions because  most  of  service  delivery  of  any
sector/ public entity happens in municipalities. The Committees are  of  the
view that the Ministry in the  Presidency  for  Performance  Monitoring  and
Evaluation and  the  provincial  and  National  Departments  of  Cooperative
Governance and Traditional  Affairs  are  key  partners  to  facilitate  the
provision of assistance by sector departments  to  municipalities  including
participation in the IDP and municipal turnaround Strategies.

Most  municipalities,  especially  the  low-capacity   municipalities,   are
struggling to convert from the Institute of Municipal  Finance  Officers  to
the Generally Recognised Accounting Practice reporting systems due  to  both
financial  and  human  resources  capacity   constraints.   These   capacity
constraints have  led  to  many  of  these  municipalities  to  be  given  a
disclaimer audit opinions by the Office of the  Auditor-General.  Therefore,
with the assistance  from  the  National  Treasury  and  the  Department  of
Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, these municipalities  should
be encouraged to include solutions to these financial  reporting  challenges
in their municipal turnaround  strategies  for  the  Operation  Clean  Audit
Report (OPCAR) campaign.

Almost all water systems/ facilities are out-dated and water is  being  lost
due to daily water pipes leakages. Unauthorised sources claim  that  40  per
cent of South African water (a scarce resource) is being lost through  water
pipes  leakages.  The  unfortunate  fact  is  that   it   is   either   that
municipalities  do  not  have  money  to  repair   water   pipes   or   that
municipalities  do  not  have  human   resources   that   understand   water
structures/systems  that  are  buried  underground.  Costs  to  repair   and
maintain these water pipes are escalated by the fact that  the  majority  of
these water pipes are made of asbestos  and  asbestos  water  pipes  are  no
loner available in the market and these water  pipes  have  to  be  replaced
with  plastic  water  pipes.  This  poses  a  serious  challenge   to   most
municipalities since the budget for water repairs and maintenance is  a  low
as a percentage of the total operating budget. The  Committees  are  of  the
view  that  funds  should  be  made  available  and  ring-fenced   for   the
replacement of existing water pipes with plastic water pipes. A  form  of  a
conditional grant may be created for this purpose. It is needless  to  state
that this is critical for a water-scarce country like South Africa.

Most municipalities do not have either an internal  audit,  audit  committee
and/or  budget  and  treasury   office.   Even   worrying,   most   of   the
municipalities who have any of the  afore-mentioned  committees  or  offices
are  not  functional.  The  Committees  are   of   the   view   that   these
municipalities are in gross violation of the  Municipal  Finance  Management
Act (MFMA). The Committees advise these municipalities to include, in  their
municipal turnaround strategies,  plans  to  establish  the  afore-mentioned
committees or offices as per the MFMA.

The salaries of municipal officials as a percentage of the  total  operating
budget for almost all municipalities visited are within 40-50  per  cent  of
the total operating budget.  The  Committees  are  of  the  view  that  this
percentage is high since  municipalities  are  expected  to  pay  for  other
operating activities as well. The Committees advise  that  the  salaries  of
municipal officials should be reviewed in order  to  ensure  that  municipal
officials are  paid  appropriately  and  there  is  no  over-staffing  which
unnecessarily increases the total amount paid in salaries. Over-staffing  in
some divisions may result in under-staffing in  other  important  divisions,
usually finance and technical divisions.

6.    Recommendations
The Select Committee on Appropriations and the Select Committee on  Finance,
after  careful  consideration  of  the  service   delivery   and   financial
performance of the  above-selected  municipalities  in  the  Northern  Cape,
recommends that the National Council of Provinces considers the following:
    • That the National Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs, the National Treasury, and the National Department of  Labour
      should  monitor  and  evaluate  the  skills  of  people  employed   at
      municipalities in order to ensure that people with relevant skills are
      employed in key positions in the areas  of  finance,  engineering  and
      other technical fields;
    • That the National Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs and the National Treasury should contribute to  the  Municipal
      Turnaround Strategy by developing  tools  that  are  going  to  assist
      municipalities to comply with all provisions of the Municipal  Finance
      Management Act;
    • That the National Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs and the Presidency should develop rules and procedures on  how
      the provincial  and  national  departments  must  fully  and  actively
      participate  in  the  Integrated  Development  Plans  (IDPs)  of   the
      municipalities and ensure that IDPs  are  aligned  to  the  Provincial
      Growth and Development Strategy (PGDS);
    • That the National Treasury and the National Department of  Cooperative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs should develop programmes aimed  at
      assisting municipalities (especially low-capacity municipalities) with
      the conversion from the Institute of Municipal Finance Officers to the
      Generally Recognised Accounting Practice reporting systems;
    • That the National Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs  and  the  National   Department   of   Public   Service   and
      Administration should ensure that  municipal  and  other  government’s
      officials are banned from doing business with any municipality in  the
      country;
    • That the National Treasury and the National Department of  Cooperative
      Governance and  Traditional  Affairs  should  contemplate  creating  a
      conditional grant aimed at  providing  municipalities  with  funds  to
      acquire skills and finance water pipes replacement projects;
    • That the National Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs and the National Department of Labour should review the use of
      consultants by municipalities with an aim of finding  a  solutions  to
      capacity constraints of municipalities;
    • That the National Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs and the National Treasury should  ensure  that  the  plans  to
      establish internal audits, audit committees, and budget  and  treasury
      offices are included by municipalities in their  municipal  turnaround
      strategies; and
    • That the National Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional
      Affairs, in consultation with  relevant  stakeholders,  should  review
      salaries, qualifications and experiences, and the number of  employees
      in scarce skills areas and other areas with an aim to determine if the
      appropriate  number  and  skills  of   officials   are   employed   at
      municipalities. A special focus should be  dedicated  to  low-capacity
      municipalities.

Report to be considered.

2.    Report of the Select Committee on Trade and International Relations
   on the Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of
   one part, and the Government of the Republic of South Africa, of the
   other part, Amending the Agreement on Trade, Development and Cooperation
   (TDCA), dated 05 May 2010:

The  Select  Committee  on  Trade  and   International   Relations,   having
considered the request for approval by Parliament of the  Agreement  between
the European  Community  and  its  Member  States,  of  one  part,  and  the
Government of the Republic of South Africa, of the other part, Amending  the
Agreement on Trade, Development and  Cooperation  (TDCA),  referred  to  it,
recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of  the  Constitution,
approve the said Agreement.

Report to be considered.[pic][pic][pic]

