---
title: 'National Assembly - 11 November 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-11-11
---

THURSDAY, 11 NOVEMBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Dr S M VAN DYK: Agb Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag namens die DA sal voorstel:

   Dat die Huis ’n debat voer oor Eskom se vermoë om volhoubare
   elektrisiteit te voorsien om aan die aanvraag in Suid-Afrika te voldoen
   en redes waarom onafhanklike elektrisiteitsverskaffers teёsinnig is om
   dié mark te betree.
(Translation of Afrikaans notice of motion follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates Eskom’s ability to supply sustainable electricity
   to meet South Africa’s demands and reasons why independent electricity
   producers are reluctant to enter into this market.]

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the funding model of Legal Aid South Africa to
   enable it to attract highly skilled and experienced litigators and
   provide assistance in civil matters, especially where women and children
   are affected.

Mr M MNQASELA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates how service delivery concerns in poor communities
   are misused by individuals and political parties as an instrument to
   cause instability in municipalities.

Ms S C N SITHOLE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates a strategy to encourage private investment to
   support the development agenda of South Africa. I thank you.

Mr M E GEORGE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope

   That the House debates the necessity for police to substantially increase
   visibility in fighting rape in our country, especially the intolerable
   rape of schoolsgirls and children.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:


   That the House debates ways to stop corruption that enables syndicates to
   infiltrate the offices of the sheriff of the court throughout the
   country.

Mr A C STEYN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:
   That this House debates the recruitment and promotion policy of the
   Department of Correctional Services, with specific reference to the
   implementation of this policy in the Western Cape, and solutions to
   improve these policies.

Mrs D R TSOTETSI: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the impact of declaring water a scarce resource to
   ensure long-term provision of water resources.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the unwarranted victimisation of informal traders
   by metro police officials in our major cities, especially in the absence
   of any structured plan to accommodate them.

                    GREAT PERFORMANCE BY BANYANA BANYANA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —

     1) notes that Banyana Banyana have made it to the  semifinals  of  the
        CAF African Women's Championship, after their  convincing  4-0  win
        against Mali on Sunday;

     2) congratulates the national  women's  soccer  team  on  their  great
        performance in the championship;

     3) wishes them well  for  their  semifinal  match  against  Equatorial
        Guinea this afternoon; and

        4) urges all South Africans to support Banyana Banyana.

Agreed to.

               COMMEMORATION OF THOSE WHO DIED IN WORLD WAR I

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M J ELLIS: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —
     1) notes that this day is known as  Remembrance  Day,  to  commemorate
        those who died during World War I;


     2) further notes that this day signifies the official end of the First
        World War on the 11th hour of the 11th day of  the  11th  month  of
        1918;


     3) recognises the importance of Poppy Day, as it is  also  known,  not
        only to the nations of the Commonwealth, but also to those who have
        lost families and friends in armed conflict;


     4) further recognises the significance of the poppy emblem -  symbolic
        not only as an indication of the blood that was spilt, but  as  the
        flower that covered the scarred landscape of war-torn Europe in the
        aftermath of the War;


     5) acknowledges the South African soldiers who sacrificed their  lives
        in the name of our country; and


   (6)      honours the memory  of  all  those  who  selflessly  fought  and
        valiantly died in the Great War.

Agreed to.


                       WORLD DIABETES DAY 20 DECEMBER

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —

     1) notes that on 20 December 2006 the General Assembly of  the  United
        Nations passed a landmark  resolution  recognising  diabetes  as  a
        chronic, debilitating and costly disease, thereby designating World
        Diabetes Day as a United Nations Day to  be  observed  every  year,
        starting in 2007;

     2) further notes that the UN resolution makes World Diabetes Day  more
        important than ever and provides the opportunity for a  significant
        increase in the visibility of  the  campaign  and  an  increase  in
        government and media participation on or around November  14,  thus
        ensuring an even greater  reach  for  awareness-raising  activities
        throughout the diabetes world;

     3) acknowledges that diabetes is fast becoming a silent pandemic  with
        over 300 million people living worldwide  with  the  disease,  with
        many cases remaining undetected; and

     4) supports the creation of public awareness of diabetes, its symptoms
        and the risks associated with the disease.

Agreed to.

                    ACHIEVEMENTS OF DR JOHAN VAN DER WAT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —


     1) notes that a Johannesburg-based  doctor,  Dr  Johan  van  der  Wat,
        became the first Africa-based practitioner to be appointed  to  the
        board of the American Association of Gynaecological Laparoscopists,
        which is divided into three areas of operation: Europe, Africa  and
        the Middle East, North and South America, Australia and Asia;
     2) further notes that Dr Van der Wat, who  specialises  in  endoscopic
        surgery and reproductive medicine, flew to Las Vegas on  Monday  to
        accept the honour;

     3) congratulates him on receiving this accolade in recognition for his
        work and for flying the South African flag high; and

     4) wishes him well with his two-year term as a  board  member  of  the
        AAGL.

Agreed to.

              ESTABLISHMENT OF PARLIAMENTARY MILLENNIUM PROJECT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move the draft
resolution printed in my name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That the House, subject to the concurrence of the National Council of
     Provinces -

   (1)      notes that the Parliamentary Millennium Project was  established
        in  2000  as  an  initiative  that  sought  to  use  creative   and
        interactive means to engage South Africans  on  issues  of  nation-
        building and heritage;


   (2)      further notes that during the Third Parliament the  project  was
        tasked with additional responsibilities such  as  reaching  out  to
        marginalised segments of the population, especially women and rural
        communities;


   (3)      resolves to replace the Parliamentary Millennium Project and its
        governance  structure  with  a  Committee  on  Nation-building  and
        Heritage, the committee to -

            a) serve as a consultative  mechanism  to  drive  the  activist
               Parliament;


            b) promote the legislature as an instrument of nation-building;


            c)   monitor   progress   with   government’s   nation-building
               initiatives  and  the  development  of  an  inclusive  South
               African  society  based  on  reconciliation,  tolerance  and
               mutual understanding;


            d) monitor efforts to foster a shared South African and African
               identity;
            e)  report  and  make  recommendations  on  its  functions  and
               activities whenever deemed necessary;


            f) exercise those powers granted in  Rule  201,  but  notifying
               other committees when dealing with  matters  falling  within
               their respective mandates; and


            g)   consist of 9 members from the National Assembly (ANC 5; DA
               1; Cope 1; IFP 1; and smaller parties 1); and 5 members from
               the National Council of Provinces (ANC 3; DA  1;  and  other
               parties 1).

Agreed to.

                  BOXING MATCH AT UNIVERSITY OF NORTH WEST

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G LEKGETHO (ANC): Hon Speaker, the boxing fraternity thronged the
University of North West in Mafikeng to witness the stylish Hlatswayo and
Malinga finishing off their opponents with quick-snapped left-right hooks,
to mention but a few. During this boxing festivity that took place on
Saturday, 30 October 2010, the locals and students filled up the hall in
contrast to the previous matches when fans were bussed in from other
provinces. This is gratifying, and other sporting codes need to take a cue
from this.

I am informed that the three-year contract between the Department of Sport,
Arts and Culture and Brandco in the province has come to an end, and this
needs urgent attention.

Hon Mbalula, sport brings different cultures from afar together. You have a
mammoth task, and we believe you can achieve this as our Constitution
requires.

I thank you. [Applause.]

          NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE SERVICE COMMISSION INTERIM REPORT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D J MAYNIER (DA): Speaker, by now we all know that the hon Minister of
Defence and Military Veterans, Lindiwe Sisulu, has refused to hand over the
interim report of the National Defence Force Service Commission to this
Parliament. One of the many reasons in the Minister’s arsenal of excuses
for this was that there was no link between the interim report and the
Defence Amendment Bill. The primary objective of the Defence Amendment Bill
was to establish a permanent defence force service commission, and the fact
is that there is a link between the interim report and the Defence
Amendment Bill.

What does one find when one reads the interim report? One finds that the
interim report itself recommends the establishment of a national defence
force service commission. Several pages of the interim report are devoted
to recommendations covering the appointment, terms of reference, functions,
staffing, and reporting responsibilities of the proposed defence force
service commission.

And here is the real clincher: the interim report itself contains a draft
Defence Amendment Bill. How is it possible, therefore, that an interim
report which contains a draft Defence Amendment Bill is not linked to the
Defence Amendment Bill? The fact is that the Minister has been caught out
telling a big political fib to this Parliament. The Minister should now
take steps to stop the bleeding, stop the pain, and release the interim
report to this Parliament. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Hon Speaker, on a point of order:
There is a Rule which says that you cannot attack the integrity of a member
of this House without bringing about a substantive motion. Therefore the
hon member is totally out of order in making the kind of imputation that he
has made.
The SPEAKER: That is correct. There is such a Rule, but I will study the
Hansard and come back with a ruling.

                                TENDER FRAUD

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G P D MACKENZIE (Cope): Speaker, the President declared war on
corruption and the Minister of Finance declared how war on corruption,
fraud and maladministration is going to be waged. Minister Chabane and the
Interim Ministerial Anti-corruption Committee jumped into action to
investigate procurement and tender fraud worth some R25 billion. We support
the declaration of war on corruption. What we need now, however, is to see
a total onslaught on corruption with results.

A report on the Transnet tender scandal where Siyabonga Gama awarded
General Nyanda Security, GNS, Risk Advisory Services a R19 million
contract, going up to R55 million in a confined or no-bid tender after
cancelling the other contracts must be tabled. All the officials involved
in the GNS tender were fired. The state now needs to recover taxpayers’
money from GNS.

A report on the R62 million paid out by Transnet in an out-of-court
settlement on a nonexisting agreement to Mthunzi Consortium led by Sandile
Zungu over the sale of MTN shares must also be tabled. General Bheki Cele’s
role in the irregular tender to the tune of R500 million is another matter
in which the House awaits its report.

In February last year, the Auditor-General’s office handed records to the
Special Investigating Unit to probe the Bosasa tenders corruption and
various contracts. How far has this investigation gone? Thank you. [Time
expired.]

          INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION OF SUPREME AUDIT INSTITUTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof L B G NDABANDABA (ANC): Mr Speaker, the Auditor-General of South
Africa, as a supreme audit institution of South Africa, is a member of the
International Organisation of Supreme Audit Institutions, Intosai, which
makes it the second largest international organisation in the world after
the United Nations.

Every three years, there is a congress known as the International Congress
of Supreme Audit Institutions, which this year will take place from 22 to
27 November in Sandton, Johannesburg, Gauteng, and in that, approximately
700 delegates will be attending this event from all over the world.

The Intosai motto is: Mutual experience benefits all. The two themes of
this congress are as follows: Firstly, the value and benefits of SAIs,
aimed at unpacking what a SAI should be doing to make it relevant to
society and contribute to constitutional democracy. This includes the need
for effective relationships between Parliaments, legislatures and the
Supreme Audit Institutions.

Secondly, the environmental Auditing and Sustainable Development, which
remains a topical issue in the international arena ... Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

                     PLIGHT OF WARDERS IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr V B NDLOVU (IFP): Mr Speaker, the warders were locked out in Ncome
Correctional Services on Tuesday. They were instructed by the head of
Correctional Services in KwaZulu-Natal to work a new shift scheduled
without them agreeing to do so. There is an ongoing misunderstanding on
these new schedules and the shifts between the workers at correctional
centres and management. The department, to communicate better with its
employees, has to stop causing destruction within the system of work. The
department should improve the relationship between itself and its
stakeholders, especially the union. Thank you. [Applause.]

             RACIAL TENSION CAUSED BY DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr P J GROENEWALD (VF PLUS): Agb Speaker, die Adjunkminister van Polisie
skep rassespanning en polariseer verhoudings in Suid-Afrika met haar
onverantwoordelike uitspraak dat die howe wittes ligter straf as swartes.
Sy sê ook dat die Suid-Afrikaanse strafregstelsel rassisties is en daarom
onmiddellik verder getransformeer moet word.

Die Adjunkminister sal vinnig moet leer dat veralgemenings altyd verkeerd
is. Sy maak geen bydrae tot die debatte en verhoudings in Suid-Afrika deur
’n enkele individuele geval te probeer voorhou as iets wat deurlopend
gebeur nie. Sy moet veral daarteen waak om nie deel te word van die
veralgemenings teen die boere en hulle praktyke nie. As nuwe Adjunkminister
gaan sy nog baie te doen kry met die wreedheid van plaasmoorde wat makliker
in so ’n gepolariseerde klimaat plaasvind.

Sonder om die verskillende misdade goed te praat, sou ek graag haar mening
wil hê oor die feit dat ’n rugbyspeler R100 000 borg kry in verband met die
dood van ’n verkeersman, teenoor die moordenaar van Eugene Terreblanche wat
R5 000 borg gekry het. Sy kan selfs die Shaik-geval vir ons vergelyk met
die 74-jarige Clive Derby-Lewis se kanker. Sy sal vinnig moet leer dat
veralgemenings altyd verkeerd is.

Regter Hlophe se uitspraak in die Marthinus Esterhuizen-geval in Beaufort-
Wes, waar hy op ’n emosionele wyse na die beskuldigde verwys het dat hy
geen siel het nie en in die tronk moet gaan verrot, sal maklik op dieselfde
wyse, na die anderkant, veralgemeen kan word.

Dieselfde geld vir Ventersdorp se landdros in die saak van die borgaansoek
van die beskuldigde in die Eugene Terreblanche-moordsaak. Om mense in Suid-
Afrika rassisties op te sweep, is geen kuns nie. Van leiers in me Sotyu se
posisie word verwag om op ’n verantwoordelike wyse hulle saak te stel. Ek
dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)
[Mr P J GROENEWALD (FF PLUS): Hon Speaker, the Deputy Minister of Police is
creating racial tension and polarising relationships in South Africa with
her irresponsible statement that courts are more lenient on whites than on
blacks. She also claims that the South African justice system is racist and
should therefore be further transformed immediately.
The Deputy Minister must quickly come to terms with the fact that
generalisations are always wrong. She is making no contribution to the
debates and relationships in South Africa, by using a single individual
case as an example of what happens continuously. She especially needs to
guard against becoming part of the generalisations against farmers and
their practises. As the new Deputy Minister, she will frequently be faced
with the cruelty of farm murders that are committed more easily in such a
polarised climate.

Without justifying the different crimes, I would like to hear her opinion
on the fact that a rugby player receives bail of R100 000 with regard to
the death of a traffic officer, whilst Eugene Terreblanche’s killer
received bail of R5 000. She can even compare the Shaik case with the 74-
year-old Clive Derby-Lewis’ cancer. She needs to quickly come to terms with
the fact that generalisations are always wrong.

Judge Hlope’s verdict in the Marthinus Esterhuizen case in Beaufort West,
where he made emotional references to the accused by saying that he had no
soul and that he should rot in jail, could easily be generalised in the
same way to the other extreme.

The same goes for Ventersdorp’s magistrate in the case of the bail
application of the accused in the Eugene Terreblanche murder case. To
racially incite people in South Africa is no art. Leaders in Ms Sotyu’s
position are expected to present their case in a responsible manner. Thank
you.]

               ASSISTANCE LENT TO LEARNERS AT TWO FARM SCHOOLS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA (ANC): Hon Speaker, Leeupoort Primary School and Thokozani
Combined School are two farm schools located around Carolina in Mpumalanga.
Children from these areas come from very poor families. Leeupoort Primary
School’s building is just a structure that was never meant to be a school.
It is old and small and, as such, did not have toilets at some stage.

Mr Chris and Mrs Jill Dale from Johannesburg adopted Leeupoort Primary
School. They have since built beautiful toilets for the school. They now
intend building classes. On Saturday, 23 October, Gift of the Givers
Foundation, a disaster response NGO, handed over two school uniforms and
food parcels to each child in these two schools. We want to thank Mr and
Mrs Dale and Gift of the Givers for this wonderful act.

We call upon all those who can afford to lend a hand to follow these
shining examples. Together we can improve and touch people’s lives. I thank
you. [Applause.]

                        MOUTSE TRANSFERRED TO LIMPOPO

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K J DIKOBO (Azapo): Speaker, when cross-border municipalities were
abolished, the area known as Moutse was transferred to the Limpopo
province. Some of the people of Moutse took to the streets to register
their unhappiness and to protest against that decision.  Property was
damaged and schooling was disrupted.

On 27 and 28 September last year, a referendum was held to test the view of
the community on whether they want it to belong to Limpopo or Mpumalanga.
They went in their numbers to IEC voting stations in the area of the
Motsoaledi and Ephraim Mogale Municipalities. The process was observed by
the demarcation board and political party agents.

We are informed that the voter turnout was high and the whole exercise went
off smoothly and peacefully. Fourteen months after that exercise, the
Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs that
organised the poll had still not released the results. Our own agents
informed us that 75% of those who voted chose Mpumalanga.

While we applaud the department for seeking the view of the people, we are
disappointed that the results have been withheld. South Africa is a
democratic state and we are informed that we have a government based on the
will of the people, a government of the people, by the people, for the
people. Vox populi, vox Dei, which means “the voice of the people is the
voice of God”, should reign, even in the case of Moutse. The people have
spoken and the nation must be told what the people of Moutse have said and
what government is going to do about it. Thank you.

                  ANC YOUTH LEAGUE’S SUPPORT OF KIM JONG II

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S MOKGALAPA (DA): Hon Speaker, the ANC Secretary General should take
action against the ANC Youth League if it turns out that they have indeed
provided vocal support for the North Korean dictator, Kim Jong II.
[Interjections.]

The Korean Central News Agency has recently used quotes ostensibly obtained
from the ANC Youth League for propaganda purposes. The KCNA stated in one
such report that the Secretary of the ANC Youth League of South Africa
praised Kim Jong II as the greatest guardian who, with his Songun politics
firmly guarantees peace and security, not only of the Korean Peninsula, but
the world.

The ANC and its youth league should either distance themselves from those
scandalous comments or should explain why they were cavorting with despots.
Kim Jong II’s repressive North Korean regime is regarded by Human Rights
Watch, an Amnesty International, as one of the most oppressive on the
planet.

The ANC must make it unequivocally clear whether these are the sort of
views they support or not. If it turns out that the ANCYL are indeed
actively supporting the North Korean propaganda offensives, then that must
also mean something about things that President Zuma should address,
particularly in light of the G20 in South Korea. I thank you. [Applause.]

             ANC LIBERATING WOMEN FROM THE KITCHEN TO JOIN SANDF

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms B T NGCOBO:(ANC): Speaker, the ANC has been able to move women out of
the kitchen to occupy all spaces that are available - the Navy, Army, Air
Force and the Marines. It was quite an exciting day when a woman-only crew
safely sailed the giant SA Agulhas from Port Elizabeth to Durban.

We salute the South African women for such achievements, as well the Deputy
Minister of Higher Education, and of Science and Technology. Women have
shattered the glass ceiling. The sky is the limit. We are looking forward
to the ANC government rallying for more funding towards the empowerment of
women; to fly higher than an eagle. They can make it. Malibongwe!
[Applause.]

                    PROMOTING DEMOCRACY AND HUMAN RIGHTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI (IFP): Mr Speaker, on 11 November we celebrate the
end of the war which should have ended all wars. About 200 million people
were butchered during the 20th century; and the war continued. We know that
there has never been a war between two democracies, perhaps, with the
exception of the Anglo-Boer War.

What are we doing to promote democracy worldwide? Will we send a high-level
representative delegation to the granting of the Nobel Peace Prize or will
we heed to the pressures not to have a representative there? Today, we
mentioned the issue of North Korea and the support given to North Korea by
the Youth League of the ruling party. There is silence about the DRC and
atrocities taking place there. There is also silence on Zimbabwe.

We need to change our foreign policy to include the component of promoting
democracy and human rights worldwide as a condition for the development of
a new world order in which we all need to take rightful ownership.
[Applause.]

                        WATER CRISIS IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs H N NDUDE (Cope): Speaker, the former Minister misconstrued our wake-up
call to her and this House that South Africa is facing the greatest water
crisis in its history. It is a point that is worth repeating. Our country
has run out of water. As a result of that, we are overdamming and
endangering the ecology of our river system. This in turn threatens the
sustainability of our water supplies. On top of that, we are allowing
pollutants and toxins to be poured into our rivers. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, order! Let the speaker be heard. Continue, hon
member.
Mrs H N NDUDE (Cope): On top of that we are allowing pollutants and toxins
to be poured into our rivers in ever-increasing amounts. Unfortunately,
this water cannot be cleaned. Our resources are thin and our technology is
hopelessly outdated. The presence of heavy metals, ecobacteria, pink worms
and amoeba, etc, is a serious compromise of our water quality. It has
become unusable.

Meanwhile, climate change is accelerating alarmingly. Witness the
destructive floods in China, Pakistan, Poland and elsewhere. This year
drought ravaged Russia and China, and China regards this as the worst in
the millennium. We must reduce water consumption and wastage. Thank you.
[Time expired.]

               IMPROVING STANDARD OF FOOTBALL IN KWAZULU-NATAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs G K TSEKE (ANC): Hon Speaker, to ensure that the 2010 Fifa Soccer World
Cup leaves a proud legacy that children and our communities will enjoy for
many years to come, the Department of Sports and Recreation in KwaZulu-
Natal is set to improve the standard of football in the province by sending
13 of their local coaches to Brazil on an international coaching course.
Furthermore, the Department is also planning to bring Brazilian coaches to
the province to conduct coaching clinics and workshops.

The ANC supports this initiative and believes that it will contribute to
the long-term development of soccer in our country as well as maintaining
the spirit and momentum built by the successful hosting of the 2010 Fifa
Soccer World Cup. The ANC hopes that other provinces will emulate this
initiative. Mmusakgotla ke a leboga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

                           INCREASE IN CORRUPTION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Me A M DREYER (DA): Agb Speaker, om korrupsie te beveg, moet skuldiges weet
hulle sal hulle werk verloor, die geld moet terugbetaal word en hulle sal
krimineel vervolg word, anders kom hulle weg met wangedrag. Die feite is
egter die volgende: Eerstens, alhoewel daar ’n toename is onder senior
staatsamptenare wat intern skuldig bevind word aan finansiële wangedrag, is
daar ’n afname in die getal afdankings van korruptes. Tussen 2003 en 2009
het skuldiges wat afgedank is, afgeneem van 47% tot slegs 11%.

Tweedens, die aantal amptenare wat intern skuldig bevind is aan finansiële
wangedrag en teen wie kriminele klagtes gelê is, het ook afgeneem van 54%
in die boekjaar 2003 na slegs 24% in die boekjaar 2008.

Derdens, oor die afgelope vyf jaar het die terugbetaling van gesteelde geld
afgeneem vanaf 50% in die boekjaar 2005 tot slegs 13% in die boekjaar 2009.


Die regering stuur die boodskap uit dat korruptes die staatskas maar kan
besteel, want hulle kom weg daarmee. As die regering ernstig is oor die
uitwissing van korrupsie, sal hulle sterk sanksies teen korruptes toepas.
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Ms A M DREYER (DA): Hon Speaker, to combat corruption, offenders must be
aware that they will lose their jobs, would have to repay the money and
will be criminally prosecuted, or else they get away with misconduct.
However, the facts are as follows: Firstly, even though there has been an
increase in senior government officials who have internally been found
guilty of financial misconduct, there has been a decrease in the number of
dismissals of corrupt individuals. Between 2003 and 2009 offenders who have
been dismissed have decreased from 47% to only 11%.

Secondly, the number of officials who have been found guilty of financial
misconduct and who were criminal charged have also decreased, from 54% in
the 2003 financial year to only 24% in the 2008 financial year.

Thirdly, over the past five years the repayment of stolen money has
decreased from 50% in the 2005 financial year to only 13% in the 2009
financial year.

The government is sending out the message that corrupt individuals can go
ahead and plunder the state coffers, because they get away with it. If the
government is serious about the eradication of corruption, they would
implement powerful sanctions against corrupt individuals.]

                     UNITED STATES CONTRACT WON BY NECSA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P MADUNA (ANC): Speaker, the South African Nuclear Energy Corporation,
Necsa, and its subsidiary, Radioisotopes, have won a US$25 million – R164,4
million in South African money – United States government contract to
develop technology on the commercial production of the medical isotope,
molybdenum-99, using proliferation resistant, low-enriched uranium.

Necsa will collaborate on the project with the Australian National Nuclear
Research and Development organisation. The award from the United States
Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration comes amid
an international shortage of molybdenum-99, as well as a United States-led
drive to minimise the use of highly enriched uranium, which can be used in
nuclear weapons.

The awarding of this contract is in recognition of the important
contribution and the impact South African scientists and companies are
making on a global scale. Thank you. [Applause.]

                     UNITED STATES CONTRACT WON BY NECSA
                        WATER CRISIS IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ENERGY: Mr Speaker, I just want to thank the hon member for
the congratulatory messages that she has given to the SA Nuclear Energy
Corporation, Necsa, and the microchannel process technology for the
contract that they have with the United States, US, Department of Energy
for the supply of radioisotopes to the US market.

I want to indicate to the House that, as we speak, South Africa is the
biggest supplier of radioisotopes in the world. It is very interesting that
we could be the biggest supplier of radioisotopes, because this is an
intervention that is actually making sure that we can have better medical
outcomes in terms of interventions in the areas of cancer and other
debilitating diseases.

I also want to indicate here that one of the interesting developments
around this contract is that the President of the Republic of South Africa,
in his input in the US-convened Nuclear Security Summit, indicated to the
world that South Africa was going to continue using nuclear material, but
that that would be intended to heal, feed, as well as to provide energy and
water to the nation.

Earlier, one member indicated the challenges that we have in relation to
water in South Africa. I just want to indicate that interventions have
already been made through PetroSA in the Mossel Bay area, where we are
going to be desalinating water, producing about 150 million barrels per
day, which shall be the water supply for the Mossel Bay Municipality, of
which 10 000 million barrels will be for the supply of the community,
whilst the other five will be for the Mossel Bay PetroSA plant.

This is an indication that we could also use nuclear-related material to
desalinate sea water for household and human consumption. I want to
indicate that South Africa is actually a leader in this area, and that is
why we’ve put so much focus, in particular, in this area.

The interesting thing is that from today we have an extension on the
comments for the public process for the Integrated Resource Plan, IRP, and
nuclear energy would be one of the considerations that we make. I’m
appealing to members of this House to participate in those particular
engagements, because Parliament is one of the biggest beneficiaries of
nuclear energy in this country as this part of the world is actually
supplied through Koeberg. So, if anything, it is in this House where we
have to make a case for it. [Time expired.]

                                TENDER FRAUD
          INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION OF SUPREME AUDIT INSTITUTIONS
                  ANC YOUTH LEAGUE’S SUPPORT OF KIM JONG II
                    PROMOTING DEMOCRACY AND HUMAN RIGHTS
                        WATER CRISIS IN SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY - NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION: Mr Speaker,
there are a couple of issues that I want to respond to. The hon member from
Cope, the guy who stole the Currie Cup from the Western Province, raised
the issues in Transnet. I want to make a point that in respect of state-
owned enterprises that are governed by the Companies Act, the boards must
make decisions, because these are not funded on the budget. It is necessary
that we respect the articles of association so that we don’t mix things up.
If you expect the executive to be involved on that level of decision-making
in a company, what will you expect of us next? I think the approach is
flawed.

The hon Ndabandaba raised the issue about the Auditor-General and indeed we
want to join him and the ANC in recognising the formidable achievements of
the Auditor-General, Mr Nombembe.

The hon member from, I think, the DA, has a big smile. Whoever he is, he’s
got a big smile; I don’t know that this House deals with the youth league
of the DA. [Laughter.] Don’t bring things from the outside here, because we
will not respond to your views. This is about the accountability of
government, and it is fundamentally important that we use these slots to
hold government to account and not dream up things that you want on the
floor of this House, hon member. [Applause.]

The hon Ambrosini ...

The SPEAKER: Order, order, hon members! [Interjections.]

The MINISTER IN THE PRESIDENCY: NATIONAL PLANNING COMMISSION - Yes, but we
are old and wise now, Michael. The hon Ambrosini - yes, it’s a new world
order, but you don’t just accept what is there. We need to engage with the
world that is increasingly hostile to poverty and inequality. This means we
must rise up and raise the voice that calls for justice and equity in the
world. That is fundamentally important, otherwise we will go along with the
likes of Silvio Berlusconi and say that is the new world order. It is
inappropriate. We must define what is in the interests of the world’s poor.

The hon Ndude raised issues of water. In broad terms, we accept, recognise
and call for the support in managing the resource more wisely. It is not a
ministerial responsibility; it’s a responsibility for all of us.

I would just like to make one little appeal, namely that we don’t
hyperventilate about all manner of climate change issues. Yes, there are
norms, it’s cold in Cape Town at the moment, but it isn’t because of the
ravages of climate change just yet. We need slightly different and more
rational approaches to ensure that we deal with this adequately. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members, order!

                        WATER CRISIS IN SOUTH AFRICA
               IMPROVING STANDARD OF FOOTBALL IN KWAZULU-NATAL
                           INCREASE IN CORRUPTION
           RACIAL TENSION CAUSED BY THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE
               ASSISTANCE LENT TO LEARNERS AT TWO FARM SCHOOLS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Speaker, I thought it important to
just indicate to the hon Ndude that our technology is not outdated. We do
have the technology, we do have the researchers and we should use what our
researchers have developed to address the problems that she correctly
identified. However let’s not put down our researchers and our technology.
We are a very innovative nation and there are solutions available in
science.

I would like to thank the hon member who referred to the coaching clinics
that will be hosted by Brazil and eventually by KwaZulu-Natal. I think it’s
excellent that we do learn from Brazil how to become a winning soccer
nation. However I’m hopeful that those who are not in the House today have
gone to watch and support Banyana Banyana as they proceed. We hope to do
very well in the semifinal match today. So, we are beginning to show that
we can perform in soccer.

With respect to the fight against corruption, government is committed to
the fight against corruption. Clearly, it’s a fight that we all must take
on with vigour, but I think one of the things we should do, is where there
are clear signs of action, we should have the courage to identify those
actions as well.

There have been assignments to the special investigating unit to
investigate a number of actions associated with corruption, and we should
really congratulate the President for ensuring that these activities are
followed up. So, we are acting in this regard. [Interjections.] Of course
...

The SPEAKER: Order, order, hon members!

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Speaker, I’m not surprised that
they would be griping and howling as they are doing, because it’s
impossible for them to acknowledge where action is being taken ...
[Interjections.] ... since their sole enterprise is the negative and
nothing else. [Applause.] We are fighting corruption; we will continue to
fight corruption.

Finally, let me say that I’m not aware of the research work that has been
done either by the hon Groenewald or the Deputy Minister that he refers to.
So, I do not have the data to respond to whether either of them are correct
in their views. I would suggest that it might be good if both of them did
the statistical analysis and came back with a perspective based on accurate
records, so that we do appropriately inform the House as to these matters
that the hon Groenewald has raised.

I certainly believe that all those in our country who generously support
the endeavour to improve the facilities for education must be
congratulated. We have many philanthropists and supporters both nationally
and internationally who support a number of initiatives in education and
are providing outstanding support to young people, universities and
colleges in our country. We should always extend a hand of gratitude to all
of them. Thank you very much.

                           UNPARLIAMENTARY REMARKS

                                  (Ruling)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, during the debate on members’ statements,
hon Deputy Minister Surty raised a point of order on a statement made by
hon Mr Maynier. I didn’t say the statement at the time was out of order,
but I was going to give a definite Ruling. I wish to do so now.
[Interjections.] Order, hon members!

The hon member, Mr Maynier, earlier said that the hon Minister of Defence
and Military Veterans told this Parliament a “big political fib” when she
said that there was no link between the report in question and the Defence
Amendment Bill. That is tantamount to saying that the Minister lied to
Parliament, a serious charge and one that is definitely unparliamentary,
and in this case without any substantive motion. I want to ask the hon Mr
Maynier to withdraw that statement.

Mr D J MAYNIER: Speaker, with respect, I refuse to withdraw the statement.
[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Well, I then ask you to leave the Chamber! [Interjections.]
[Applause.]

The member thereupon withdrew.


                       DEEDS REGISTRIES AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Consideration of Bill)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move that the Bill be
passed.

Order disposed of without debate.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.


                       SECTIONAL TITLES AMENDMENT BILL


                           (Consideration of Bill)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move that the Bill be
passed.

Order disposed of without debate.

Motion agreed to.

Bill accordingly passed.

     THE CURRENT STATE OF BULK WATER INFRASTRUCTURE IN SOUTH AFRICA AND
 RECOMMENDATIONS ON HOW TO IMPROVE THE MAINTENANCE AND REFURBISHMENT OF THIS
                               INFRASTRUCTURE

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mr G R MORGAN: Hon Speaker, hon members, Phaphazela Village in rural
Limpopo is a difficult place in which to live a dignified life. Here,
villagers compete with animals for scarce water from dirty wells and
distant taps.

Commentator Elmon Tshikhudo wrote last week in an online journal about his
recent visit to this area. He encountered Ms Nkhensani Mabasa, a resident
of the village, who said she had to leave her home at two in the morning to
use a tap that was some distance away. “Our lives are at stake”, said Ms
Mabasa. “We travel in the dark and leave our properties at the mercy of
criminals who know that we will be queuing for water”, she said.

The irony is that the neighbouring Nandoni Dam is full to the brim with
water, but local people suffer because they do not have access to the
contents of that dam.

Granted, the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs has appointed a
new contractor to replace the substandard pipes that should have been
providing water to this and other communities in the vicinity. These
inefficiencies in government mean that the local people will have to wait
even longer for clean water. The right to clean water, as espoused in our
Constitution, is not yet a reality for these people. Let us acknowledge
what the achievements are first.

At the dawn of democracy in 1994, almost 15 million people were without
access to safe drinking water in South Africa. Today, that figure stands at
1,6 million people, still unacceptably high, but a reflection of success
nevertheless. Of course, the statistic is of no comfort to the people of
Phaphazela Village, which I have just mentioned. A lot of work still needs
to be done.

By admission of the Department of Water and Environmental Affairs itself,
the relentless focus on the provision of water to people who never before
had access to water came at the cost of the department taking their eye off
the ball on the maintenance of the existing infrastructure. Today we have a
creaking infrastructure that is in desperate need of attention.

The DA believes that the provision of clean water is essential for human
development and economic growth. The provision of clean water improves
health, especially for the large portion of our population that is
immunocompromised. Easy access to water allows our people, especially in
rural areas, to be able to devote more time to other productive activities,
rather than walking considerable distances to find water. It thus enhances
opportunities. And the provision of water is important for growing economic
development and the maintenance of food security.
When allocating water, we need to ensure at all times that the ecological
reserve is not compromised and that we satisfy human requirements.
Thereafter, allocations are made in such a way that maximises growth and
development.

We must not take our water for granted; it is a precious resource. We are
the 30th driest country in the world, and if statistics are to be believed,
already 98% of the available water in South Africa has been allocated. It
is therefore critical that water governance is of the highest standard.

Our new Minister has an important task, but sadly, she inherited the Water
department which is in turmoil. The director-general was suspended last
year and has now been dismissed for several financial governance
irregularities. A recent Attorney-General’s report painted a damning
picture of over R1 billion of financial irregularities. Last week, the
acting DG and chief financial officer, CFO, were also suspended amid new
allegations of financial irregularities. The Minister must ensure that her
top team in the department is made up of competent and skilled technocrats.
The water sector can ill-afford redeployed politicians to fill these
positions.

So what of the state of the infrastructure? There are 65 national schemes
where raw water is collected and transferred from one catchment to another,
and at least 185 bulk schemes where raw water is collected and delivered
within a catchment. These exclude the infrastructure in South Africa
managed by the Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority and the Komati River Basin
Water Authority.

We can be proud of the engineering feats of the last century, but must be
conscious of preserving what we have while we continue to add to the asset
base.

The age profile of the infrastructure indicates that the majority was
constructed in the 1970s and 80s, with much of the assets being between 30
and 40 years old, and some up to 100 years old. The majority of
infrastructure is in a fair or good condition, at least for the moment.
However a large portion of the infrastructure is in a poor or very poor
condition. In this regard it must be stressed that very few dams are in a
good condition, and urgent and ongoing rehabilitation is required. Most of
the infrastructure assets are near optimal capacity and therefore the
conditions or infrastructure integrity is critical to ensure continual
water supply.

Funding challenges for the water sector are immense. The department
estimates that in order to cater for infrastructure backlog and some
refurbishment requirements, R113 billion is required. Over the Medium-Term
Expenditure Framework, MTEF, period we are in, only 5% of this amount has
been allocated. Yes, funds are scarce but water is the foundation for life
and development, and Treasury is going to need to increase its allocation.

The waste water sector is in a critical need of attention. A day does not
go by when, as a Member of Parliament, I do not receive a report from a
member of the public about another failing waste water treatment or a
sewage spill.

Notwithstanding the impressive initiatives such as the Green Drop report
intended to improve ongoing performance of the more than 800 plants, the
trends in performance are getting worse, not better. Thirty per cent of the
plants require immediate attention to avoid the outbreaks of waterborne
diseases.

In the North West and Free State provinces, 100% and 99% of the waste water
treatment works, respectively, are noncompliant with effluent standards,
while in the Eastern Cape 95% of the plants have flows that are unknown or
exceed the design capacity.

It is important to highlight waste water infrastructure as its general poor
state impacts on the quality of bulk water in South Africa. The
purification costs of drinking water are steadily increasing, as testified
by many water boards, as the water is increasingly requiring more intense
treatment due to pollution from sewage predominately, but also from mining
and agricultural run-offs. So what to do?

Besides finding more money and ensuring that money is correctly spent, the
Minister also needs to deal with the skills crisis in the water sector.
More than 120 municipalities in South Africa are at high risk or critical
when it comes to lack of skills in the water sector. At the end of last
year there were 210 vacant posts for civil engineers in the national
department. We need these positions to be filled, and government must make
these positions attractive and reward skilled people. Improved planning is
needed. New developments should not be approved without the required bulk
infrastructure in place.

We need ring-fencing of municipal income grants where a certain percentage
of funds have to be spent on water infrastructure, and not on the
nonessentials that so many municipalities choose to waste funds on; as well
as creative funding solutions; the use of public-private partnerships and
expanding the mandates of the 14 water boards to service larger areas as
possible solutions as well; fixing the badly managed water trading entity
and ensuring that fees are collected from water users.
Billing problems in the water trading entity are immense, and the
department cannot even be sure that what it is billing for are the correct
amounts. We need to review tariffs to ensure that water is correctly
priced, and so that fees are sufficiently contributing to the maintenance
and building of new water infrastructure. But mostly we need political will
and leadership. The water sector will not tick along by itself. In fact it
is teetering on the precipice. Getting this right is important for human
health development and economic growth. If taps run dry, it will make
electricity load shedding look like a Sunday school picnic. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms P BHENGU: Speaker, hon members, given the country’s history and the
systematic manner in which the majority of the people were denied access to
even the most basic human needs, drafters of the Constitution wanted to
make sure that the democratic government took steps to meet these needs.
Access to water is therefore a human rights issue provided for in the
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa.

With respect to each of these basic rights, the Constitution says:

   The state must take reasonable legislative and other measures, within its
   available resources, to achieve the progressive realisation of each of
   these rights.

To this end, the government is biased towards the people and the most
vulnerable people who have in the past been left to fend for themselves
with minimal or no support from the apartheid government. They are to be
found in rural areas which, as a legacy of apartheid, were created as large
dumping areas for the unemployed and reservoirs to be drawn upon to feed an
apartheid-structured labour market.

Somlomo, uMthethosisekelo wethu ukubeka ngokusobala ukuthi wonke umuntu
unelungelo lokuthola ngokwanele ukudla namanzi. Yingakho lohulumeni oholwa
nguKhongolose ukwazile ukunikezela ngamanzi ahlanzekile kubantu abangama-
88% ngonyaka ka-2007 kusuka kuma-62% kusukela ngonyaka ka-1996.

Lezi zinhlelo ziphumelele ngoba beziqondiswe ngqo kubantu abahluphekile.
Njengamanje inkinga esasele nohulumeni azimisele kakhulu ngayo
ngeyokudluliselwa kwamanzi kulabo abangawatholi kahle okungabantu
abasemaphandleni, le konja ayiphume, ukwenza isiqiniseko ukuthi bayawathola
amanzi ahlanzekile.

Njengoba sazi sonke ukuthi kunemifula emikhulu ehlale igcwele amanzi kodwa
abantu abahlala eduze kwayo abanawo amanzi. Kunalokho lawo manzi
ayadluliswa ngemishini emikhulu, aye emadamini amakhulu ayophakela abantu
basemadolobheni. Abantu abasezindaweni ezinjengoMsinga lapho ngiphuma khona
bangabi nawo amanzi ngemifula yabo uThukela neMpofana.

Kusenenkinga enkulu yokudlulisela amanzi kubantu njengoba kwenzeka koJozini
lapho uhulumeni wobandlululo akha khona amadamu amakhulu ayewasebenzisela
ezolimo kuphela abantu bangawatholi. Siyabonga kakhulu kulo hulumeni
kaKhongolose ukuthi usekwazile ukuba enze izinhlelo zokuthi lawo madamu
avulwe ukuze asetshenziselwe ukudlulisela amanzi kubantu njengoba sibona
eJozini. [Ihlombe.](Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Speaker, our Constitution states clearly that every person has the right
to have access to food and water. That is why this ANC-led government has
managed to provide clean water to 88% of the people in 2007, which is an
increase from 62% in 1996.

These programmes succeeded because they were specifically intended for poor
people. Now the only problem that the government is prepared to resolve is
that of distributing water to people in the rural areas who do not have
access to clean water.

As we all know, there are big rivers always full of water, but people who
stay near those rivers do not have access to clean water. That water is
channelled by big machines to big dams to supply water to the people in the
cities. People in areas like Msinga, where I come from, do not have access
to water from their rivers, namely uThukela and Mpofana.

There is still a big problem with regard to water distribution to people.
This is happening in Jozini where the apartheid government built big dams
which were used for agricultural purposes only, but people were not
supplied with water. We are very grateful that the ANC-led government has
managed to put programmes in place for those dams to be reopened and used
for distributing water to people, as we are witnessing in Jozini.
[Applause.]]

The ANC-led government’s position is that the country’s economic growth
target and the sustainability of water resources are not mutually exclusive
and that the supply and demand must be determined in a compatible manner.
Otherwise serious shortfalls will occur, creating instability and no
economic growth and threatening scarce water resources.

UMongameli wezwe ubaba uMsholozi, kwinkulumo yakhe yesizwe yonyaka odlule
ka2009 uqinisekile ukuthi iNingizimu Afrika iyizwe elomile, elinamanzi
angenele futhi elidinga ukuba liqasheliswe ngeso lokhozi, ukuthi noma
sinamanzi angenele kodwa kumele sabelane ngawo kuzo zonke izakhamizi.
Kulesi sikhathi ukuze sihlangabezane nanezidingo zokukhula komnotho
ngaphandle kokuhlukumezeka kwemvelo nokuvikela amanzi, siwagcine ekhona
futhi siwonge. (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[In his state of the nation address last year - in 2009 - the President,
Msholozi, confirmed that South Africa is a drought-prone country, with not
enough water. This means that water needs to be saved. Even though we do
not have enough water, we have to share it amongst all communities during
this time so that we can meet the needs of economic growth without abusing
the environment - and saving water in the process. Keep it and save it.]

South Africa is a dry country with a low average and high variability of
rainfall in most areas. The available freshwater resources are already
almost fully utilised and under stress, and demand is outstripping supply
in most catchments. Access to potable water remains the most worrying
constraint for many rural people. Many of them spend several hours a day
securing supplies.
At the projected population growth and economic development rates, it is
unlikely that the projected demand on water resources in South Africa will
be sustainable. Water will increasingly become a limiting resource in South
Africa and supply will become a major restriction to the future
socioeconomic development of the country in terms of quantity and quality.
At present, many water resources are polluted by industrial effluents,
domestic and commercial sewage, acid mine drainage, agricultural run-off
and litter.

Evidence is becoming clearer that global climate is a threat to sustainable
development that could undermine global poverty alleviation efforts and
have severe implications for food security, clean water, energy supply,
environmental health and human settlements. The most obvious impact of
climate change worldwide will be extreme weather events occurring more
frequently and becoming more severe. In South Africa, the rise in average
temperatures will cause access to freshwater resources to decline while
higher rates of evaporation due to high temperatures will lead to more
severe droughts on the one side of the planetary water cycle and more
severe floods on the other.

As Africans, we remain deeply concerned by climate change. The continent is
particularly vulnerable to changes in climate, which have a profound impact
on issues like food security, economic viability, biodiversity and access
to water. The ANC resolved in Polokwane that we should recognise that
climate change is a new threat on a global scale and poses an enormous
burden upon South Africans and Africans. The central message is that we
have to use our limited water supplies more efficiently and effectively.
Our celebration of water as a source of life must translate into practical
actions aimed at ensuring that we do indeed use our limited water supplies
carefully.

Population growth and changes in demographics such as people moving from
rural to urban areas and smaller households mean that government must
continue to provide infrastructure for more people, and in new areas. We
must therefore provide and plan infrastructure development and look at
alternatives in a manner that does not endanger future generations.

Regional bulk water services infrastructure plays a key role in bringing
water services to all the people in South Africa. Due to the size and
extent of such infrastructure, it plays a vital role in achieving an
integrated socioeconomic development.

The implementation and management of regional bulk water services
infrastructure is guided, impacted and driven by various factors, including
water availability and scarcity. The scarcity and availability of water
demands that water must be brought over substantial distances to serve
communities in an integrated manner. Without such bulk infrastructure,
internal services are not possible or sustainable.

It is therefore clear that accelerated investment in water infrastructure
is needed to overcome internal barriers that are likely to retard South
Africa’s productive potential. Such investment will contribute to growth
and poverty reduction and an increase in agricultural productivity and
subsequently to the achievement of the millennium development goals, MDGs.
By 2005, this government had already achieved the MDGs of halving the
proportion of people who are unable to reach or afford safe drinking water
by 2015.

Asikho isidingo sokusebenzisa izigidi zemali ukufakela amapayipi
nokudlulisela amanzi bese sivumela ukuthi ingqalasizinda yethu yonakale ibe
sesimweni esibi futhi ilinyazwe. Kumele ingqalasizinda yethu ihlale
isesimweni esamukelekile futhi inakekelwe. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[There is no need to use millions of rands for infrastructure to distribute
water and then to allow it to be destroyed and to fall into a state of
disrepair. Our infrastructure needs to be maintained so that it remains
functional.]
The phrase “water for development” refers to the critical role of water in
poverty alleviation and people’s constitutional right to have reliable
access to safe drinking water. Speeding up the delivery of infrastructure
and providing for the maintenance thereof is therefore a major part of the
ANC-led government’s programme. The objectives are to move faster towards
getting rid of social backlogs by making sure that everyone has access to
water and sanitation. This should be done in a way that reaches the poor
and builds integrated and viable communities.

There are still millions of people who do not have access to clean running
water and sanitation, and infrastructure programmes must ensure that we get
rid of these backlogs so that every citizen can enjoy these services.
Ngiyabonga. [Thank you.] [Applause.]

Mrs H N NDUDE: Mr Speaker, let me take this opportunity and congratulate
our chairperson who has been appointed the Deputy Minister of Police. I
must say that the committee will really miss her inputs and how she has
steered the committee.

Let me begin with a serious concern. The Department of Water and
Environmental Affairs has been underbudgeting then, as it has also happened
this year. The department will plead that certain expenses were unforeseen
and therefore unavoidable. This argument is used to shift funds from
environment to water.

The current poor state of bulk water infrastructure is the outcome of poor
budgeting. This House must take note that a staggering 70% of
municipalities in South Africa lack the capacity to supply bulk water
services in the areas of their operation. Only 30 out of the 262
municipalities can boast water services that are functioning effectively.
There certainly are financial constraints, but it is the political
mismanagement that has led to the dire situation we have today. Government
will state that it has a serious challenge.

We in Cope say that the situation is worse. Bulk water infrastructure is
close to collapsing in most parts of our country. When misuse of resources
combine with government-generated incompetence, failure is inevitable.

The 2010 Green Drop Report, for instance, states that in many cases
extensive refurbishment and expansion of the current plants are required,
and the process employed at plants are no longer sufficient to deliver the
required final water quality. What is extensive refurbishment? It is
another way of saying that band-aid is no longer adequate. Major surgery by
specialists at a major cost is what is needed.

Does South Africa have the money and the specialists? More importantly,
does South Africa have a transparent procurement process to prevent big
amounts being siphoned off into the pockets of tenderpreuneurs and their
fellow conspirators? The answer is obvious - we do not.

The Minister of Finance has warned that South African consumers should
ready themselves for a substantial increase in water tariffs. Will
government’s failure mean that, once again, as we have seen with Eskom,
people must carry the cost?

The most urgent priority for this government is the updating of the
infrastructure database, which would also include information on internal
waste water systems and the asset management programme.

The Environment and Conservation Association has stated that in five years
almost 80% of the country’s fresh water resources would be badly polluted.
As a result, no process of purification available in the country would be
able to clean it sufficiently to make it fit for human or animal
consumption.

The Chief Executive Officer Mr Davis, of Xstrata has stated that South
Africa needs urgent investment of some R100 billion in bulk water
infrastructure and reticulation. And it will be up to the state alone to do
this.

Underinvestment in water infrastructure risks pitting agriculture, mining
and the manufacturing industry against their own communities as water
supply dwindles. It is time for the state to manage this valuable asset on
which all South Africans depend.

With some things we can wait, but a shortage of water will be too big a
crisis to contemplate. Seconds are ticking and the country is watching to
see what this government will come up with to maintain and upgrade bulk
water supply in this country. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr Speaker, politics has a language of its own. I
don’t know at what point big challenges should still be called challenges
rather than what they are, which is a hell of a big problem. The water
situation in this country is without reason, because the country has enough
water to supply its entire population.

The problem of water is transversal; it affects many departments and many
line functions. By the same token, the failure to address this problem is
transversal, which, in the end, hinges on the issue of planning. And it’s
saddening that the person responsible for planning, the Minister in The
Presidency: National Planning Commission, did not find the time to stay
with us. He made a couple of remarks and did not respond to the question
about the Nobel Peace Prize, but as soon as this debate started he saw fit
to abandon this House. The issue of planning is critical. It is an issue on
environmental protection.

There is not enough control of sediment. Most of the water, which could be
used for drinking purposes, is not being used. Sediment and erosion control
is still a function that needs to be developed in South Africa.

There is an issue of pollution. The level of emissions and our controls
over emissions brought from point sources and unpointed sources are way too
low. Even against the territory standards, there is an issue of
implementation, regulation and oversight over what the industry does.

First and foremost, there is an issue of management. This is not a
challenge of management, but it is a crisis of management - a problem of
management. The culture of management within government at all levels is
not performing as required, and is becoming a culture of mismanagement.

Another is the problem of perspective. We are still implementing the 19th
century solutions and engineering, disregarding the 21st century
engineering and solutions. Dams and reservoirs are things of the past in
many contexts, as they take up too many resources. The types of solutions
that are available today for water purification are much more cost-
efficient, effective and easy to implement.

There are problems with skills, and again they are transversal. The types
of problems that we are facing are made much worse by lack of proper
legislation on immigration because of the failure of the immigration
system. There are problems at all levels of government, which are exposed
to these issues.

I just want to take the last two seconds to correct something which was
said here earlier. I don’t want to say that it was true or untrue. I am
very concerned about what is a fib and what is not, but the people around
the Jozini Dam are not receiving the water that they are entitled to. There
are long queues and their right to have clean water, as guaranteed by the
Constitution, is not fulfilled. Thank you very much. [Interjections.] [Time
expired.]

Mr L W GREYLING: Hon Deputy Speaker, nothing represents our
interconnectedness on this planet more than water. It is essential for the
existence of all life forms, and as humans we are absolutely dependent on
it, both for our survival and for almost all of our economic activities.

Unfortunately, we have not shown water issues the priority they deserve in
South Africa. We have allowed our bulk water infrastructure to degrade at a
time when water demand has been increasing in our country. It is now
estimated that an urgent investment of over R100 billion is needed to bring
our entire bulk water infrastructure up to scratch. In addition to this
underinvestment, government has also not taken enough swift action against
those who have polluted our water resources, which supply our bulk water
needs.

The most vivid and shocking representation of this is the Grootvlei Mine,
owned by Aurora Empowerment Systems, where millions of litres of untreated
acid mine water has been pumped daily into the surrounding wetland. There
are also numerous mines around the country that are operating illegally
without the requisite water licences. The ID believes that we now need to
show true political will in stopping such practices and showing a
commitment in addressing our water needs, which are only going to get worse
as a result of climate change.

We can, in fact, turn acid mine water into potable water to augment our
water supply, but it starts with the government facing up to this problem
and taking a decisive stance as opposed to simply dismissing the arguments
of those who are alerting them to this impending crisis. It doesn’t matter
whether we call it a challenge or a crisis, if we don’t show our water
issues the urgency they deserve we will all face serious repercussions in
the near future. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L B GAEHLER: The importance of water infrastructure is undisputable by
way of energy. If a country is viewed as an organic body, then water, along
with energy, transport and infrastructure, act as the arteries that enable
growth and development. Water is critical to address poverty on the level
of the individual. Therefore, it is in the Constitution as a human right.
However, in addition to that, we must also recognise that water plays a
pivotal role in the economic health.

It is regrettable that in communities throughout the country there are
local governments that have failed to maintain water and sanitation
infrastructure. The need for new bulk water infrastructure should not be
forgotten in the face of the major maintenance crisis. The UDM has
campaigned for infrastructure in rural areas to be brought on par with
those in metropolitan areas. There are areas in the country, such as large
parts of the Eastern Cape, which have never had bulk water infrastructure
to begin with.

The absence of infrastructure exacts a heavy toll because the daily arduous
collection of water dominates household activities.

Somlomo, into ebalulekileyo apha kukho iidolophu ezingenawo kwaphela
amanzi. Iveki iyaphela zingenawo amanzi, kwaye loo nto yenziwa ngoomasipala
abangakwaziyo nabasilelayo ukunikezela ngeenkonzo ebantwini, kunye
nokungqongophala kwezakhono. Kwezinye iidolophu iindlela zonakele kwaye
zinemingxuma, zonakaliswa ngamanzi ngenxa yemibhobho ebolileyo.

Ezilalini kunzima, abantu basela amanzi needonki kunye neekati. Siyavuma
ukuba urhulumente uzifakile iitephu, kodwa ezininzi azisebenzi, zome nko.
Ezi zizinto ekufuneka urhulumente azinike ingqwalasela. Siyambulela
urhulumente ngokufaka kwakhe iitephu, kodwa kunzima. Kwezinye iindawo
imibhobho ehambisa ilindle iye idibane neyamanzi aselweyo. Le nto yamanzi
ifuna ukujongwa kakuhle, khon’ ukuze kwakhiwe amadama afanelekileyo
ezilalini. Enkosi. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Speaker, what is important is that there are towns which do not have
water. These towns can be without water for as long as a week and that is
as a result of municipalities which are neglectful, which lack skills and
which do not deliver services to the people. These municipalities also
experience a lack of skills. In other towns roads are damaged and have
potholes. They are damaged by water as a result of rotten pipes.

In the villages it is a struggle - people are drinking water from the same
source as donkeys and cats. We agree that the government has provided taps,
but most of them are not working and they are bone dry. These are issues
that government must pay attention to. We thank the government for
providing taps, but it is still hard. In other places sewerage
infrastructure overlaps with the infrastructure providing drinking water.
This water issue needs special attention, so that in future we will build
suitable dams in the villages. Thank you.]

Adv A D ALBERTS: Mevrou die Adjunkspeaker, hierdie debat is nie ’n nuwe een
nie. Die uitdagings wat Suid-Afrika het as ’n waterdroë land is al voorheen
in die Parlement bespreek en geïgnoreer. Ek kan net hoop dat hierdie
administrasie met die uiterste dringendheid op vandag se waarskuwings en
voorstelle sal reageer. Indien nie, sal ons ’n oorlewingskrisis in die
gesig staar wat alle ander uitdagings sal oorskadu. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Adv A D ALBERTS: Madam Deputy Speaker, this debate is not a new one. The
challenges that South Africa encounters as a water-scarce country were
previously discussed in Parliament and ignored. I can only hope that this
administration would respond to today’s warnings and suggestions with the
utmost urgency. If not, we will face a survival crisis that would eclipse
all other challenges.]

Under the previous administration in 2008, Dr Anthony Turton, then still a
researcher at the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research submitted
a report to Parliament on the water-related challenges facing South Africa.
Of course, we know that this report was so incisive, correct and damning
that the Mbeki administration rather chose to fire Dr Turton instead of
heeding his advice. Our party liaised with Dr Turton in August of this year
and he advised that his parliamentary report of 2008 is still valid today,
even more so. Therefore, we hereby resubmit the report to Parliament and
the Minister for serious consideration.

The report deals with three drivers of the water problem, as well as three
strategic water quality challenges facing the country. One of the most
profound findings is that South Africa has lost its dilution capacity due
to the over-allocation of natural water resources. This means that the
infrastructure is also straining.

Die kern van die uitdaging om die hoofinfrastruktuur in stand te hou en op
te gradeer, lê by die gebrek aan kapasiteit. Reeds in 2006 het die
Wetenskaplike en Nywerheidnavorsingsraad bevind dat 31% van
infrastruktuurgebrekke te wyte is aan ’n gebrek aan menslike hulpbronne en
kundigheid. Hierdie gebrek kan weer teruggelei word na die ideologiese
dryfkrag agter regstellende aksie-kwotas. Die SA Instituut van Siviele
Ingenieurswese vertel dit in die rondetafelverslag van die Centre for
Development and Enterprise as volg: (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[At the centre of the challenge to maintain and upgrade the basic
infrastructure lies the lack of capacity. In 2006, already, the Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research, the CSIR, found that 31% of the
deficiencies in infrastructure were due to a scarcity of human resources
and skills. This scarcity, in turn, can be traced back to the ideological
motive for affirmative action quotas. In the round-table report of the
Centre for Development and Enterprise, CDE, the SA Institute of Civil
Engineers states as follows:]

    The role of engineering in municipalities has been reduced by
    interposing political levels between engineers and decision-makers.

Therefore, due to the gravity of the water problematique, we implore the
Minister to seriously consider Dr Turton’s report and to address the link
between affirmative action, overpolitisisation of water-related
institutions and the lack of capacity. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP believes that South Africa is facing
a water crisis as ageing infrastructure and rising demand spew potentially
deadly bacteria into water systems in South Africa. The quality of our
drinking water is supposed to be monitored monthly and it is purported to
be amongst the best in the world. However, we know that, particularly in
the rural areas, much still has to be done and there are serious concerns
about the acceptability and the value of that water.

Outdated infrastructure and problems in retaining skilled staff have
contributed to unacceptably high levels of pollution in many rivers and
dams. We have the situation of millions still lacking access to flush
toilets and piped water, and, of course, as I mentioned, the threat of
waterborne diseases is very serious.
The reported levels of the potentially deadly E.coli bacteria have been so
high in certain areas that municipalities have been forced to issue boil
alerts and supply water to severely affected communities by tanker trucks.

The new Eskom power stations and key industrial developments will require
substantial bulk water and capital investment, estimated, as has been
mentioned earlier, to the amount of R100 billion. Clearly these are aspects
that we need to look into very seriously and Treasury needs to address this
issue in detail.

The ACDP calls on South African residents in the country to conserve water
as well as the government to embark on a public awareness campaign similar
to the one that we had during the power shortage. If we do not attend to
this water crisis, we will be facing very serious public health issues
arising from waterborne diseases. Thank you.

Mr J R B LORIMER: Madam Deputy Speaker, this government is quick to
congratulate itself over the roll-out of much needed basic services. In the
recent report on universal household access to basic services, for example,
the Fezile Dabi District Municipality in Northern Free State was listed as
having 100% access to basic water provision. That means having a tap no
further that 200 m from every home, but that 100% figure hides a different
reality.

Last week I visited the small town of Steynsrus in the Moqhaka municipality
which is part of Fezile Dabi District Municipality. There I found a town
which had had no water in its taps for a month. That was because the town’s
storage dam had run dry. About a year ago the council was warned that the
dam was going to fail because the wall was not being maintained. The
council did nothing. The rains came last summer and the dam wall failed.
Most of the water was lost. The province came in and fixed the wall, but
the water soon ran out. The town was unable to pump from the river or from
boreholes because all of its five pumps were broken. So water was trucked
in from the municipal centre at Kroonstad some 50 km away.

That coincided with the water crisis in Kroonstad. We were told that the
town ran out of money and could not afford chemicals to purify the water.
For two weeks the water was not treated. Predictably, more than 1 000
people in Kroonstad and some 200 in Steynsrus suffered from diarrhoea. That
should not be a surprise. The 2010 Blue Drop Report said, “It is sincerely
unfortunate that three water service authorities in the Free State province
have shown no commitment towards their drinking water quality management
responsibilities.” The department therefore cannot have any confidence in
the manner tap water quality has been managed, and one of those three
municipalities was Moqhaka.

So, why can’t this municipality afford to clean its water? Here are some
clues: The mayor bought a Mercedes E200 at a cost of R471 000 without
proper authorisation; there was a purchase earlier this year of R150 000
for a desk and a wall unit by the municipal manager; and recently, the
council got quotes for a new intercom system. It rejected the quotes for
R99 000 and accepted the one for R350 000.

The reasons may be different, but the failure is the same in the Blouberg
Municipality in Limpopo. A water scheme for the 5 000-strong Indemark
community was installed by the local ANC council just before the last local
elections. It was installed and ticked off, but it never worked. The DA and
local farmers have now built a system to deliver free water for the people.


It doesn’t just happen in deep rural areas. Water quality in Madibeng
Municipality near Brits has collapsed. The municipality was placed under
administration in March after mismanagement of projects and allegations of
corruption.
Then Minister Sonjica was there recently, and she said, “We hope to give
some type of Christmas present by refurbishing these treatment plants.” A
Christmas present? The Minister should remember that clean water is a
right. It’s not a present from government, or worse, the ruling party. It
comes from the tax money of every single South African citizen, whether
that tax is paid as income tax or VAT.

Our people have a right to basic services, real and continuing basic
service delivery, not just projects that are built and look good on a
report and then collapse. Projects cannot simply be installed and walked
away from; for people who cannot afford to buy bottled water, this kind of
failure can be fatal.

This government needs to have a good hard look at the real reasons for this
failure to maintain projects. Face facts: The cadre deployment policy,
which is the backbone of the national democratic revolution, is a disaster.
The wrong people get put in the wrong jobs. When they fail, as they often
do, they are not fired; they are protected, excused and redeployed and the
people who suffer are the poorest of the poor. Thank you. [Applause.]

Manana J MANGANYE: Xandla xa Xipikara xo hlonipheka,  Swirho  swa  Palamende
leswo hlonipheka, ndzi khensa  Mutshamaxitulu  wa  mina  loyi  a  nga  endla
leswaku ndzi rhandza Komiti leyi ya swa Mati, muchaviseki  Magdeline  Sotyu.
Ndza n’wi khensa swinene hikuva a ndzi nga tivi leswaku  mati  i  xilo  lexi
nga endlaka leswaku hi hanya. Loko va ku Komiti ya  Mati  a  ndzi  nga  tivi
leswaku va vulavula hi yini.

Matsalwa ya tsariwile eka Bibele, eka Tihosi 2 Ndzimana ya 5 vhese ya  1  na
loko u  enhla  hi  yona  ku  ya  ehansi  yi  ri:  (Translation  of  Xitsonga
paragraphs follows.)

[Ms J MANGANYE: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Members of Parliament, I  thank  the
chairperson, the hon Magdeline Sotyu, who made it possible for  me  to  like
the Portfolio Committee on Water and  Environmental  Affairs.  I  thank  her
very much because I did not know that water is something that  is  vital  in
our lives. When they talked about  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Water  and
Environmental Affairs, I did not know what they were talking about.

It is written in the Bible in 2 Kings, Chapter 5, verse  1,  and  even  when
you read further, it says:]


   So Naaman went down to the dirty Jordan River. He stripped  down  to  his
   underwear and went in. He dipped himself once and  nothing  happened.  He
   dipped himself a second and third time. When he dipped  himself  for  the
   seventh time, he came out and was healed.

Mati i vutomi naswona ya hanyisa. Loko u vabya ya horisa. Loko u karhele  ya
ku timula. Loko u ri na wona u na ntsako. Hikwalaho hi nga vona  Naman  loko
a horisiwa. Mati ya horisa. U nga teka mirhi ya wena u  yi  sweka  hi  mati.
Loko u nga ri na mati, ku hava  lexi  u  nga  xi  endlaka  leswaku  u  hola.
Hikokwalaho hi nge mati ya tsakisa. Naaman u tsakile hi ku  vona  leswaku  u
horile.

Mfumo  wa  xihlawuhlawu   wu   endle   leswaku   matikoxikaya   ya   pfumala
switirhisiwankulu swo tala swo fana na madamu  ya  mati,  tipompi  na  leswi
basisaka mati.

Xandla xa Xipikara, ndzi lava ku ku tivisa leswaku loko mina  ndzi  kula  hi
nkarhi wa xihlawuhlawu a ndzi vangisana mati enambyeni na  tidonki,  timbuti
na tihomu. Namuntlha swa ndzi hlamarisa loko hi ta  ta  yima  laha.  Mina  a
ndzi telanga ku kora tipoyinti loko ndzi yime laha. Ndzi tele leswaku hi  ta
vonisana, hi khomisana  na  ku  vonisana  leswaku  loko  hi  ri  Swirho  swa
Palamende hi hlanganile laha hi nga endla yini lexi  nga  ta  endla  leswaku
vanhu va ka hina va mati lava hi nga va thola va kota ku  nyiketa  vanhu  va
hina lava  nga  yimela  nhluvukiso  le  hansi.  Ndza  ha  ri  lontshwa  laha
Palamende. Ndzi tshemba leswaku ku khomisana hi  leswi  hi  nga  tela  swona
laha.

Mfumo wa xidemokirasi lowu nga rhangela  emahlweni  hi  ANC  wu  ringeta  hi
matimba hinkwawo ku hundzuluxa na ku lulamisa leswaku vanhu va kuma mati  yo
tenga, naswona va ya kuma ekusuhi.  Ku  na  tindhawu  tin’wana  ku  fana  na
Eastern Cape, Limpopo na Kwazulu-Natal laha mati yo tenga ya ha  kayivelaka.
Loko hi languta tindhawu leti na  tin’wana  ta  North  West  laha  vanhu  va
Magalies Water Board va nyikaka mati kona, ka ha ri na  laha  ku  kayivelaka
kona leswaku ku engeteriwa. Tiphayiphi ta kona na switirhisiwankulu  se  swi
hlakarile naswona i swa khale. Swi lava  ku  lunghisiwa.  Ti  kona  tindhawu
tin’wana laha vanhu va hetaka n’hweti va nga  kumi  mati  tanihi  laha  ndzi
humaka kona eLerume. Ha heta n’hweti hi nga voni mati.

Lembe leri komiti ya  swa  mati  a  yi  endzele  eLimpopo  eka  Masipala  wa
Thulamela. Hi kumile damu ra Nandoni ri tele ri tlhela ri khapa hi mati.  Ku
suka eNandoni ku na muti wa ka Malamulele lowu nga 15km. Hi kumile  kona  ku
nga ri na mati. A ha ha vuli hi Giyani hikuva yona yi na 52km ku  suka  laha
dan’wini. Loko va ri vona a ha ha vuli nchumu. Leswi swi bihile swinene.  Hi
leswi loko hi fika laha Palamende hi faneleke hi vulavula hi  swona  leswaku
hi nga swi lunghisa njhani.

Xana mfumo wa tsandzeka ku nyika vanhu mati? Xana i vanhu  lava  hi  nga  va
thola etihofisini lava nga koteki ku nyika vanhu mati? Loko kuri  leswaku  i
masipala  leyi  tsandzekaka  ku  nyika  vanhu  mati  i  yini  lexi  loko  hi
hlanganile laha Palamende hi xi endlaka leswaku vanhu lava va kota  ku  kuma
mati? Loko kuri i masipala hikwalaho ka yini yi nyikiwa leswaku yi  va  wona
“water authority” yi ri hava vuswikoti byo nyika vanhu mati, kambe yi ri  na
vutihlamuleri bya leswaku hi yona yi nyikaka vanhu mati?

Swilo leswi hi vulavulaka hi swona laha hi fanele  hi  swi  lunghisa  kahle.
Endzhaku ka loko komiti leyi ya Palamende yi humile yi lavisisa  timhaka  ta
mati, yi kume leswaku tindhawu leti yi nga famba eka tona  a  ti  lunghanga.
Yi tshamile ehansi yi vutisisa leswaku i yini lexi endlaka leswaku vanhu  va
nga kumi mati. Hi ri va komiti ya mati hi kumile leswaku vanhu va hina  lava
hi tirhelaka, vatirhelamfumo, va hava ntokoto. Hi vula swikili  swa  mitirho
leyi va nga rhamberiwa yona. Hi lava leswaku  swilo  leswi  swi  lunghisiwa.
Vanhu lava hi nga va thola a va na wona  nkhinkhi  wo  endla  leswaku  swilo
leswi swi endleka hi xihatla.

Hi ku landza swa misava, hi na Afrika Dzonga  laha  rin’wana  ra  matiko  ya
rona ya kayivelaka mati. Ku na mfanelo ya leswaku hi teka  magoza  yo  endla
leswaku mati lawa hi nga na wona, wona lamatsongo, hi ya tengisa  hi  tlhelo
hi ma hlayisa.

Loko ndzi yime laha namuntlha ndzi ri eka swirho swo  hlonipheka  leswi  nga
laha Palamende, a hi khomisaneni hinkwerhu hi nyika vanhu va  hina  mati  yo
tenga.

Mfumo wa ANC wu lava leswaku vanhu va tiko hinkwaro, ku katsa  na  lava  nga
matikoxikaya, va kuma mati yo tenga. Loko u ri na mati, u na  vutomi.  Swilo
leswi swi nga endla leswaku vanhu hinkwavo va Afrika  Dzonga  va  tshunxeka.
Loko va ri hava mati, va nge koti ku tshunxeka.

Ku na swibumabumelo leswi hi lavaka leswaku swi endliwa hi Yindlu leyi.
(Translation of Xitsonga paragraphs follows.)

[Water is life and it heals. When you are ill, it makes you well. When you
are tired, it cools you down. When you have it, you have happiness. This is
why we saw Naaman being healed. Water heals. You can take your medicinal
herbs and cook them in water. If you do not have water, there is nothing
that you can do to get healed. This is why we say water is delightful.
Naaman was happy to realise that he was healed.

The apartheid government ensured that the rural  areas  lack  infrastructure
such as dams, taps and water purification plants.

Deputy Speaker, I want to mention that when I  was  growing  up  during  the
times of apartheid, I competed with donkeys,  goats  and  cattle  for  water
from the river. Today I am surprised when we have to come here.  I  did  not
come here to score points. I am here so that we can  share  ideas  and  work
together with the view of, as Members of Parliament  gathered  here,  seeing
what it is we can do to ensure that the people whom we employed  to  provide
water to the people are able to do so for our people  who  are  anticipating
development at grass-roots level. I am  still  very  new  in  Parliament.  I
believe that working together is what we are here for.

The ANC-led democratic government is trying its best  to  transform  and  to
make sure that people get  clean  water  from  within  their  neighbourhood.
There are places such as the Eastern Cape, Limpopo and  Kwazulu-Natal  where
clean water is still scarce. When looking at these places and others in  the
North West where people get water from the Magalies Water Board,  there  are
still shortages which need to be taken care of. Taps and the  infrastructure
are dilapidated and old. They need to be repaired. In some places,  such  as
Lerume where I come from, people  go  without  water  for  a  month.  We  go
without water for a month.

This year  the  Portfolio  Committee  on  Water  and  Environmental  Affairs
visited the Thulamela Municipality in Limpopo. We found Nandoni Dam full  to
the brim. From Nandoni, Malamulele Township is 15 km  away.  We  found  that
there was no water. The same is true with regard to Giyani which  is  52  km
from that dam. We cannot say much about them. This  is  very  bad.  This  is
what we have to talk about when we are here in Parliament to see how we  can
remedy it.

Is the government failing to supply water to the people? Is  it  the  people
whom we appointed to the offices who are unable to supply  the  people  with
water? If it is the municipality which is failing to supply the people  with
water, what is it that we can do, as we are gathered here in Parliament,  to
ensure that the people have water? If it is  the  municipality,  why  is  it
assigned to be a water authority without the capacity to  provide  water  to
the people, when it is charged with the responsibility  of  supplying  water
to the people?

We have to remedy  these  things  we  are  talking  about  here.  After  the
portfolio committee had gone out to  investigate  the  issue  of  water,  it
found out that the places it visited were not up to  scratch.  It  sat  down
and enquired why people did not have water. As the  Portfolio  Committee  on
Water  and  Environmental  Affairs,  we  found  out  that   the   government
employees, who provide services to us, do not have the  experience.  We  are
referring to the skills necessary to do the job they are employed to do.  We
would like that situation to be remedied. The people  we  have  employed  do
not have the zeal to ensure that these things are done quickly.

From a geographical perspective, South Africa is one of the countries  which
have a shortage of water. We need to take  the  necessary  steps  to  ensure
that we purify and also conserve the little water we have.

As I am standing here today, I am saying  to  the  hon  members  present  in
Parliament that we should work together to give our people clean water.

The ANC government wants all the people of this country, including those  in
the rural areas, to get clean water. When you have  water,  you  have  life.
This can make all the  people  of  South  Africa  achieve  freedom.  Without
water, they will never be free.

There are recommendations that we want this House to consider.]

The department must give  the  municipality  technical  support.  They  must
provide skills in the department, especially in analysing data.  We  need  a
multidisciplinary  team  which  encompasses   engineers   and   researchers;
maintenance of water pump stations; supply of water treatment;  clear  water
storage - that is reservoirs; and to upgrade the aging infrastructure.  When
we ignore them it will cost our government. We must have engineers who  have
the love of the community at heart.
Regarding the curriculum of life skills in schools, we must inculcate  these
skills into children so that they must like water.  They  must  learn  about
water when they are still young. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Ndzi khensile Mutshamaxitulu. Ku dya i ku engeta. Inkomu. [Va phokotela.]
[I thank you, Chairperson. I am grateful for the opportunity and I hope it
will be granted again in future. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr K J DIKOBO: Madam Deputy Speaker, I come from a village called
Makgopong, also known as Bataung in Zebediela, Limpopo. Makgopong and the
surrounding villages would find this debate very amusing because they have
no running water. They fetch water either from the Nkwimbi River or from
the wells. They share water with their animals. They do not know of any
bulk water infrastructure that has to be maintained or refurbished.

Indeed, as Azapo, we agree that we have to take good care of what we
already have. We must maintain the existing infrastructure so that access
to clean water can be extended to all communities. My hope is that my 73-
year-old mother, Mologadi, will be able to draw water from a tap in her
lifetime. Thank you.

Mr A J WILLIAMS: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon Ministers, hon members, guests,
friends and, most importantly, the South African people, I would also like
to acknowledge my family who are at home watching these proceedings on
television, in Johannesburg, Secunda and Mossel Bay; in particular, my
daughter, Rosemary, and my nephews, Kyle and Benjamin, and my niece,
Jordan.

As I stand here today, we are nearing the end of the 16th year since the
democratic breakthrough. If we were to compare our democracy to a person,
she would be in Grade 11. She would have her learner’s licence and we would
consider her sweet 16. Sixteen years is not a long time to address the
massive developmental differences between rural and urban communities, and
the enormous underdevelopment that took place in the former homelands;
firstly by the imperialists and then later by the apartheid government.
Having said that, the challenges still exist and we as the ANC are
committed to addressing these challenges.

In the past 16 years, 18,7 million people have been given access to clean
water and 10,9 million were provided with sanitation. The number of
households with the bucket system reduced from 605 675 in 1994 to 113 085
in 2007 and this figure is decreasing all the time. These achievements have
put enormous pressure on the existing bulk water infrastructure.
The report of the Ad hoc Committee on Co-ordinated Oversight on Service
Delivery that was tabled earlier this year highlighted some of these
challenges we are still facing. This includes that the Department of Water
and Environmental Affairs cannot act apart from issuing directives when
problems of water quality are raised at municipal level because the
department is the regulator of water provision whereas municipalities have
the mandate to provide water.

Another challenge is that, if the municipality has resources to enhance
water provision, it can’t do so, because that falls under the scope of the
district municipality.

Provincial water committees chaired by Premiers exist to enable rapid
response to some of these challenges. So far 57 municipalities have been
assisted and a risk profile of municipalities has been developed to enable
the department to identify areas in need of urgent attention. This co-
operative holistic approach should become the standard practice. The
departments need to talk to one another and the different spheres of
government need to plan together. This will allow challenges to be
indentified early and corrected before they become crises.

The most pressing issues around bulk water infrastructure are the questions
of maintaining existing infrastructure and the lack of infrastructure in
small rural municipalities. Over the years the lack of maintenance has led
to large amounts of water being wasted and we as South Africa cannot afford
to waste any more water.

The President has told us that South Africa is a water-scarce country. If
we, as South Africans, continue on our current path, where we think that
water will keep coming out of the tap forever and ever without a thought to
the reality, then the next generations will be facing a very serious
problem.

So, South Africa, this wasting of water does not only affect this
government, but it affects all of us. Saving water must become part of our
lifestyle. So, don’t just walk past a leaky tap or drive past water flowing
down the road on a dry day; report it, make a noise and alert the
authorities. Tell them that you have been requested by Parliament to do so.
[Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: That’s cheering for you!

Mr A J WILLIAMS: Global climate change is a reality, it is happening.
Saving water today, South Africa, will be in your best interests tomorrow.

The ANC government is trying to address the infrastructure and maintenance
challenges through the Municipal Infrastructure Grant, MIG, system. This
system is also experiencing problems, some of which can be attributed to
bad contractors who fail to meet specifications resulting in leaking bulk
lines. However, these monies are sometimes not spent by municipalities and
metros at all. This underspending is a serious concern.

This underspending occurs in all nine provinces and even in some metros.
Here in the City of Cape Town, over R100 million, which should have been
spent on infrastructure including bulk water infrastructure, was not spent
in the 2009-10 financial year. [Applause.] This resulted in some of the
residents of Du Noon, Khayelitsha and Mitchells Plein having to live with
inferior or no water or sanitation of any kind.

As government, we need to start taking the issue of underspending very
seriously. Those municipalities and metros that fail to spend their
allocated monies must be scrutinised, including the City of Cape Town, and
the reasons for the underspending must be addressed. We as government need
to vigorously monitor municipal infrastructure spending.

We as the Fourth Parliament, an activist Parliament, must hold the
executive accountable for underspending that resulted in the failure of
bulk water infrastructure. Underspending on bulk water infrastructure will
not be tolerated by the ANC and should not be tolerated by any political
party represented in this House.

The question of capacity must also be looked at more seriously. Does
government at local, provincial and national level have the capacity to
operate, maintain and develop bulk water infrastructure? If the answer to
that question is no, then what measures are being taken by the executive to
address this? Have learnerships been established to capacitate those
responsible for bulk water infrastructure at all levels? Do we have the
required management skills, engineering skills and operating skills to
provide 49 million people with clean water?

Big business, especially big mining houses, needs to start taking
responsibility for the current state of the underground water. As a
collective, they need to work on mechanisms to prevent future damage and
work closely with government on ways to correct the existing damage.

Dr Suzan Oelofse from the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
said in the 2008 paper, Mine Water Pollution:

   The threat of acid mine drainage to the environment is not solved in the
   short, to medium term; it is likely to persist for centuries to come.
   Whilst acid mine drainage threatens the scarce water resources of South
   Africa, and as a result also human health and food security in mining
   areas, it also presents an opportunity to provide usable water through
   appropriate treatment technologies.


Hon Morgan stated that in 1994 there were 15 million people without clean
water. And today, this figure has dropped to 1,5 million people. Never in
South Africa’s history, even during the time of the Progressive Federal
Party, PFP, the Democratic Party, DP, and now the DA, did so many people
get access to so much clean water. [Applause.]

As I’ve said at the beginning of this speech, our democracy is sweet 16,
she is filled with hope for the future and determined to bring about a
better life for all.

All South Africans have a role to play; we can all start saving water,
business can start taking responsibility, Parliament can hold the
implementers of government policies accountable, because working together
we can do more. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G R MORGAN: Deputy Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity for
this very important debate. It is indeed disappointing that Ministers are
not present; most notably the newly appointed Minister of Water and
Environmental Affairs, who, no doubt, still has to come up to speed with
this very important portfolio. I take the hon Ambrosini’s point of view
that indeed Minister Manuel should be here as well.

The timelines for water planning are indeed very, very long and we need to
be able to sit down and think, not only about what is going on now, but
about what is going to be happening in many years to come.

Many of my colleagues, quite rightfully, including the hon Bhengu, raised
the issues of climate change, which is indeed going to change the water
landscape in South Africa completely.

I would like to highlight one thing first and that is what hon Manganye
said, “If there is not water, there will be not freedom.” And she is
correct to have pointed that out. Indeed, a lot of people have had access
to water over the past 16 years. That is a great achievement, one that I am
more than happy to point out.

But the risk at the moment, ladies and gentlemen and hon members, is that a
lot of water that has been provided is under threat because of failing
infrastructure. It’s no good providing people with water if, when they turn
on their taps, it is green, containing E.Coli or, indeed, when they turn on
their taps, nothing comes out.

Now there are local places in South Africa where indeed water once was
provided and is no longer being provided. We don’t want that situation to
prevail and we don’t want it to be the norm. That is why I called for this
constructive debate on what needs to be done and to analyse the problems,
going forward.

A lot of our colleagues here raised issues about water quality: hon Ndude,
hon Swart, hon Greyling, and hon Alberts. Indeed, the dilution capacity of
South Africa is very weak because we have had such low available resources.
The more pollution we put into the system, the harder it is to ameliorate
that pollution.

The skills crisis is indeed very, very severe and was raised by a number of
our members here today. But we must be careful - many of these
municipalities had the skills. It’s not necessarily up to the national
Department of Water and Environmental Affairs to fix the skills crisis in
the municipalities.

The separation of powers in the Constitution provides that municipalities
must take care of their own skills requirements. So, let’s make sure,
particularly in the ANC municipalities, that we keep good people in
employment, the ones who know how to keep the waste water treatment plants
working and the purification plants working, which is not what happened in
Madibeng, as raised by my colleague the hon Lorimer.

Ladies and gentlemen, this is a serious debate, we must debate it  over  and
over again. I would like to thank all of you for the  submissions  that  you
have provided. Thank you very much.

Debate concluded.

The House adjourned at 15:34.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces
The Speaker and the Chairperson


1.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Assembly on 11 November 2010:


          a) Deeds Registries Amendment Bill [B 13B – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Sectional Titles Amendment Bill [B 14B – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT - T101111e–insert 1 – PAGES 3855 - 3867

 2. Progress report of the Portfolio Committee on Communications on the
    process followed on recommending persons for appointment to the Media
    Development and Diversity Agency (MDDA) Board, dated 11 November 2010.

    The Portfolio Committee on Communications, having considered the
    nominations of candidates submitted for appointment to serve on the
    MDDA Board in terms of Media Development and Diversity Agency Act, 2002
    (Act No14 of 2002), reports as follows:
    Request from the Minister in the Presidency: Performance Monitoring and
    Evaluation as well as Administration, to fill three vacancies at MDDA
    was referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications on 22
    September 2010 (see ATC 22 September 2010).

    The Committee called for nominations and received 22 CV’s. The
    Committee subsequently shortlisted the following candidates:

    Mr Brian Makeketa
    Mr Siviwe Minyi
    Dr Simangaliso S Malinga
    Mr Tahir Zakariya Sema
    Mr Tyrone August
    Ms Nomonde Gongxeka
    Ms Louise Carol Vale
    Mr Dinkwanyane Kgalema Mohuba
    Ms Phelisa Nkomo
    Ms Nadia Bulbulia

    The interviews are scheduled for 16 November 2010.

 3. Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the Amendments to
    Schedules 1 and 2 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act , 2001 (Act
    No. 38 of 2001), dated 11 November 2010.

    The Standing Committee on Finance, having considered the Amendments to
    Schedule 1 of the Financial Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No. 38
    of 2001) and Amendments to Schedule 2 of the Financial Intelligence
    Centre Act, 2001 (Act No. 38 of 2001), reports that the House, in terms
    of section 73 (3) and section 75 (3) of the Financial Intelligence
    Centre Act, approves the said Amendments.

    Report to be considered.

