---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 25 May 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MAY
month_slug: May
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-05-25
---

TUESDAY, 25 MAY 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:00.

The Deputy Chairperson (Ms T C Memela) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

               NO NOTICES OF MOTION OR MOTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, I’ve been
informed that the Whippery has agreed that there will be no notices of
motion or motions without notice today.

  POINTS OF ORDER RAISED BY THE CHIEF WHIP OF THE COUNCIL AND MR T D HARRIS
                               ON 18 MAY 2010

                                  (Ruling)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Before I proceed, I
would like to respond to the objections by hon Ntwanambi and hon Harris on
Tuesday, 18 May 2010. I wish to begin by reminding members of the input by
the hon Chairperson of the NCOP in the debate on Tuesday, 11 May 2010. He
urged members to familiarise themselves with the Rules of the NCOP and to
refer the presiding officer to the Rule in terms of which a point of order
was raised.

Hon members, may I ask that you all be attentive, so that we don’t repeat
the same mistakes again? I looked at the unrevised Hansard for the debate
on 18 May. Hon Ntwanambi raised, as a point of order, that the hon Worth
was out of order because in referring to the issue of Umsobomvu or the
youth agency, he was raising matters that were outside the parameters of
the debate. I understood this to mean that the hon Ntwanambi wanted the
presiding officer to call the hon Worth to order for raising issues that
were irrelevant to the debate.

Hon Harris raised, as a point of order, that the hon Ntwanambi was
contravening NCOP Rule 33 because she was not raising a point of order, but
was only interrupting the hon Worth during his speech. NCOP Rule 36
provides that the presiding officer may order a member addressing the Chair
to stop speaking if that member, despite warnings from the Chair, persists
in irrelevant or repetitive arguments.

My interpretation of this Rule is that even though members have freedom of
speech in the House and may raise political arguments and share their
views, there are certain limitations. One such limitation is that the views
put forward must be relevant to the debate before the House. The presiding
officer should therefore ask whether reference by the hon Worth to the need
for the monitoring of funds transferred to the National Youth Development
Agency is relevant in the Budget Vote debate of the Department of Women,
Children and People with Disabilities. I recall that at the establishment
of this new Ministry of Women, Children and People with Disabilities, the
area of the youth was specifically part of its mandate. However, subsequent
to that, issues of the youth were transferred and are now located within
the Ministry for Performance Monitoring and Evaluation as well as
Administration in the Presidency.

My understanding is that the hon Ntwanambi was therefore not out of order
when she raised a point of order regarding the relevance of the reference
by hon Worth to the National Youth Development Agency or Umsobomvu.
However, I am not of the view that the argument expressed by hon Worth was
out of order because, in my opinion, the issue was not completely removed
from the debate at hand, the most obvious connection being that matters
concerning persons with disabilities could just as readily refer to matters
concerning the youth.

In summary, the hon Ntwanambi did raise a point of order. However, my
decision on that point of order is that the hon Worth was not raising a
matter entirely irrelevant to the debate. Thank you.




                             APPROPRIATION BILL


                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 32 - Rural Development and Land Reform:

The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Deputy Chair, the speech
we are going to present to this august House is much the same as the one
that we presented to the National Assembly on the occasion of a similar
debate.

We have looked at the department in terms of its programmes. We conducted
an overview, and we looked at the current mandate that government is
carrying on with, looking at outcomes on the basis of that mandate. We
looked at the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme, CRDP, and made a
few comments with regard to how it is performing in terms of pilot
programmes. We also looked at our ability in the department to carry out
those programmes. Of course, we looked at a few elements of the CRDP, and
then we looked at what it is that we would like to see moving forward in
terms of the changes that we are proposing. That is a summary of what we
are going to present briefly to the honourable House.
Deputy Chair, hon members, hon MECs, esteemed traditional leaders,
representatives of organised agriculture, ladies and gentlemen, today my
speech, as I have just said, is very similar to the one that we presented
to the National Assembly on the occasion of a similar debate on 26 March.
Since then, we have seen remarkable progress with the implementation of the
CRDP, which gives meaning to our vision of vibrant, equitable and
sustainable rural communities. At the opening of the National House of
Traditional Leaders on 23 February 2010, the President underlined the
important role that amakhosi have to play in the planning and
implementation of rural development. He implored us to work together for
the improvement of the quality of life of our rural people and communities.


National sovereignty is defined in terms of land. That is why, even without
it being enshrined in the Constitution of the country, land is a national
asset. The resolution of the 52nd national conference of the ANC in 2007 on
agrarian change, land reform and rural development confirmed the ANC’s
acute awareness of and sensitivity to the centrality of land as a
fundamental element in the resolution of the race, gender and class
contradictions in South Africa.

That is where the debate about agrarian change, land reform and rural
development should appropriately begin. Without this fundamental
assumption, talk of land reform and food security is superfluous. We must,
and shall, fundamentally review the current land tenure system during this
Medium-Term Strategic Framework, MTSF, period. We shall, through rigorous
engagement with all South Africans, review the land tenure system so that
we emerge with a tenure system that will satisfy the aspirations of all
South Africans, irrespective of race, gender and class.

It is therefore fitting and appropriate that the strategy of the Department
of Rural Development and Land Reform be agrarian transformation,
interpreted to mean a rapid and fundamental change in the relations of
land, livestock, cropping and community. The objective of the strategy is
social cohesion and development. All anticolonial struggles are, at the
core, about two things, namely repossession of lost land and restoring the
centrality of indigenous culture to underscore all nation-building
endeavours. These two are therefore integrally linked.

With regard to the review of the programmes of the department for 2009-10
in particular, I have to acknowledge that the land reform programmes
implemented to date have not been entirely sustainable and they have not
provided the anticipated socioeconomic benefits to all the recipients of
the programmes. To date, approximately 6 million hectares of land have been
transferred through restitution and redistribution. Much of this land is
not productive and has not created any economic benefit for many of the new
owners.

There has been an overemphasis on hectares at the expense of development
and food security. This has contributed to declining productivity on farms,
a decrease in employment in the agricultural sector and deepening poverty
in the countryside. Coupled with this is a leak-out of redistributed land,
which results from recipients failing to honour debts with the Land Bank
and other commercial banks. The monetary implications to transfer the
remaining 19 million hectares of land by 2014 has been calculated at
approximately R72 billion, if we are to continue to pursue the willing-
buyer, willing-seller model.

It is clear that the current land reform environment is the result of
institutional weaknesses in overall land management, policy and
legislation. We have to strike a realistic and sensitive balance between
the acquisition of land hectares on the one hand and land development for
food security on the other.

The mandate of the department is derived from the five priorities of the
ruling party and government’s Medium-Term Strategic Framework priorities.
The CRDP has set us on a new course for postcolonial reconstruction and
development. This shall be achieved through co-ordinated and broad-based
agrarian transformation, which focuses on the following: building
communities through social facilitation and mobilisation, as well as
technical and institutional capacity-building; strategic investment in old
and new social, economic and ICT infrastructure and public amenities and
facilities co-ordinated through the rural infrastructure programme of the
Department of Rural Development and Land Reform; a new land reform
programme implemented in the context of a reviewed land tenure system; the
rendering of professional and technical services, as well as effective and
sustainable resource management through the components of geospatial
services, technology development and disaster management; and, finally, the
effective provision of cadastral and deeds registration, as well as surveys
and mapping services.

The department is committed to the achievement of outcome 7 of the 12
outcomes pursued by government over the MTSF period, that being vibrant,
equitable and sustainable rural communities. The success of this department
over the MTSF period will be measured through delivery on the following
outputs: sustainable land reform, food security for all, rural development
and sustainable livelihoods, and job creation linked to skills development.

In our efforts to make rural development a reality, we have developed the
framework for comprehensive rural development. This has been shared with
all national sector departments, as well as provinces, through Minmec. The
key thrust of the framework is an integrated programme of rural
development, land reform and agrarian change.

In its quest to create vibrant, equitable and sustainable rural
communities, the department is implementing the CRDP in several wards
across the country. Since the launch of the first pilot site by the
President of the Republic in Muyexe, Giyani, Limpopo province, the
department has expanded the implementation of the CRDP and is currently
working in 21 wards across the country. This work will be rolled out to 160
additional wards by 2014, as stated by the President. We have adopted all
the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programmes across the country,
that is the ISRDP nodes, and have incorporated the lessons learnt from them
into the CRDP.

As from 1 April 2010, the War on Poverty programme, which has prioritised
1 128 wards over the next MTSF period, has been relocated from the
Presidency to the department. During this period, we have also been working
on building the institutional capacity of the department to deliver
effectively on these mandates. A new organogram has already been approved
by the Minister for the Public Service and Administration, as well as the
National Treasury. The department is currently in the process of recruiting
the required capacity. As promised during my maiden Budget Vote speech last
year, the postsettlement support strategy has been strengthened and
properly capacitated with a new chief directorate and a trading account
unit at head office, as well as more than 100 employees across the country.


Realising that we cannot do this alone, partnerships have been developed
with tertiary and research institutions, as well as the department of
Higher Education and Training. An overview of the department’s overall
performance has been completed and has guided the development of certain
short- and medium-term strategic and operational remedies.

Of importance is that in each area where the CRDP is being implemented, a
new vibrancy has been created around working together, involving
communities, the three spheres of government and the private sector. This
has enabled us to mobilise resources from all sectors of government to
ensure delivery. An inclusive CRDP stakeholder participation model has been
developed with the council of stakeholders functioning as a planning,
implementation and monitoring mechanism. Communities themselves have become
central to their own development. We have, through the work undertaken at
the CRDP sites and in conjunction with the national, provincial and local
government, erected infrastructure such as housing, water, sanitation,
agricultural inputs, community halls, multipurpose centres, fencing,
renovation of schools and clinics, and much more.

Simultaneous with the implementation of these different projects, we have
been piloting a job creation and skills development model. Professional
support is ably provided by the IDT, Independent Development Trust, in this
regard.

One of our key responsibilities is the revitalisation of small rural towns
as they act as catalysts for job creation and skills training in the rural
and peri-urban areas. This will be achieved by interfacing rural and peri-
urban areas through infrastructure development, initiatives to meet basic
human needs, enterprise development, agro-village industries and credit
facilities. Key drivers in this regard will be water services, energy,
sanitation, the communication system and human skills. The department will
continue to play its part in the local government turnaround strategy by
providing support to municipalities in the compilation of spatial
development frameworks.

We are driven by the strategy of putting one job in every household. From
the CRDP entry point of mobilising and organising rural people, we build
unemployed people’s skills, particularly the youth, and unleash them in
their own communities to do decent work. The hon members who are close to
sites in this regard would probably have seen this. We have entered into
strategic partnerships with the Department of Higher Education and
Training, FET colleges, HSRC and universities of technology in this regard.
The HSRC is developing training modules for use in intensive preparations
of young people to run their own enterprises so that they can create
sustainable jobs in their own communities. We are focused on transforming
them from being job seekers into becoming job creators to break the cycle
of dependency on social grants.

The ANC’s 52nd national conference in 2007 resolved, among other things,
that the government should establish an appropriate institution with the
resources and authority to drive and co-ordinate an integrated programme of
rural development, land reform and agrarian change. The policy and
legislation for the envisaged
rural development agency is receiving increasing attention and shall be
finalised by May 2012.

The challenges in our current service delivery model and fiscal constraints
have compelled us to review our approach relating to 1and redistribution.
The following principles will underpin our new approach towards sustainable
land reform: the deracialisation of the rural economy for shared and
sustained growth; democratic and equitable land allocation and use across
gender, race and class; and, finally, strict production discipline for
guaranteed national food security.

With regard to the land tenure system, we have introduced new proposals. In
the Green Paper on rural development and land reform, we propose that for
South Africa to achieve equitable access to land and sustainable land use,
the current land tenure system must be overhauled. In this regard, we
propose a three-tier land tenure system, namely introducing leasehold
tenure on state land, introducing freehold with limited extent for private
land and foreign ownership should be under precarious tenure. The above
system will be based on a categorisation model informed by land-use needs
at the level of household, smallholder, medium-scale and large-scale
commercial farming.

To address the institutional weaknesses in land management policy and
legislation alluded to earlier, there is a need for a land management
commission that will be autonomous, but not independent of the Ministry; be
accountable, transparent and professional; and have the powers to subpoena,
inquire on own volition or at the instance of interested parties, verify
and validate title deeds, demand declaration of landholdings and grant
amnesty and cause individuals and entities to be prosecuted. The state
shall have the first right of refusal on all land sales. This is
fundamental for establishing and maintaining the integrity of our national
heritage and asset, which is land.

To respond to the challenges of the collapsing land reform projects and
defunct irrigation schemes in the former homelands in particular, we have
introduced a new programme called recapitalisation and development. The
objectives of this programme are to increase production, guarantee food
security, graduate small farmers into commercial farmers, and create
employment opportunities within the agricultural sector. The core
principles of the programme are mentorship, comanagement and share equity.

To implement this programme, we have taken a decision to allocate 25% of
our baseline land acquisition budget. This amounts to R900 million for the
current financial year. The centrality of the public-private partnerships
in the recapitalisation and development programme cannot be overemphasised.
We are encouraged that organised agriculture has fully embraced this
strategic intervention.

While we are in the process of developing legislation linked to the Green
Paper, it is imperative that we find immediate mechanisms to respond to the
plight of farm workers and farm dwellers as was enjoined on us by the
President during the state of the nation address last year.

We will introduce a Land Tenure Security Bill which will repeal the
Extension of Security of Tenure Act, as well as the Land Reform (Labour
Tenants) Act. This Bill will be informed by the following objectives:
firstly, to protect the relative rights of farm workers, farm dwellers and
landowners; secondly, to enhance the tenure rights of farm dwellers; and,
thirdly, to ensure food security through sustained production discipline.

I am pleased to announce that over the past few months the department has
been focusing on the development of a Green Paper on agrarian
transformation, rural development and land reform, which will articulate
and elaborate on some of the measures mentioned above. It will culminate
into a new land policy framework and omnibus legislation, which should be a
consolidation of all land-related laws. The Green Paper will soon be
presented to Cabinet for consideration, and the plan is to submit it to
Parliament during the course of this year.
In conclusion, the President of the Republic entrusted us with the mandate
of rural development and land reform. He entrusted us with the future of
South Africa’s poorest of the poor. As part of a responsive and responsible
government, we shall implement policy that will create a better life for
all rural communities. We will work together, and we will achieve these
goals together.

The President enjoined us to make this the year of action. We are ensuring
that the department is properly orientated and adequately capacitated to
give effect to the President’s call. The time for rural development is now
and not tomorrow. This is the time for rural people to experience the
desired change which some of us have been talking about. Let us all be the
agents of that change. I thank you, hon Deputy Chair. [Applause.]

Mrs A N D QIKANI: Deputy Chairperson, I want to start by thanking the
Minister, the Deputy Minister and the director-general for always making
themselves available to attend our meetings. The Select Committee on Land
and Environmental Affairs has so far always had a good collaboration with
the department and, more specifically, Minister, your staff always sends in
documents in good time so that members can interrogate them and have good
discussions during our meetings. Thank you for facilitating our oversight
over your department.

Minister, your department has a mammoth task. The implementation of the
CRDP is seen as the main tool to address the needs of the rural
marginalised communities. It is also a great achievement for the
administration. In the 2010 state of the nation address and during the
Minister of Finance’s Budget Speech, rural development, linked to land
reform and food security, emerged as one of the five key government
priorities for the year. Since the majority of the poor in the country are
in rural areas, it makes sense that rural development emerged as a key
government strategy to fight poverty and to ensure a better life for all
South Africans.

The aim for rural development is to enable the rural poor to take charge of
their destiny by creating sustainable rural livelihoods through optimal
land use and the management of natural resources. The main issues
identified for the department in the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework,
MTEF, include sustainable land reform, food security for all, rural
development and sustainable livelihoods and job creation and skills
training, including a job-creation model.

Underpinning the above-mentioned outputs is a focus on creating sustainable
rural livelihoods and improving food security. This implies a shift of
focus from land delivery, as was the case in previous financial years,
where there was much focus on meeting the targets of land delivery while
ignoring postsettlement support. This is evident in the fact that there was
no mention of fast-tracking land delivery and finalising land claims in the
2010 state of the nation address or the Budget Speech.

In the 2010-11 financial year, the intention of government is to have a
balance between land delivery and postsettlement support to address the
challenge of poverty and food insecurity. The focus is to recapitalise
struggling commercial farms that have been transferred to emerging farmers.
In March this year, the Minister confirmed that the recapitalisation of 200
nonproductive commercial farms and the taking over of farms that are not in
use is aligned with the government’s new approach to land reform.

Furthermore, the department aims to overhaul the land policy and
legislation in order to facilitate sustainable land reform. These
initiatives are fully supported. As our people have been landless for far
too long, we need to speed up delivery in this regard.

It is clear from the vast mandate of the department that various challenges
inhibit the department from implementing its programmes. Comrades, this is
the time for proper integration of programmes of various departments so
that we can do more together. In line with the objective of creating
sustainable rural livelihoods and a better life for all, the Minister of
Finance, in his Budget Speech, alluded to the fact that rural development
has been identified as an important area that needs more spending and co-
ordination.

In the 2010-11 budget, an additional allocation of R860 million is provided
for improving the quality of life within rural communities and broadening
the base of agricultural production. In addition, a special allocation of
R1,2 billion for the rural household infrastructure grant to support rural
communities, especially for on-site water and sanitation infrastructure,
was made to cover the 2010 Medium-Term Expenditure Framework.

However, this allocation is located in the Department of Human Settlements
as the role of providing water and sanitation has been shifted from the
Department of Water Affairs to the Department of Human Settlements. This
implies that the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform has to
work closely with the Department of Human Settlements, other departments
and other spheres of government to ensure provision of water and sanitation
in rural areas, and to deliver on the rural development mandate.

From the budget portion, the department has been allocated a budget of
R6,7 billion for 2010-11, which shows a slight increase from the R6,4
billion allocated in 2009-10. In nominal terms, the budget for the
department increased slightly by 5,8% between the 2009-2010 and 2010-11
financial years, while, in real terms, it decreased by 0,89%. The slight
increase is driven by the significant increase in the budget for the land
reform programme, whilst the budget for the other four programmes declined.
The slight increase in the budget allocation for the department for 2010-11
is of serious concern, considering the fact that rural development and land
reform is one of government’s five key priorities for the medium term.

Furthermore, the fact that the budget allocation for the department makes
up, by Vote, only 1,47% of the total government appropriation is not in
line with prioritising rural development at a national level. One would
have expected the budget for the department to increase drastically in
order to be able to cover previous commitments as well as demands due to
the expansion of the mandate of the department.

Minister, and Deputy Minister, other areas that your department needs to
address include the frustration experienced by land claimants who await
agricultural support and extension services. The Select Committee on Land
and Environmental Affairs has visited far too many restored farms that are
lying idle after millions of rands of government funds have been spent in
the restitution process. In a country that needs to increase agricultural
productivity, Minister, we need to find solutions quickly.

Mphathiswa, ikomiti ibikhe yaphuma yaya kwelaseMpuma Koloni. Ukusuka kwayo
eQamata neziphaluka zayo, iye yayakubona iLubisi Dam. Into ethe yayibona
endleleni, lukhukhuliso lomhlaba olumangalisayo. Kubonakala ukuba abantu
baza kuhlala ezindongeni. Ngoko ke ndicinga ukuba isebe lakho likhe
likhawuleze ukujonga ezi ndawo okanye libuze kuthi thina bantu bamane
bengena bephuma kwezi ndawo ngelokukhangela ukuba zeziphi na iindawo
esizibona zikwimeko embi. Loo nto ingalinceda isebe.

Ukuba siyajonga phaya, kukho amahlathi, abantu abahlelanga kakuhle kwaye
nemigaqo ayikho. Eli sebe lakho kufuneka libhinqele phezulu oko mgqakhwe
eleqwa ekwendeni. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Minister, the select committee paid a visit to the Eastern Cape. The
select committee noticed severe soil erosion on their way to Lubisi Dam
from Qamata and surrounding areas and the erosion is so extensive that
residents could end up living in the dongas. I therefore think that your
department should look at these areas immediately or else consult with us,
the people who pay frequent visits to these areas, on a mission to find out
which areas are in a bad condition. That will help the department.

If you look at these places you will notice that there are forests, the
conditions under which people live are not right and the roads are
terrible. This department needs to pull up its socks in terms of a work
ethic and standards as of yesterday.]

Finally, comrades, I leave you with this quote:


   The Comprehensive Rural Development Programme is our national collective
   strategy in our joint fight against poverty, hunger, unemployment and
   lack of development in our rural areas. It is an embodiment of our
   unshaken commitment that we shall not rest in our drive to eradicate
   poverty.

These are the words of our President, spoken at the launch of the programme
in Giyani, Limpopo, on 17 August 2009. The Select Committee on Land and
Environmental Affairs supports the budget for the Department of Rural
Development and Land Reform – Vote No 32. I thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mrs N W Magadla): Hon Chairperson, hon Minister,
Deputy Minister, MECs present, members of the House, distinguished guests,
let me first start by thanking the Minister and the Deputy Minister for
participating in the NCOP Taking Parliament to the People programme in
Limpopo in March. We appreciate the commitment you have shown and the work
that you are doing.

I would like to reassure you that we will do our best to ensure that you
have the resources you need to do your work. We will also continue to
engage all relevant role-players to join in ensuring that we improve the
living conditions of our people, especially in rural areas. To this end,
the Chairperson of the NCOP will be convening a planning meeting in
Polokwane this weekend with a view to facilitating oversight on commitments
made during our visit to the Greater Sekhukhune district in March. We will
also be engaging the national departments so that the provincial and local
governments are assisted to respond to the expressed needs of the Limpopo
people.

During the fourth term of our Parliament, we have committed ourselves to
ensuring that we play a significant and clear role in promoting the
principles of co-operative government and intergovernmental relations.

Rural development and land reform, which is one of the priorities of
government, is indeed on our own priority list when it comes to our
oversight work. By the end of this term, we would like to see a marked
improvement in how government responds to developmental challenges in rural
areas. This is important because we need to stop many of our people moving
from rural to urban areas only to realise that they do not have the skills
to participate in the urban economic life.

On 13 April 2010, as the committee, we received briefings from the
Department of Rural Development and Land Reform on its policy and Budget
Vote No 32. The key objective of the department is the achievement of
vibrant and sustainable rural communities. As the committee, we will be
monitoring, among other things, the Comprehensive Rural Development
Programme, which is an important intervention towards the realisation of
the department’s objective.

Minister, we believe that the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme
should include, but not be limited to the following: the improvement of
economic infrastructure; the development of access roads in rural areas;
fencing for agriculture, including community gardens for the purpose of
securing food production; and ensuring that every family has food.

Informed by the mandate of the ANC obtained during the national and
provincial elections last year, we have emphasised, through the committee,
the fact that the department needs to support the development of
sustainable and vibrant rural communities with all the amenities necessary
to support the quality of life in a rural area.

The committee also believes that an ideal rural community must have access
to water, electricity, irrigation schemes, information and communications
technology, or ICT, systems, business centres, schools, adult basic
education and training, or Abet, centres, libraries, clinics, community
halls and sports facilities. It is a fact that many of our rural villages
today do not have many of these amenities. In fact, these facilities are
associated with urban life and not with the needs of the people,
irrespective of where they reside. A well-known farmer and philosopher once
said:

   If the land is to be used well, we must have people on the land who know
   it well, who know how to use it well, have time to use it well, and are
   able to afford to use it well.

This teaches us about the comprehensive nature of land and agrarian reform
as we pursue it in South Africa. Therefore, with rural development, the
exodus to cities will come to an end as rural areas will be self-
sustaining.

Land is central to the implementation of government’s comprehensive rural
development strategy. In this context, allow me to remind the Minister that
the issue of land claims is still a challenge to the development of the
Greater Sekhukhune district. This needs our undivided and collective
attention.

In conclusion, I want to thank the Minister for the wonderful work that he
has done for the Sisonke District Municipality in my province, KwaZulu-
Natal, by assisting the community during the Sisonke district pilot project
on rural development. Your assistance has contributed immensely to better
equip the community of the Sisonke District for rural development. I have
no doubt that the people of Sisonke will be able to handle matters
differently as they go forward in fostering rural development as the key
element of all strategies to combat poverty.

Chairperson, when we talk about rural development, we are referring to
rural communities that were always left behind with no focus. We urge an
urgent and quick response to our concerns. The ANC supports the Budget Vote
of the department. I thank you.

Mr D A WORTH: Hon House Chairperson, hon Minster, MECs present, hon
members, firstly, it would be remiss of me not to thank the department for
their presentations, to our committee as well.

Rural development has moved up on the government’s agenda, hence the
establishment of a dedicated Ministry. In the state of the nation address,
the President announced rural development and land reform as one of the
government’s top five priorities. This department states that its purpose
is to “initiate, facilitate, co-ordinate and catalyse the implementation of
a Comprehensive Rural Development Programme that leads to sustainable and
vibrant rural communities”. Only some R1,568 billion has been allocated to
the land restitution programme, of which R800 million has been used to
purchase farms.

Many farmers and land claimants are going to court to force the department
to honour the commitments of signed contracts to purchase land. In the
interim, much productive land is not farmed, which South Africa can ill
afford. By the Minister’s own admission, some 90% of land reform projects
have failed due to the lack of postsettlement support to the land reform
beneficiaries. What is required is for government to commit the necessary
resources to finance land reform and to ensure that there is sufficient
capacity within the state to manage the process.

Some of the concerns raised by the committee are the unacceptably high
vacancy rate in the department; the continued use of external consultants;
the inability of the Auditor-General to audit receivable revenue; and a
lack of effective deed registration, which prevented the department from
finalising the asset register of all state-owned land.

It was highlighted that there was a need to integrate land reform and
agricultural support programmes - by which the success of these programmes
will be measured - by an increased amount of small-scale farmers that
become economically viable. The fact that the department will only focus on
150 wards through the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme is of
concern as the budget allocated is only a fraction of what was requested
from Treasury. The department must then obtain co-operation with other
stakeholders such as the Departments of Social Development, Health, Home
Affairs, Transport, Water Affairs, etc. Funds will have to be pooled to
address competencies within the selected area.

More than a third of South Africa’s population is found in rural areas, but
agriculture accounts for only 10% of employment. Migration to urban and
metro areas is likely to continue for the foreseeable future. Weak
infrastructure, combined with deteriorating rail and roads in many farm
areas, raises production costs and limits market access. This, in turn,
reduces productivity. This means that users cannot afford to contribute
much towards infrastructure investments. Poor social infrastructure means
lower skills and health levels.

The Minister has already submitted a Green Paper to Cabinet with regard, as
he has alluded, to the government’s new approach to land reform, including
alternatives to the willing-buyer, willing-seller principle. The Minister
of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries has alluded to the fact that
government is looking into a share scheme with the aim of reaching land
reform targets. The uncertainty and confusion created by these various
statements is not good for agricultural production and will scare off
future investments.

The DA is in full support of reversing the effects of past land
dispossession, but the process must not undermine property rights. This
would ultimately destroy the free-market system. Ignoring the basic
principle will result in the total collapse of food production and the
banking system. According to a written reply to a question from the
Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, some 98 farms in the Free
State province alone purchased through the Land Bank are unproductive, and
if we expand that to the other eight provinces, we then realise what we are
talking about. Small agricultural units operate on minimal net profit
margins with the result that small and medium commercial farmers are in no
position to divide income between more shareholders.

The DA proposes that the government first implements a successful model
based on the partnership and mentorship to which the Minister has alluded
for the failed farms under the land restitution process before risking the
successful productive farms and food security. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G VAN RENSBURG (Western Cape): Chair, hon Minister, Deputy  Minister,  my
friendly colleague from Gauteng and members, it is with  a  great  sense  of
urgency that I am standing here today.  Issues  of  land  reform  and  rural
development  are  very  serious  matters  as  they  hold  the  potential  to
fundamentally change the future of this country. At  the  same  time,  I  am
very excited about the possibilities of land reform  and  rural  development
and what they hold for our country.

It is very important to know and reflect on  the  history  of  our  country.
Grave injustices were committed in the past, and we need  to  keep  that  in
mind when we plan for the future. Sixteen years have  come  and  gone  since
our first democratically elected government took charge of South Africa.  We
have experienced 16 years of land  reform  which  has  left  South  Africans
disillusioned.

This is  not  your  fault,  Minister;  perhaps  it  is  the  fault  of  your
predecessors. But now you have to solve this problem. Rural  restitution  of
land is not happening. Settling restitution with cash payments is  defeating
the very purpose of its inception in the  first  place.  Redistribution  has
ground to a halt; tenure reform is  not  happening.  This  is  creating  the
perception that we have become stuck in the past. We have  to  move  to  the
future now.

People have been quick to blame the willing-buyer,  willing-seller  approach
as the root cause of land reform failure. Commercial farmers are accused  of
inflating land prices. Farmers are accused of blackmailing land reform.  But
commercial farmers in the Western Cape are no longer only white.  A  blanket
accusation against commercial farmers is no longer valid.

Solving this problem  does  not  lie  in  a  three-tier  property  ownership
system. Such a system is something of vast complexity that  poses  the  risk
of disinvestment in agriculture and, ultimately, national food security.

Challenges posed by  land  reform  and  rural  development  are  huge.  When
confronted with challenges of this magnitude, it is possible and only  human
to overlook the simple and obvious solutions right in  front  of  our  eyes.
Land reform in South Africa does not need more legislation. After 16  years,
we do not need yet another land analysis or more research reports that  will
go into great length about inequalities  that  permeate  land  ownership  in
South Africa. We do not need to  resort  to  repossession  of  land  or  new
repossession legislation. We do not need more levels of  bureaucracy  in  an
attempt to solve the problem.

The answer is right here.  Together  with  commercial  agriculture,  we  can
drive land  reform  in  South  Africa.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  commercial
agriculture wants to assist us in driving land reform in South Africa  -  if
only government could give them the opportunity to do so.  Mr  Nkwinti,  you
would be surprised to what extent South Africans  of  colonial  lineage  are
sensitive to our country’s history. You might also be  pleasantly  surprised
with the commitment that these very same people have to the future of  South
Africa. All South Africans realise the importance of land reform.

Dit is belangrik dat ons dit so gou moontlik en so suksesvol moontlik  begin
doen. [It is important that we start doing it as soon  as  possible  and  as
effectively as possible.]

If we can allow commercial agriculture to assist us, Minister  Nkwinti  will
benefit from the positive results. The worst thing that we can do  regarding
land reform in South Africa is to continue postponing it.

I will support any effort to increase the percentage of the national  Budget
that is allocated towards rural development and land  reform.  The  task  is
too important for the amount being allocated.

Minister, u weet dat ek u ten volle steun en u sal help  dat  ons  landelike
ontwikkeling in die Wes-Kaap van die grond af kry. [Minister, you know  that
you have my full support, and I will assist you  to  get  rural  development
off the ground in the Western Cape.]

I want to urge the Minister not to restrict  new  farmers  to  small  plots.
Let’s rather plan to allow new farmers to progress  from  being  subsistence
farmers to being smallholder farmers and then to being  commercial  farmers,
as soon as possible.

Kom ons kyk hoe vinnig ons hulle deur die proses kan kry, sodat hulle  groot
kommersiële boere kan word. [Let’s see how quickly we can get  them  through
the process in order for them to become large commercial farmers.]

The agricultural world  is  moving  towards  an  ever-decreasing  number  of
farmers on increasingly larger farms.  We  cannot  ignore  these  realities.
Larger commercial farms are producing food  in  an  efficient  manner  while
creating valuable job opportunities. Commercial agriculture links  with  the
rest of the economy. A farm worker on a commercial farm can progress with  a
career path in marketing, finance or much more.
Op  ’n  groot  plaas  dra  ’n  plaaswerker  nie  meer  net  ’n  werkpak   en
rubberstewels  nie.  Daar  het  ons  plaaswerkers   in   seniorbestuur,   in
middelbestuur en in die bemarking in Europa, of waar dit ook  al  mag  wees.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[On large farms farm workers do  not  necessarily  just  wear  overalls  and
rubber boots anymore.  On  these  farms  we  have  farm  workers  in  senior
management, and middle management, as well as in  marketing  in  Europe,  or
wherever it may be.]

I have committed the Western Cape to a 60% land reform success  rate  within
the  next  five  years.  We  will  achieve   that   through   public-private
partnerships with various commodity organisations. We  are  in  an  advanced
phase of establishing 1 000  hectares  of  deciduous  fruit  trees  for  new
farmers. The project  is  being  funded  on  a  rand-for-rand  basis  by  my
department and the relevant commodity  organisation.  In  this  case  it  is
Hortgro. In a similar manner, we are working with dairy, grain,  vegetables,
wine and livestock industries in establishing new farmers on  a  sustainable
basis.

I handed a community farm over to its rightful  owners  last  night  in  the
Southern Cape. It is the Jakkalskraal farm,  which  belongs  to  the  Griqua
people. They have built up their own  successful  farm  over  the  past  few
years, with the assistance of the Western Cape department of agriculture  in
Casidra. They make a profit and plough this profit back into the  community.

Daar is een ding van daardie  gemeenskap:  hulle  werk  saam  en  hulle  vat
hande. Hulle trek nie dwars  nie.  Ons  het  ’n  groot  suksesverhaal  daar.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[There is one thing about  that  community,  and  that  is  that  they  work
together and join hands. They are not unreasonable. We have a major  success
story there.]

The Western Cape has shown that equity share schemes can  work  as  a  model
for land reform. This  approach  allows  for  proven  managerial  skills  to
remain in a business. This helps to  ensure  future  success.  At  the  same
time, vital food security is retained. All this happens while also  creating
wealth for beneficiaries. This model can be successful in the rest of  South
Africa as well.  I  know  that  commercial  farmers  will  give  their  full
support. It is up to the government to show that it is  serious  about  land
reform and its successful conclusion.

Minister Nkwinti, use the goodwill of the people who know  how  to  farm  to
help create a country where everybody has  access  to  land.  I  thank  you.
[Applause.]

Mr Z MLENZANA: Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister, hon MECs here
present, hon members, to those who know and understand whose sons and
daughters we are, it will not be amazing when I, on behalf of Cope, support
this budget.
Ndilandela ke ezinyaweni zikanyawontle uMfundis’ uDandala ... [I’m
following in Rev Dandala’s footsteps ...]

... my leader, who has, without reservation, supported this budget.

To us, as Cope, this department is meant to deal with economic development
in rural areas, where we would see the establishment of agri-industries, co-
ops and local markets in rural settings.

The empowerment of rural people and communities, especially women and the
youth, with regard to training them in technical skills such that they are
able to deal with animal diseases, natural disasters, hunger and food
security, should be a priority. Hence we must jointly stop the selling out
or the unilateral outsourcing of schemes like the Ncora Irrigation Scheme
in the Eastern Cape.

We also want to appeal to the Minister to focus, in an integrated approach,
on the implementation of the rural transport development Programme. I
advise, hon Minister, that this will succeed only if we reclassify and
declassify rural roads.

Kuphele le nto yokuba kuthiwe kukho imigwaqo yesizwe, eyephondo kunye
neyoorhulumente basekhaya. [Eliminate the idea of national, provincial and
local government roads.]

In conclusion, please agree with me when I say that not much has been done
on land reform and the restitution of land rights. We hope and pray that
since this budget will be your first tool of trade, hon Minister, you will
push for the settlement of all outstanding claims. Please remember ...

... Tat’ uMnqarhwane, ukuba basilindile kwaMajola ePort St Johns ... [...
Mr Mnqarhwane, that they are waiting for us at kwaMajola, in Port St Johns
...]

... in the Eastern Cape. If one looks at this budget, one will see that it
is the Freedom Charter in action. [Interjections.]

I want to assure you, Mnqarhwane, that we are not in opposition to all the
good things that are done by the ruling party. Furthermore, we will not hug
and kiss reactionary elements that are still conservative and have
“verkrampte” [conservative] tendencies. At no stage shall we marry the AWB,
or Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging.

I also want to pronounce that we shall never be confused when it comes to
affirmative action and black economic empowerment. Those who came to Cope
with ulterior motives, both doors are open. They can come in through that
door and go out through the other. Cope will remain in place. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr R T MTHEMBU (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, Minister, Deputy Minister,
thank you very much for affording KwaZulu-Natal an opportunity to
participate in the debate on the Budget Vote of the national Department of
Rural Development and Land Reform introduced by the Minister, hon Gugile
Nkwinti. Let me congratulate the Minister for a comprehensive Budget Vote
speech on rural development, agrarian transformation and land reform.

Key to effective rural development is the meaningful involvement of rural
people and the understanding of current livelihoods. The acupuncture
principle will concentrate on what intervention will provide best value for
money, and the systems thinking will concentrate on asking ourselves what
this would look like in 20 years’ time.

The Minister has emphasised integration and ensuring that there is no
fragmentation or duplication. To respond to the Minister’s call in KwaZulu-
Natal, we have mainstreamed rural development in all government
departments, the provincial rural committee chaired by the director-general
in the province, departmental rural development committees and district
rural development forums.

Msinga has been pronounced as the pilot for KwaZulu-Natal. The chairperson,
Minister Gugile Nkwinti and the MEC visited the Msinga site to formally
pronounce this area the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme pilot
site in the province on 26 April 2010.
The pronouncement of the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme site
marked the commencement of the 100-day action plan leading to the launch of
the site by the President. Currently, the department is working closely
with the national Department of Rural Development and Land Reform and our
sister departments in the province on the Msinga site, as follows: We will
finalise household profiling by the end of May and data capturing and the
launch of the stakeholder council by the end of June. The Msinga and
Nkandla provincial task team is working hard to ensure the implementation
of the 100-day action plan.

The implementation of the Comprehensive Rural Development Programme will be
effective through joint planning, aligning and co-ordinating with
stakeholders to ensure holistic, integrated and coherent government
programmes through district municipalities in partnership with traditional
leaders.

The provincial cabinet approved an integrated rural development plan. The
thrust of the framework for rural development strategy is the importance of
aligning planning processes for different spheres of government, the
integration of departmental efforts and the involvement of people in their
own development and empowering the people to participate and own processes
of development to ensure sustainability.

The hon premier introduced the concept of district champions, making sure
that service delivery happens and is monitored at ward level. The premier
announced a provincial rural model in partnership with the Ngonyama Trust –
the one village, one product model. Amakhosi will identify 100 hectares and
link the produce to markets with a clearly defined value chain management
strategy.

The theme of the ANC January 8 Statement 2010 was “Working Together to
Speed Up Effective Service Delivery”. In his state of the nation address,
His Excellency President Jacob Zuma declared 2010 as a year of action. He
further said that we should work harder, faster and smarter. A large part
of the address was dedicated to agriculture and rural development, which is
an indication of the importance of agriculture and rural development.

His Majesty the King, in his address during the opening of the legislature,
stressed the importance of agriculture as a turnaround strategy for poverty
in rural areas and that people should not only be consumers, but also
producers.

What the Minister said will be done in the Budget Vote has already started,
and this will continue with great speed and dedication. Firstly, the One
Home, One Garden strategy was started and well received, and lessons have
been learned. We will assist in upscaling and improving the campaign. We
will also launch the One Church, One Garden strategy in September in
partnership with the religious community and the office of the premier.

Secondly, seed distribution will be upscaled, and the support to the
community will be strengthened.

Thirdly, subsistence farming has been provided to communities, but more
still needs to be done to increase participation.

Fourthly, support has been given to land reform farms through the
Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme.

Fifthly, markets for primary agricultural co-operatives were secured
through partnership with the Department of Health. More still needs to be
done in this financial year.

In the sixth place, communities are being built through social facilitation
and mobilisation, as well as technical and institutional capacity-building.


In the seventh place, strategic investment in the old and new social and
economic infrastructure has occurred.

Lastly, the revival of small towns linking to the growth path of the
province, in partnership with the Department of Co-operative Governance and
Traditional Affairs, acts as a catalyst for rural development.

We concur with the hon Minister when he says that rural development is
multifaceted and multidimensional. It is not only agriculture that is
involved in the rural development space, but also all provincial and
national government departments, as well as the private sector.

We would like the intervention of the Minister with regard to outstanding
land claims in the province being fast-tracked so that we can deliver to
our communities. The outstanding land claims are creating a problem in our
communities. We will appreciate his intervention in this process so that we
can go back to our communities and give them the right answer.

As a department we are taking the lead in the co-ordination and integration
of all rural development initiatives and programmes in the province, in
partnership with our national Department of Rural Development and Land
Reform. Partnerships are key to the success of an integrated development
strategy. A strong productive working relationship - horizontally and
vertically – is also important between rural communities and various
institutions and sectors, as well as local, provincial and national
government.

In conclusion, this year is the year of action. We need to roll up our
sleeves, dirty our hands and improve the lives of our rural communities.

Sithi phezu komkhono, masibuyisele emasimini. [The ploughing season is upon
us; let us go back to the fields.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Chair, hon Minister and hon members, the ID understands that
this new department faces the difficult task of trying to implement its new
plans against the backdrop of decreasing available finances. It is indeed
unfortunate that during the years when there was enough money, not enough
was done to support the beneficiaries of land reform.

The ID agrees that all transferred land must be used productively. We are
happy with the department’s recognition that the land reform process has
been flawed because redistributed land did not receive enough
postsettlement support. The ID remains concerned that land reform is being
put on hold and that we are getting conflicting signals as to how we are
going to deal with this issue going forward.

South Africa needs a clear direction on policy, together with achievable
targets. Minister, we also do not want to see the aspirations of the
landless being continuously dashed as they have been over the past 16
years. The proposal to make land a national asset in the upcoming Green
Paper must be carefully considered and debated.

The ID supports the second option - a review of current tenure policies and
legislation involving the current freehold title system and land ceilings
framework linked to the categorisation of farms. However, it would be wrong
to attempt to bring about land redress by simply amending the Constitution
due to government’s own failures of the past 16 years.

I would like to call on the Minister to ensure that there is a
Comprehensive Rural Development Programme that can help rural people gain
access to all basic services such as roads, electricity, health, quality
education, water and sanitation.

Dink u dit is regverdig om ons mense nie behoorlik te vergoed vir grond wat
vandag markwaarde het van miljoene rande nie? Ons mense is baie min
uitbetaal.

Hoekom kan ons mense nie reg vergoed word vir wat werklik hulle eiendom was
nie? Hoe lank moet ons mense wag vir die uitstaande eise? Sal hulle vergoed
word volgens markverwante pryse?

Ek hoop dat die Minister reg sal laat geskied. Ek hoop en vertrou dat die
plan en aksies wat die Minister het, uitgevoer sal word. Ons sal u steun,
omdat grondhervorming die hartklop van ons mense is.
Armoede kan ontmoedig word wanneer ons mense grondeienaars word met
dieselfde markwaarde. Hoekom moet die mense wat ons verdruk het en wat
voordeel getrek het deur die land te vat, weer voordeel trek deur miljoene
rande betaal te word? Dit bevorder nie demokrasie nie. Hulle het in die
eerste plek ons mense verneder en nou moet hulle weer vergoed word. Ons
ondersteun die begroting. Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Do you believe it is fair not to compensate our people properly for land
that today has a market value of millions of rand? Our people were paid
paltry sums.

Why should our people not be duly compensated for what was really their
property? How long must our people wait for the outstanding claims? Will
they be compensated at market-related prices?

I hope that the Minister will let justice prevail. I hope and trust that
the Minister’s plan of action will be implemented. We will support you,
because land reform is the heartbeat of our people.

The fight against poverty can be promoted when our people become owners of
land of the same market value. Why should the people who oppressed us and
who benefited by taking away the land, benefit once more by being paid
millions of rand? That does not promote democracy. It was they who
humiliated our people in the first place, and now they have to be
compensated once again. We support the budget. I thank you.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Chairperson, hon
members of the NCOP, our MECs present here, senior government officials,
ladies and gentlemen, it is indeed a great honour and privilege for us to
have this opportunity to come and share with the NCOP the vision of our
department and Ministry and the plans for contributing towards the
improvement of the quality of life of our people, especially those in the
rural areas.

Fourteen days ago, our new Ministry and Department of Rural Development and
Land Reform completed their first year of existence. The creation of this
department by the hon President, as announced on 11 May 2009, had been the
culmination of a process that started at the ANC conference in December
2007, when a very detailed resolution was adopted, outlining the challenges
of rural development. This was followed by the ANC election manifesto for
the 2009 general elections, which identified rural development and food
security as one of the top five priorities for the 2009-14 term if elected
to government. Of course, it is now common knowledge that the ANC was
returned to office by an overwhelming majority of South Africans in the
2009 general elections.

Today, as we stand in front of this honourable House, which is a vital link
between lawmakers at the national level and our masses in the provinces, we
are confident in saying that we understand our mandate and that we are
ready to discharge our responsibilities to the rural masses.

The mandate for this department has to do fundamentally with repairing the
damage caused by over three centuries of colonisation and apartheid. The
ANC Polokwane conference resolution captured this very succinctly when it
said:


   Colonisation and apartheid were rooted in the dispossession of the
   African people of their land, the destruction of African farming and the
   super-exploitation of wage labourers, including farm workers and their
   families. Poverty, inequality and joblessness are the consequence of
   centuries of underdevelopment and exploitation consciously perpetrated on
   the majority of the population, which had its most destructive and
   enduring impacts on rural South Africa. Consequently, the structural
   faults that characterised the apartheid rural economy remain with us
   today.

In charting the way forward, the conference drew a clear relationship
between improving the quality of life of the rural masses and addressing
the question of land dispossession by declaring:

   Rural development is a critical pillar of our struggle against
   unemployment, poverty and inequality.

The resolution also states that:

   A more equitable distribution of land is necessary both to undo the
   injustices of history as well as to ensure higher productivity, shared
   growth, employment and sustainable livelihoods.


In charting the way forward, the conference further declared that we should
—


... and resolved to —


   ... embark on an integrated programme of rural development, land reform,
   and agrarian change;

  ... accelerate the roll-out of rural infrastructure, particularly roads,
  but also other services including potable water, electricity and
  irrigation and ensuring in particular that the former Bantustan areas are
  properly provisioned with an infrastructure base for economic and social
  development.


There is also a need to improve the co-ordination and synergy between
departments and all levels of government to ensure an integrated approach
to land and rural development.

I thought it was important that as we are gathered here to discuss our
programme of action to address the expectations of our rural masses, we
must remember our mandate, which was endorsed actively by more than 12
million South Africans at the ballot boxes on 22 April 2009. It is
therefore quite clear that there is no question of us in the Ministry and
the department not knowing what the people out there expect from us.

We’ve gone a long way over the last 12 months in laying the foundation to
systematically reverse the damage caused by many centuries of rural
degradation and neglect. The Comprehensive Rural Development Programme,
which we conceptualised after our establishment, provides a very clear
vision and mission and an anchor strategy of agrarian reform for us to take
this task forward.

The Comprehensive Rural Development Programme speaks to the key tenets of
our resolutions and our election manifesto that rural development should
speak to poverty eradication, provision of employment opportunities,
reduction of inequality and support for sustainable livelihoods. Our
Comprehensive Rural Development Programme also speaks to the required roll-
out of rural infrastructure, as outlined in our resolution.

Our decision to embark on the first pilot project in Giyani municipality,
Limpopo, within a few months of establishment, which was launched by the
President within his first 100 days in office, provides us with invaluable
experience in terms of rolling out the Comprehensive Rural Development
Programme. Up to now, this project, with its many challenges - not least of
which is the scarcity of water - provides inspirational motivation to all
of us involved in this mammoth task in all government departments which are
involved in Limpopo, and it also provides valuable experience for other
role-players, both in government and in the private sector.

The other subsequent pilot projects in seven other provinces also provide a
valuable mix of experiences, with each one of them having their own unique
challenges and opportunities; from the programme we’ve launched in
Riemvasmaak in the Northern Cape, to Mkhondo in Mpumalanga, to Diyatalawa
and Makgolokweng in the Free State, and the North West, the Eastern Cape
and Dysselsdorp in the Western Cape province. Experiences from these
projects make us better prepared for a more extensive roll-out during the
course of this financial year and beyond, as spelled out by the President
in his state of the nation address in February this year.

The Comprehensive Rural Development Programme provides a perfect platform
to practise our 2009 election motto, “Working together we can do more”. The
success of this programme hinges heavily on the ability to bring together
various role-players in the three spheres of government, various state
entities, the private sector, NGOs and community structures. It is for this
reason that we place a lot of emphasis on our implementation in
strengthening institutional governance and social cohesion in communities
where we are already operational.

The Comprehensive Rural Development Programme also provides an excellent
opportunity to contribute towards reducing unemployment, especially amongst
the young people. The implementation of all the projects, be it social
facilitation, community profiling, or the laying out of infrastructure such
as water, electricity, clinics and schools, ICT, early childhood
development and many other infrastructural projects, provides a major
opportunity for our young people to learn skills, which can result in
medium- to long-term job opportunities and also an ability to start their
own businesses.

From an economic point of view, we are very clear also that the central
anchor of this economic activity is agrarian transformation. We want to
make sure that, increasingly, most of our rural people should not be
dependent on social grants.

We’ve gone a long way in reorganising our department to meet the challenges
of this new mandate. The process of the retraining of staff and recruitment
of new staff where skills cannot be found in-house is ongoing. We also
value very highly the support, the co-operation and the enthusiasm of our
premiers in all provinces, MECs, mayors and councillors, which we have
experienced over the last 12 months. This has been very encouraging.

The twin challenges of our mandate - that of acceleration of land reform -
have been a major learning curve over the last 12 months. As we appreciate
the extent to which land dispossession has been a cornerstone of
colonisation and apartheid oppression, as noted in our Polokwane
resolution, the redress of this invokes a lot of passion and emotions from
South Africans, depending on the standpoint they come from. Those who were
beneficiaries of the old order want to protect what they have, whilst those
who were victims of colonisation and apartheid feel that the pace of
redress is rather slow. It is for this reason that land reform has
dominated the media space with regard to our department over the last 12
months of our work.

A lot of progress has been made in the restitution of our ancestral land to
claimants, with up to 96% of such claims already concluded. The remaining
4% is a mixture of court challenges, overlapping claims and complex and
expensive claims on conservation land, forestry land, sugar-cane farms, and
land used for mining operations and other such enterprises. We have to
navigate very carefully in many of these situations to make sure that the
public funds used to acquire such properties are indeed to the long-term
benefit of the beneficiaries.

A lot of progress has also been made in implementing various schemes for
land redistribution to aspirant black farmers. Cumulatively, up to
5,9 million hectares of land have been transferred to new black
beneficiaries over the last 15 years. The reality we have been confronting,
however, as the Minister has already indicated, is that quite a lot of
these farms have not been used productively. It is for this reason that
we’ve made a decisive intervention to invest in the recapitalisation of
such farms. It is clear that if we want to adequately address this
challenge, more resources will need to be allocated to our department.

In going forward, we will up the pace in making sure that there is a
qualitative and quantitative acceleration of all the programmes meant to
improve the quality of life of our rural people, who are the backbone of
our democracy. With the experience of 16 years of democratic governance and
one year of this administration, we believe it is high time we review
comprehensively the policy framework of our land reform strategy, which is
critical for a lasting, equitable rural development; therefore, as
announced by the Minister, the introduction of the Green Paper, which will
be tabled soon.

We believe that together we must find solutions for the creation of a truly
inclusive, nonracial, democratic, nonsexist and prosperous South Africa. We
must soon reach a situation where we can confidently say that we can
respond to the battle cry of many years of struggle which said, “Mayibuye
iAfrika” [Let Africa return], and that we can confidently reply to our
people that, “Ibuyile iAfrika” [Africa has returned].
I believe that at the present moment we are only able to say so in hushed
tones, because there are many of our people who will argue that “Ayikabuyi
iAfrika” [Africa had not returned].

The Green Paper process therefore will provide a platform for all South
Africans who love and cherish the country to engage in a dialogue, which
will make us get closer to a stage where the majority of our people will
agree and say indeed, “Ibuyile iAfrika” [Africa has returned].

I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

UMntwana M M M ZULU: Sihlalo, mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe nePhini lakho,
oNgqongqoshe abamele izifundazwe, kulo Mnyango omusha ngithi ngiyazi ukuthi
ubhekene  nezinselelo ezinqala ngokuthi yonke iMinyango ingenelela kuwe
njengoba uphathiswe inhlabathi nje.

Ngabuka uhlelo lwakho lokusebenza  ngabona ukuthi okunye uyakwazi
ukukufeza. Ngqongqoshe kulesiya siFundazwe engisuka kuso seNkosi uDinizulu
uma ngibheka amaphesenti ayi-13 womhlaba, usaphethwe ngabamnyama kodwa
wonke lo omningi uma siyakumaphesenti angama-87 ulokhu ukwezinye izandla.
Ngakho-ke Ngqongqoshe kulapho lakufanele ubone khona  ukuthi abantu bakithi
basese osizini lokungabi nawo umhlaba.

Ngiyazi ukuthi uphathiswe uMnyango obalulekile nakuba  kuthiwa Isabiwomali
Saphakathi Nonyaka sakho sangonyaka odlule sasisikhulu, kodwa kwasikhalisa
thina njengeqembu leNkatha ukuba ucoshe imali eyizigidi ezingama-R256
kuphela. Kodwa ngiyabona  ukuthi mhlambe Umcwaningi mabhuku-Jikelele
akacabanganga ukuthi leziFundazwe eziyisishiyagalolunye zibhekene nawe
ngqo.

Ngiyazi ukuthi kukhona umhlaba okuthiwa uhlezi kithi njengabaholi
bomdabu,kodwalawa madolojana amancane, nomasipala abancane bayaye babe
nenkinga enkulu ngoba ezindaweni ezinjengalaphaya ekhaya KwaNongoma,
izinduna zezigodi ziyaye zibambise abantu isigxobo khona eduze nedolobha
nje. Lezizinto ezinje kufanele nizibheke Nqgongqoshe, ukuthi kungeziwa
njani ukuthi kuhlukaniswe omasipala basemakhaya nezindawo zamakhosi ukuze
abantu bakwazi ukusizakale na. Uma ubheka idolojana elingangoKwaNongoma,
oSuthu, naKwaMandlakazi lawo madolobha awanazo izindlela zokuthuthuka
nanoma ngaluphi usuku ngoba izinduna zicabanga ngeyazo imicabango
ngingakugxeki-ke lokho.

Izinselelo onazo, izinselelo okufunele ubhekane nazo njengendoda. Ngicela
ukuthi ubheke ukuthi uzokwenza njani kodwa ngiyafisa ukuthi uhulumeni
awuthathele phezulu lo Mnyango wakho, ngoba ubaluleke kunayo yonke
iMinyango ekhona ngoba inhlabathi yingubo yethu yokulala. Inhlabathi
sithola  ukudla kuyo uqobo.

Ngaleyo ndlela njengeqembu le Nkatha isabiwomali sakho siyasesekela noma
imali incanyana kodwa kuyofuneka ubheke ezinhlelweni zakhona ukuthi abantu
bakithi basizakala kanjani ukuba bathole inhlabathi. Ngiyabonga.
(Translation of isiZulu speech follows.)

[Prince M M M ZULU: Chairperson, hon Minister as well as your Deputy and
the MECs representing the provinces, I know that this new department is
facing major challenges because others are dependent on it as it deals with
land.

I looked at your programme of action and noted that you were able to
resolve other issues. Hon Minister, in iNkosi Dinizulu’s province, where I
come from, when I look at the percentage of the land, I find that only 13
per cent is in the hands of black people but the other large stretch of
land - 87 per cent of it - is still in the hands of other people. That is
where you are supposed to realise, hon Minister, that our people are still
languishing in poverty for they do not have land.

I know that you are heading an important department and although it was
said that your mid-term budget allocation for last year was sufficient, we
were not satisfied as the IFP because you were only allocated R256 million.
However, I realise that maybe the Auditor-General did not take into
consideration the fact that all nine provinces are your responsibility.

I know that as traditional leaders we have access to land, but the small
towns and the small municipalities are usually faced with big problems
because in places like my hometown, KwaNongoma, regional headmen usually
allocate plots to people close to town. You must look at such issues, hon
Minister, to see how you are going to separate rural municipalities and
tribal authorities’ land so that communities could be assisted with regard
to getting land. Towns like KwaNongoma, oSuthu and KwaMandlakazi have never
had development programmes before, because headmen just have their own
ideas – not that I am criticising that.

Your challenges are challenges which you need to face like a man. I am
asking you to look at ways in which to deal with this issue, but I would
also like to ask the government to take this department seriously because
it is the most important of all departments, because land is our blanket.
Land also produces food.

In that way, as the IFP, we support your budget, although the allocation is
so small you need to look into the programmes to see how our people could
be assisted with regard to getting land. Thank you.]

Ms N MAYETHULA-KHOZA (Gauteng): Chairperson, hon Minister, hon Deputy
Minister, hon members, hon MEC from the Western Cape, ladies and gentlemen,
it is indeed an honour for me to rise in this House in support of Budget
Vote No 32 of Rural Development and Land Reform for 2010-11. In fact, as
Minmec, we have already supported the Budget Vote.
We are calling for this endorsement with confidence that the budget policy
presentation by the hon Minister will indeed significantly contribute to
our vision of building viable, equitable and sustainable rural communities,
with food security for all. In achieving this vision, we are guided by the
hon President’s state of the nation address of 2009-10 when he said that —

      ... abantu basemakhaya nabo banelungelo lokuba nogesi, namanzi,
      izindlu zangasese ezigijima amanzi, imigwaqo, izindawo zokuqeda
      isizungu nezemidlalo, kanye nezindawo zokuthenga eziphucukile
      njengasemadolobheni.


Nabo banelungelo lokusizwa kwezolimo ukuze bazitshalele imifino nokunye,
bafuye nemfuyo bakwazi ukuziphilisa.

Sizimisele ukuqala lo mkhankaso wokwakha izingqalasizinda ezindaweni
zasemakhaya. Uma sibambisene nezakhamizi, amakhosi, amakhansela, nezinduna
siyokwazi ukuwusheshisa lo msebenzi. Uma sisebenza ngokubambisana
sizokwenza okuningi. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)


[People from the rural areas also have a right to electricity, water, flush
toilets, roads and recreational and sports facilities, as well as decent
shopping centres like those in the urban areas.

They also have a right to be assisted in respect of agriculture so that
they can grow vegetables and other things, and have livestock in order to
earn a living.

We are determined to start with this campaign of building infrastructure in
the rural areas. If we work together with the communities, chiefs,
councillors and headmen, we will be able to speed up this task. If we work
together we will do more.]

Therefore, Gauteng province supports the Minister’s Comprehensive Rural
Development Programme approach not only because it is in line with what the
President said but because it is in line with our ANC election manifesto,
which has set a new course for postcolonial reconstruction and development,
which will be achieved through co-ordinated and broad-based agrarian
transformation.

The hon Minister has indicated that this programme will focus on quite a
number of things, and I quote:


  Building communities through social mobilisation and institution-
  building; strategic investment in old and new social, economic,
  information and communication technology, ICT, infrastructure and public
  amenities and facilities co-ordinated through the rural infrastructure
  programme; a new land reform programme implemented in the context of the
  reviewed land tenure system; the rendering of professional and technical
  services as well as effective and sustainable resource management through
  the component of geo-spatial services, technology development and
  disaster management; and the effective provision of cadastral and deeds
  registry, as well as surveys and mapping services.

It is in this context that our province, particularly the department, has
recommitted itself to the development of rural areas within the province as
a whole, even though many of our people in South Africa believe that rural
development in Gauteng is a rumour. I would like to say this afternoon that
this is not a rumour because it is indeed happening. [Laughter.]

I would also like to confirm that Gauteng is the smallest province in our
country, covering only 1,7 million hectares or 1,4% of the total area. Of
this, 438 628 hectares are potentially arable. This tells us that there is
indeed rural development and agriculture in Gauteng. A total of 4% of the
province’s population resides in rural areas, including on agriculturally
arable land. We can no longer continue to develop rural communities by
chance. We have a clear strategy, plans, outcomes and outputs, as well as
targets, in line with the national strategy and programme.

In the province, we have finalised the Gauteng comprehensive rural
development strategy in line with the Comprehensive Rural Development
Programme approach. We have also revised the Gauteng integrated food
security strategy, and we are implementing these strategies accordingly.

We have also committed ourselves to working towards realising national
outcomes 7 and 10 of the 12 outcomes pursued by the national government
over the Medium-Term Strategic Framework period. We have already made
mention of outcome 7. Outcome 10 is about protecting and enhancing our
environmental assets and natural resources in urban and rural areas in
particular. The success of these outcomes will also be measured through the
delivery of outputs as outlined by the hon Minister: sustainable land
reform, food security for all, rural development and sustainable
livelihoods as well as job creation linked to skills training. We in
Gauteng have already adopted these outputs in line with the national
outcomes.

On sustainable land reform, the Gauteng provincial government will work
together with the national Department of Rural Development and Land Reform
to ensure a democratic and equitable land allocation to our people. Indeed,
at our Polokwane conference, we all agreed as the ANC that the willing-
buyer, willing-seller model has not worked for our people, hence the
initiative to review the legislation to allow equitable land allocation to
take place in our country and in our province in particular, as well as to
deracialise the rural economy for shared and inclusive growth.

We have already identified three pilot projects in Gauteng for
comprehensive rural development. These are areas such as Devon in the
Lesedi municipality, Hekpoort in the West Rand and Sekhulumi in Metsweding.
Therefore, we are moving very fast in implementing the Comprehensive Rural
Development Programme in line with our national principles, as outlined by
the Minister and the department.

On rural development, we are promoting equitable development to overcome
the urban-rural divide and to ensure that rural communities have access to
decent services, infrastructure and economic opportunities. We will work
together with all other provincial departments to build sustainable rural
livelihoods because as a department alone we cannot achieve comprehensive
rural development in Gauteng.

On food security for all, we will continue to intensify the establishment
of food gardens. In fact, we did launch a campaign of one household, one
food garden, especially in the 20 prioritised townships and in the 50
poorest wards in Gauteng. We will also continue to intensify the
establishment of co-operatives in Gauteng and assist smallholder farmers to
become commercial farmers. We will also continue to support commercial
farming, including agro-processing.

We have also supported the Minister’s job creation and skills training
programme, and therefore we will continue to ensure that the prioritised
households in the 50 poorest wards will benefit from the creation of decent
jobs through our Expanded Public Works Programme in the rural and urban
areas, the Community Works Programme and agricultural and rural
infrastructure development.

Therefore, we support the national policy and legislative processes on
agrarian transformation, rural development and land reform processes,
including the Land Tenure Security Bill, amongst other things, in order to
protect the rights of farm workers. Let us also report that we have
convened a very successful summit in Gauteng with farm workers and the
unions. We all agreed that we needed to see a cordial working relationship
between farmers and farm workers and that the conditions of farm workers
should indeed be improved.

We were sad to hear the farm workers saying that, after 16 years, they
still do not feel part of the democracy and the freedom that we are
enjoying today. Therefore, we will continue doing this work and ensure that
there is a cordial working relationship between the farmers and the farm
workers, with the aim of ensuring food security for all in Gauteng. Very
soon we will also be consulting with our people in Gauteng on the Green
Paper and the Bill that has been supported by Minmec.

Let me conclude by indicating that in the name of our Freedom Charter,
Gauteng supports Budget Vote No 32. We believe that the national Department
of Rural Development and Land Reform, led by the Minister, will succeed in
achieving the outcome and the outputs that we have set for ourselves, as
long as we work together with the provincial government, all departments,
the local government, and most importantly, our communities, all
roleplayers and stakeholders. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G G MOKGORO: Chair, hon Minister Nkwinti, special delegates, hon members
of the NCOP, I know you must have wished me a speedy recovery. I have
recovered from the procedure I underwent with remarkable speed, and I thank
you.

We must know that when we speak about rural development, we are speaking
about something that touches the nerve of poverty and backwardness of our
rural community. It is from this that all historical systems of government,
in their successive following, made certain that our rural communities were
left in devastating and sustainable poverty, as is still the case even
today.

We are happy that rural development has been identified as one of the
development priorities in our country. More so, it will impact positively
on the eradication of the degradation to which our people have been
subjected. It will stimulate economic growth to its full potential and
ensure a high level of social development.

South Africa, as an emerging leading light amongst developing nations of
the world, on the African continent in particular, must take issues of
rural development very seriously and with the determination to demonstrate
how this can be done. We must also be aware of the fact that if we have to
engage in real rural development, the first requirement would naturally be
land acquisition.

We must do vigorous auditing to determine who owns what as well as the
extent of the land. There are people sitting with several very big farms. I
think we all know that land ownership is skewed in a particular direction.
We have not yet made a significant dent in the landownership position of
1913. The majority of our people are still landless. With that, we cannot
guarantee food security.

Whilst we commend our government for the enthusiasm, commitment and
political willingness it has shown in making resources available to build
infrastructure required for staging the 2010 Fifa World Cup tournament, we
have seen organisational structures being set up as well as the unleashing
of huge financial resources for the success of this soccer spectacle. We
would like to see the same enthusiasm, commitment and political willingness
in making meaningful resources available in support of rural development.
It is only rural development that has the potential of pushing back the
frontiers of poverty.

It is the responsibility of this activist Parliament, which has to pass
laws, to make acquisition of land easier for equitable redistribution. The
preamble of the Freedom Charter says, and I quote: “South Africa belongs to
all who live in it, black and white.” In my view that means that every
South African must have a piece of land where he or she can conduct his or
her own economic activities.

If rural development is carried out with the vigour it deserves, it can
address many challenges facing our country. We should in fact start
thinking about how we can unbundle these big metropolitan centres because
eventually there will be no movement in these big centres.

It is also the responsibility of this activist government to pass laws that
encourage and redirect investment from urban areas to rural areas. If we
can do that, we will turn the tide that causes congestion in the
metropolitan centres. Nation-building must be accompanied by concerted
efforts to deliver our people from poverty to prosperity so that all can
taste the fruits of the democracy they have fought so hard for.

Rural development will curb urban migration, which negatively impacts on
existing urban infrastructure. It will eventually work to eradicate shack
settlement, which makes our people lose their human dignity and self-
respect.

Farm workers’ position must be stabilised, and they must be given pieces of
land where they can conduct their own agricultural activities and move from
being perpetual workers to becoming emerging farmers. This would enable
them to build houses for themselves, eat decent food, have clean running
water in each household and send their children to the best schools.

I heard the MEC of the Western Cape saying that black farmers are not
widespread in the Western Cape. I don’t know when that happened. Last year,
intensive research was done by the South African media, and it focused on
black people in the Western Cape - which opportunities they have. The
findings were that whenever professional or senior jobs crop up, they are
not even considered. They all complained about racism.

In conclusion ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! It is very
difficult to stop a veteran of the ANC ... [Laughter.] ... but in terms of
the time ... [Interjections.]

Mr G G MOKGORO: In conclusion, rural communities must live an organised
life with sporting, cultural and social activities. They must have shopping
centres nearby where they can buy their supplies with ease. They must have
some means of transport for their local movement. [Interjections.] We
support the budget. [Time expired.]
The MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Chairperson, I will
respond to just a few things because the hon Deputy Minister has really
responded to quite a number of the issues which were raised by hon members.
I don’t want to go back to those. Just for emphasis, we have noted the
point that has been made by all hon members in terms of the frustration
that people are experiencing with regard to the question of restitution.

Hon members will be aware that our budget in the current financial year is
just about R2 billion; it is R1,98 billion. It’s completely insufficient.
However, we will do the best we can with the little that we have, given the
current economic crisis in the world.

Furthermore, I would like to say that there were two critical elements in
this Budget Vote speech. The first one is the land tenure system reform
that we are proposing. The second one is the Land Tenure Security Bill that
we have referred to. The tendency in South African debate with regard to
the question of the three-tier system is that we should make sure that we
retain the large-scale commercial farming system that we have. The reason
is that it is supposed to be efficient, effective in food security and
create jobs.

However, what drives land reform in South Africa is land redistribution.
That is what drives land reform here. There is a huge gap between those who
own land, and ...
... ndicinga ukuba uMntwana uyithethile loo nto. Isizathu kukuba abanye
banomhlaba omkhulu ngeli lixa abanye bengenamhlaba. Le nto ibangela ukuba
umahluko phakathi kwabantu abanezinto nabantu abangenazinto uye usiba
mkhulu. Yiloo nto ebangele ukuba sithi makuhlengahlengiswe umhlaba ukuze
kubekho ukulingana kwabantu ekubeni ngabanini-mhlaba. Xa abantu belingana
ngokuba ngabanini-mhlaba bazakukwazi ukuvelisa, batye ukanti bakwazi
nokuthengisa. Ngaloo ndlela uyakutsho uvaleke umsantsa phakathi kwabantu
abanezinto nabo bangenazinto.

Ngoko ke, le nto yokuthi xa sihlengahlengisa ubunini-mhlaba sizakube
siphazamisa imveliso, asiyonyaniso. Umzekelo, ukuba abantu baseMzantsi
Afrika bathe xa bexoxa ngeli Phepha loGayo-zimvo babanoluvo lokuba ubukhulu
bomhlaba wokuvelisa – le nto bathi ngesiNgesi yi-large-scale commercial
farming – ngama-1000 eehektare, oko kukuthi ushishino ngomhlaba
olunengeniso. Loo nto ke ithetha ukuba ukuba uNkwinti ungumnini weehektare
ezingama-2000, uNkwinti kufuneka anikezele ngeliye iwaka leehektare aze
agcine iwaka elinye elinokuthi mhlawumbi libekwe njengomda; ezo ziingxoxo
eziza kubakho eMzantsi Afrika.

Kodwa ke, loo nto akufuneki ithethe ukuba iwaka eli uNkwinti anikezele
ngalo, umzekelo kutata uMokgoro, liza kuba yilahleko kwimveliso.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[... I think the Prince referred to that. The reason is that some possess
vast tracts of land while others do not even have land. This widens the gap
between people who have assets and those who do not. That is why we are
proposing land reform so that there can be equal ownership of land. If
people have equal ownership of land, they will be able to produce, consume
and sell their products. That way the wide gap between the haves and the
have-nots will be reduced.

Therefore, claiming that land reform and ownership will affect production
is not true. For example, if South Africans, when debating the Green Paper,
are of the opinion that large-scale farms must be 1 000 hectares big – we
are talking here about commercial farming, which refers to profit-making
farming - that means that if Mr Nkwinti owns 2 000 hectares, he must hand
over 1 000 hectares, which will leave him with the remaining 1 000
hectares, and that might be set as a minimum in the debates that will ensue
in South Africa.

However, that should not mean that the 1 000 hectares that Mr Nkwinti has
handed over to, for example, Mr Mokgoro, will be lost to production.]

It is not lost to production; it is retained. What has changed is the
ownership pattern. The production pattern itself should remain. Whether it
is foreign landownership or national landownership, the principle is going
to be the same. Whether it is a black person or a white person, the
principle is going to be the same. So, there shouldn’t be any problem
around this.

With regard to the second issue of the Land Tenure Security Bill, we have
strongly introduced the concept of relative rights. The reason is that
there are three classes of rights on the farm. For example, there is a
worker who is a commuter, and this is a widespread phenomenon in South
Africa today.

Bemkile abantu ezifama, bahlala elokishini okanye ezilalini. Kodwa ke,
bayathuthwa yonke le mihla baye kusebenza ezifama ze babuye baze kuhlala
kwasezilokishini okanye ezilalini. (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[People have left the farms; they live in the townships and in the
villages. However, they are provided with transport to and from work on a
daily basis and after work they return to the townships or the villages.]

This is done so that the farmer doesn’t have the responsibility of
habitation.

The second class of rights is the one that relates to the people who are
both dwellers and workers on the farm. This is a class of rights because
these people are not only workers who have to be taken care of in terms of
the Labour Relations Act, but they are also dwellers on the farm. This is
the question of tenure. Therefore the second thing in terms of the
protection of rights is the enhancement of security of tenure of the person
who is a dweller on the farm.

The third one is production discipline. You would have noticed that
production discipline runs across all these things, whether we are talking
about the Bill or about the Green Paper. The reason is that we want to
deracialise the rural economy. Issues of race are diminishing. The more we
give black people land, the more they will become effective in production.
The more the issues of class come to the fore in a more pronounced manner,
the smaller the issue of race will become. Therefore, issues of race and
farm size are not really going to be much of a problem as we move forward.

Lastly, I would like to talk about the institutional support system. In
this regard, we have talked about a land management commission. Hon members
will note that – even this year, I’m sure - the department will be
qualified by the audit. The reason is that we don’t have and are unable to
produce a credible asset register for land. Frankly, we don’t know which
land belongs to the state. But we must know. This is because land is a
national asset and does not have to be declared. There is no
nationalisation here; there is a conceptual issue here. The hon member from
the ID talked about this point. Land is a national asset.

If one goes to the United States of America, one will find that the United
States of America is defined in terms of land. The United Kingdom is
defined in terms of land. South Africa is defined in terms of land space;
it’s a national asset. We are not talking about nationalisation, but we are
saying it’s our heritage; it’s our asset as a nation. We must therefore
have an institutional mechanism of protecting and, in fact, even
establishing and maintaining the integrity of land as a national asset. So,
this is what we mean when we say land is a national asset. We are not
talking about nationalisation. Hon members must not get worried about this.

Furthermore, what we are saying is that the land management commission must
be established in order for us to be able to ensure - through it - that we
know every piece of land that belongs to the state. Secondly, we are saying
that the state will have the first right of refusal when a private
individual sells his or her land. This is where the question of integrity
of the national asset comes in. One cannot just sell land. People are just
selling land anywhere to anybody. If one does not manage the asset, our
heritage, then we don’t know what postcolonial reconstruction and
development means.

We wish that hon members will support this one. We wish that you will
support this proposal because through this land management commission, we,
as South Africans, will be able to definitively say: This is what belongs
to South Africa - this land. Thank you very much, hon Chair. [Applause.]
Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Hon Minister, Deputy Minister and MECs
present, there is a subject for debate, which is Africa Day. Yours is
finished, but if you feel like being part of the House, you are welcome. If
you have some other business to attend to, you are also welcome to go and
attend to that business.

Hon members, may I take the opportunity to welcome the hon Deputy Minister
S van der Merwe, Deputy Minister of International Relations and Co-
operation, who will then introduce the subject matter for discussion. You
are welcome, Deputy Minister. [Applause.]

        AFRICA DAY: Democracy, Unity, Peace and Prosperity in Africa

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION (Ms S C van
der Merwe): Chairperson of the House, Ministers and Deputy Ministers - they
all seem to have left – MECs - I’m not quite sure - hon members of
Parliament, members of this House, it is really a great honour for me to be
here and have the opportunity to open the debate on the occasion of the
celebration of the 47th Africa Day celebration.

It was on 25 May 1963 that the leaders of 32 independent African states
signed this charter on the establishment of the Organisation for African
Unity. All these years later, Africa Day celebrations present us with an
opportunity to take stock of the continent’s pursuit of the realisation of
a united, peaceful and prosperous Africa, captured in today’s theme.

As you would all know, the vision of African unity was championed from as
early as the 19th century, and many great African leaders expanded on this
vision in the ensuing years. It is important for us to remember this
history and the importance of what Africa Day is now within the context of
African unity and its contribution to the liberation struggle of the
countries of the continent, and in particular, our own country, South
Africa.

It is a well-documented fact now how the Organisation for African Unity,
OAU, the precursor to the African Union, prioritised the decolonisation of
Africa as its main objective. The OAU had, all those years ago, decided to
establish the African Liberation Support Committee, ALSC. The people of
Africa, within the framework of the OAU Charter, took a conscious and
deliberate decision to wage a united struggle against colonialism and
apartheid. Our fellow Africans, in collaboration with progressive forces
throughout the world, steadfastly supported our liberation movements as we
fought to end the abhorrent system of apartheid in our country. It was in
the pursuit of African unity that apartheid in South Africa became
internationally isolated from the 1960s until its demise in the 1990s.

We recall with pride and gratitude the role of the frontline states, whose
leaders and people were at the forefront of this campaign. These frontline
states subsequently went on to form, as you will recall, the Southern
African Development Co-ordination Conference, SADCC, which then transformed
into the Southern African Development Community, SADC, the regional
organisation as we know it today.

It was against this background that the ANC was granted observer status in
the OAU. President Zuma reminded us during his closing remarks at the
assembly of the 13th Ordinary Session of the African Union Summit in Libya
in July last year, when he said:


   South Africa, guided by the oldest liberation movement in Africa, the
   ANC, has a long and a proud tradition of working for African unity.

I’m proud to say that in 2012, this oldest liberation movement will turn
100 years old. The President went on to remind us of the role that former
President Mandela and the late O R Tambo played in the process of the
establishment of the OAU, the launch of which was attended by none other
than our ANC President, President Tambo. It will further be recalled that
it was O R Tambo who was instrumental in crafting the well-known Harare
Declaration, which laid down a statement of principles and modalities for
negotiations in South Africa adopted by the OAU Assembly in August 1989.
This declaration paved the way for our negotiated political settlement.

The 26th Ordinary Session of the OAU Heads of State and Government held in
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, in July 1990, carried out a critical review of
Africa’s political, social and economic situation informed by the rapidly
changing international environment and further committed itself to
enhancing the promotion of democracy on the continent. This was the period
during which we in South Africa were undergoing our own transition through
the multiparty negotiations at the Convention for a Democratic South
Africa, Codesa, in Kempton Park, which resulted ultimately in the
establishment of our own constitutional democracy. Our path to democracy
was underpinned by this change that took place in the development of the
OAU when the OAU transformed into the African Union.

This brief historic account emphasises, I believe, the place of global
changes in the decisions taken by African leaders at that time that the OAU
be transformed into the African Union in order for the continent to address
and to meet the challenges of our modern era.

In the process of the transformation from the OAU to the African Union, the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development, Nepad, was conceived. South
Africa was one of the initial architects of Nepad, with the primary
objective to eradicate poverty and to place African countries, both
individually and collectively, on a path of peace, stability, democracy and
sustainable growth and development.

Since we achieved our democracy, we have committed ourselves anew to
working towards the realisation of this vision of a united, peaceful and
prosperous Africa. We have done so mindful of the high expectations that
SADC, Africa and the world have of our emerging democratic country. South
Africa has had to transform from a pariah state to a responsible global
citizen. We have had also to play our role in the transformation from the
OAU to the Africa Union, which was launched in Durban in July 2002, and
South Africa thus took on the historic mantle to become the first chair of
the African Union.

The Constitutive Act of the African Union provides for the acceleration of
the African integration agenda. This agenda is predicated on the same
vision of a united, peaceful and prosperous Africa. You will all recall our
contribution through our people and our leadership, with other like-minded
countries, to the establishment of Nepad, the continent’s programme for
socioeconomic development.

Through Nepad, Africa has also managed to expand development priorities and
it has allowed for Africa to take ownership of its own development and
success. Development and funding in critical sectors such as agriculture,
ICT, science and technology, infrastructure and education have revitalised
the continent in many aspects and allowed for significant improvements in
the quality of life for millions of Africans. It has, we believe, unleashed
a progressive renewal agenda which needs to be sustained to bring the
vision of Nepad to fruition.

Linked to Nepad was the establishment of the African Peer Review Mechanism,
APRM, in order to improve economic, corporate and political governance on
the continent. This was informed by our understanding that good economic,
corporate and political governance is central to the implementation of
Nepad to improve the living conditions of our people. It not only sets the
standard for mutual accountability but plays a major role in accelerating
political, economic and social reform on the continent.

Our country has been active in efforts to bring about peace and stability
also on the continent. We have engaged in peacekeeping operations together
with peace-building measures in support of the African agenda, and have
also played an important mediation and facilitation role in countries such
as Burundi, DRC, Sudan, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Côte d’Ivoire and Zimbabwe, to
name a few.

We have used our own experience of reaching a negotiated settlement and
creating a progressive constitutional democratic state to work with other
states currently in conflict situations and share our experiences. South
Africa, with its limited resources, has invested in assisting countries on
the continent to set up institutions that entrench the culture and practice
of democracy, such as our own Independent Electoral Commission’s
participation in many election observation missions; building governance
capacity by assisting in the establishment of functioning civil services;
and utilising South Africa’s experience and expertise in postconflict
reconstruction and development, PCRD, programmes on the continent. I think
we can be proud of these achievements.

This we do in concert with our civil society, think-tanks and the private
sector. You will recall that the statute of the Economic, Social and
Cultural Council, Ecosocc, which was adopted by the African Union, provides
for the establishment of country chapters of Ecosocc. In this regard, we
continue to enhance civil society participation in the processes of the
union in partnership with the Ecosocc-SA Chapter.

Successes and challenges have accompanied this endeavour. However, we
continue to support the peaceful resolution of conflicts, knowing very well
that there will be no development without peace and stability on the
continent. We realise we need to maximise our collective efforts in
realising Africa’s vision of a peaceful continent. Thus, the Tripoli Plan
of Action was adopted by the African heads of state and government and
outlines specific commitments aimed at accelerating the resolution of
conflict and crisis situations, as well as consolidating peace where it has
been achieved.

Further to this, at a special summit held in Libya last year, the African
Union declared 2010 as the year of peace and security in Africa to
strengthen peace-making efforts across the continent. The year of peace and
security will culminate on 21 September this year, which is the
International Day of Peace and Security. We believe this provides an
opportunity for all of Africa to come together and prove to the world that
peace on our continent is indeed possible.

I raise all these issues to challenge you in this debate today to reflect
on the continent’s past and present and to map out a way forward towards
African unity and prosperity. We must do a critical assessment of our role
on the continent and the current status of Africa. The question we should
be able to answer at the end of this debate is: How do we intend to move
forward from this current situation, considering the lessons we draw from
our past?

We acknowledge that much still needs to be done towards the realisation of
this important vision. Having registered considerable gains in the
consolidation of democracy in Africa, it is disheartening to experience the
re-emergence of unconstitutional changes of government most recently. The
question is: How do we start to work towards the prevention of this
contradiction to our vision?
It is my belief that we can bring lasting peace and stability by
intensifying conflict prevention mechanisms. At times there are warning
signs that alert us to a potential conflict, but in some cases we have not
responded adequately. This is a serious weakness in the overall African
peace and security architecture. We may also need to further strengthen the
African Union’s sanction regime and revisit certain mechanisms, such as the
Lomé Declaration of 2000.

Let me conclude by reminding us all about the big theme of this year’s
Africa Day celebration, which is “Building and Maintaining Peace through
Sport in Africa”. This is happening as South Africa and the rest of Africa
prepare to host the 2010 Fifa World Cup in just two weeks’ time - and I see
not one vuvuzela here and only one South African scarf, including my own.

This sporting event presents Africa with a unique opportunity to harness
the power of sport for the promotion of peace and security in diverse
communities, in environments where personal security is a challenge and in
countries with conflict and postconflict situations. Let us ensure that
Africa takes advantage of this opportunity to encourage a developmental
legacy across the continent, speed up economic growth and halve poverty and
unemployment by 2014. Ke Nako! The time is now. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mr D D GAMEDE: Chair, hon Deputy Minister, it is really Africa Day today.
It is Africa my continent, our continent, our home, our land and home for
the ANC and everybody.

May I start by quoting what other leaders and writers have said. I will
start by quoting David J Francis in a book titled Uniting Africa:

   The wave of decolonisation started with the independence of Sudan in
   1956, and was rapidly followed by the freedom from colonial rule of more
   than 30 states.

All these liberties were moved by Pan-Africanism.

Marcus Garvey, with his Back to Africa Movement, also played an influential
role in raising the consciousness of African nationalism.

Another African leader, Kwame Nkrumah, in the book Neo-Colonialism, The
Last Stage of Imperialism, said:

   We are Africans first and last, and as Africans our best interests can
   only be served by uniting within an African community.


Chairperson, this day is also made profoundly significant by the fact that
after centuries of slavery, political, racial, economic and ethnics
subjudication, the people of Africa could still remain adamant in their
quest for carving a destiny of unity and solidarity. It is a day that
rallied leaders of the continent to establish a shared vision for the
people of Africa. It is a day that demonstrated the resilience of the
African people and their determined yearning for a prosperous Africa.

Indeed many people would ask a relevant question on how far the African
continent has come in implementing the visions and aspirations as
articulated in 1963 when the OAU was formed. This is a pertinent question
that, if taken lightly, can lead one to misguided presuppositions that do
not understand the profound impact of colonialism and apartheid on African
people.


The founding fathers of the African Union saw peace and security as
essential preconditions for translating the determination to achieve unity
and progress on our continent. To them peaceful settlements of disputes by
negotiations, mediation, conciliation and arbitration and adherence to the
Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
provided a solid foundation for peaceful and positive co-operation among
states.


Underlying all these objectives was a realisation of the need to ensure
sustainable economic development through co-ordination and co-operation in
various sectors. These essential components constitute the vision that
inspired the founding of the OAU, which, I may add, was later changed to
the African Union. It is a vision which, though couched in the perspective
of the realities of the early ‘60s, contains a fundamental framework that
has remained valid and relevant even today.

Indeed, as the ANC, we are concerned about the wars engulfing our continent
and the continued mutilation and abuse of women and children in some parts
of Africa. As you will note, the ANC government has made it a priority to
mediate peaceful settlements in countries such as Sudan. We will remain
committed to ensuring that the people of Africa live in peace and that they
are able to resolve their political differences with no acts of violence or
civil war.

We acknowledge that peaceful settlements of political and civil disputes
provide an inspiration and dynamism for unity and economic prosperity on a
continent. As the ANC, we have made it clear that the end of the liberation
struggle compels us to direct all our efforts to tackling the task of
socioeconomic development and building credible institutions and systems
for democracy.

We are also concerned that many African states are still battling with
addressing their political differences through democratic processes.
Political violence continues to escalate the problem of refugees and
undermines any efforts to promote basic human and people’s rights and
foster democratic governance on our continent.

We are indeed concerned about the levels of literacy and the state of
education in many states in Africa. For a prosperous Africa, we need to
work tirelessly to transform our education system and expand access for
poor communities. We need to ensure that our education system produces
learners with the knowledge and technical skills that will enable us to
fill the skills gap facing our prospects of building a prosperous Africa.

However, we can say without any fear of contradiction that our continent
has overcome many constraints since the establishment of the OAU. As the
ANC, we take comfort in the fact that our continent has made noticeable
successes in redressing the legacy of colonialism and apartheid on our
continent. For example, the signing of the Abuja Treaty Establishing the
African Economic Community a year after the promulgation of the 1990
declaration was a further manifestation of the determination of African
countries to advance our collective destiny and the reaffirmation of a
strong faith in each other. It marked a resolute effort aimed at
consolidating our political unity by fostering closer economic co-operation
and integration amongst the people of Africa.

The creation of a mechanism for conflict prevention, management and
resolution by another solemn declaration of the assembly of heads of state
and government in Cairo in 1993 was, thus, an important achievement in our
quest to ensure the wellbeing of our people.

It is encouraging to observe that all initiatives that are currently being
undertaken to resolve conflicts in Africa are being led by Africans
themselves. Indeed, despite various hurdles to be overcome, there are
positive developments in many of these conflict areas which signal
prospects for democracy, unity, peace and prosperity in Africa. As the ANC,
we remain firm in our conviction to work tirelessly with the people of
Africa to advance our continent. We are truly convinced that the prospects
of attaining the vision espoused by the founding fathers of Africa are
increasingly becoming brighter and nearer.

My last quotation is from a book by Alfred Nhema and Paul Tiyambe Zeleza,
The Resolution of African Conflicts: The Management of Conflict Resolution
and Post-Conflict Reconstruction:

   Any attempt to resolve conflicts in Africa has to take into account the
   root causes of some of the current problems in Africa. The role of the
   external power has been cited as one of the main causes of African
   conflict.

One may add here and say that the West is always at war. However, this is
never in the West but in Africa. When music is played in London and New
York, people in Accra, Bulawayo, Tanzania, Blantyre and Pretoria should not
dance. I thank you, Chair. [Applause.]

Mr T D HARRIS: House Chairperson, MECs and hon members, I would like to
thank the Deputy Minister for the compliments on the scarf. She will find
that the DA is a patriotic opposition. I would also like to thank her for a
very nice speech that she gave. But I am not quite sure how to respond to
and debate on it, because I agree with just about everything she said.

Instead of reviewing the comprehensive history the Deputy Minister ran us
through, let me rather look at a few aspects of her department’s work in
Africa that she didn’t deal with. Her department has nine strategic
objectives. I want to deal with three of them today, especially as they
relate to our foreign policy.

The first is to provide consular services to South African nationals
abroad. Here I want to heartily congratulate the Deputy Minister on a job
well done. I spent most of 2007 and 2008 travelling through 18 African
countries on a personal mission to explore our continent. I travelled with
two friends in an old truck, with a budget of less than what most of the
hon members sitting here probably spent on lunch today. We made hundreds of
friends all over the continent. I am pleased to report that some of the
best friends we made were the diplomats and staff of our foreign missions.
They were - without fail - helpful, accommodating and friendly. I must, in
particular, thank the embassies in Gabon, Nigeria, Ghana and Senegal for
their kind assistance, and the Deputy Minister for making sure that our
missions were staffed with such excellent people.
The other two strategic objectives I want to deal with are the ones that
concern protecting and promoting South African national interests and
values and contributing to the formulation of international law and
enhancing respect for its provisions. I believe that our government, led by
the Deputy Minister of the Department of International Relations and Co-
operation, is failing in these objectives. On the continent of Africa,
these failures amount to an abandonment of moral leadership.

The fact that we have a leadership role to play on the continent is
uncontested. The Minister herself has stressed this. But that this
leadership role should include moral leadership is also clear to me. The
father of our nation, Nelson Mandela, in 1994 promised South Africa and the
world that human rights would be the light that guides our foreign affairs.
Yet today these rights are left out in the dark as we have abandoned the
role of moral leadership in African foreign affairs.

Let me tell you why. Last week a Malawian court sentenced Steven Monjeza
and Tiwonge Chimbalanga to 14 years’ hard labour for unnatural acts and
gross indecency under an Act that dated from colonial days. Their crime was
that they expressed love for each other, which they committed to publicly
at a same-sex ceremony in December last year. Notwithstanding the clear
directive in our Constitution that no one should be discriminated against
on the grounds of private, consensual, adult sexual relations, the
department’s silence on this matter has been deafening. And by remaining
silent they failed to protect and promote South African national interests
and values.

In comparison, dozens of other states and organisations have condemned the
sentence. Unfortunately, our government has a proud history of failing to
protect and promote principles we adhere to at home in our foreign affairs.


In 2008, a Declaration on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity was
brought to the United Nations. Amongst other things, it called on states to
take all the necessary measures to ensure that sexual orientation may under
no circumstances be the basis for criminal penalties. About 67 countries,
including Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Gabon, Mauritius and Guinea-Bissau,
signed this declaration, yet South Africa - with our liberal Constitution -
has not signed it. It is worth noting that the countries that opposed this
declaration included such bastions of human rights as Iran, North Korea,
Syria, Swaziland, Sudan and Zimbabwe.

I would appreciate the Minister’s views on which side our government is on.
This is because domestically we stand proud as one of only seven countries
that have no official heterosexist discrimination. But our foreign policy
practices urgently need to be aligned with our country’s constitutional
principles.

In Mauritania, Sudan and northern Nigeria, homosexuality can be punishable
by death – silence from the department. Last week Zimbabwean police raided
the headquarters of Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe and arrested two
activists who had dared to display a letter they had received that was
critical of Mugabe’s homophobia. They have been denied access to lawyers –
no comment from the department.

In another example, in Uganda, offenders can receive a maximum sentence of
life imprisonment for homosexual acts and legislation changing this to the
death penalty is before their parliament. Yet our government responds not
by speaking out against this, but by sending a known homophobe, Jon
Qwelane, to be our ambassador there.

In just over an hour’s time, the Deputy Minister will reply to this debate.
I challenge her to respond to all of the concerns raised by all the
speakers in this debate.

In recent days, my party’s leaders have called on this government to
renounce the prosecution of the Malawian men and the criminalisation of
private, consensual adult sexual relations. [Interjections.] The policy of
the DA on homosexuality is that we respect the rights of people to practice
what they like behind their closed bedroom doors.

I call on the Deputy Minister, in her reply to this debate, to break the
department’s deafening silence on the recent human rights abuses in Malawi
and to commit the South African state to signing the UN Declaration on
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity as soon as possible. By doing these
things she will start to lead us out of the darkness and back onto the
course of moral leadership in African foreign policy that Tata Mandela set
us on 16 years ago. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M C DIKGALE: Hon Chairperson, hon members, distinguished guests, Africa
Day is a celebration of a continent that has given so much to us. It is
Africa that fought so bravely with the ANC and other liberation movements
against the apartheid regime so that, as equal to any other, we could
exercise our sovereignty as a nation. We will forever be indebted to the
continent and its people for the support. The Africa of which we speak is
the cradle of humanity and it has given humanity her civilisation and
continues to hold unlimited opportunities for the future.

In 1963, at the epoch-making conference to establish the OAU, leaders such
as Nyerere, Kaunda, Nasser, Nkrumah and others, with their rich and
unfailing fountain of wisdom, made the following commitment:

       The organisation shall have the following purposes:


        a. To promote the unity and solidarity of the African states;
        b. To co-ordinate and intensify their co-operation and efforts to
           achieve a better life for the peoples of Africa.

Our then President of the ANC, Oliver Tambo, had the following to say on
that watershed day:


   The Organisation for African Unity is one of the most hopeful symbols of
   African aspiration and determination to carve a proper place for our
   continent in the world.


To us, the sentiment of African solidarity and unity is deeply rooted, and
it has always found expression in our movement. The song Nkosi Sikelel’
iAfrika, composed by an African man, Enoch Sontonga, in 1903, became the
national anthem of the ANC and contributed to the north of our borders –
Zimbabwe - for a period and Zambia to this day. This anthem was inspired by
the moving ideal of African brotherhood and sisterhood, an outlook
expressed by our slogan “Mayibuye iAfrika” [Let Africa return].

We are all too aware of the sordid record of colonialism and what it did to
the African continent; from slavery, which robbed Africa of her able-bodied
and healthy men and women, to imperialism and colonialism, which pillaged
and plundered her raw materials and destroyed her culture, traditional
agriculture and domestic food security. These ventures and escapades on the
continent by colonialists took place on the premise that as Africans we
were not equal to the colonial master. For them Africans were subhumans.

Neocolonialism perpetuated and reinforced the exploitation of the continent
while creating a self-serving and greedy elite, whose only interest was the
accumulation of wealth and the strengthening of their positions in the
global balance of forces. Unstable political systems such as military
dictatorships that followed only served to plunge the continent into a
process of intractable conflicts, genocide and civil wars. This resulted in
the displacement of millions and refugee populations, especially women and
children. This, coupled with the unfavourable terms of trade, international
debt, declining development assistance, lack of foreign direct investment,
malaria, HIV and Aids and poor governance, led to the marginalisation of
the continent from the global economy.

Notwithstanding all these, a new generation of African leaders emerged on
the continent - a leadership that is hard at work to create conditions
where security, peace, stability, multiparty democracy, human rights and
emancipation of women are the norm rather than the exception. This is where
people themselves will regain sovereignty to determine their destiny.

The economic recovery of Africa can be traced back to the 1990s when the
then OAU mandated the then Presidents - Mbeki of South Africa, Bouteflika
of Algeria and Obasanjo of Nigeria - to work on a plan for economic
rejuvenation to address the principal development challenge facing the
continent. They were later joined by President Wade of Senegal and Mubarak
of Egypt. Extensive consultation took place with their colleagues inside
and outside the continent, in international financial institutions,
multilateral institutions, business and civil society.

They worked closely with their regional counterparts and identified the
following areas as deserving the undivided attention of the continent and
constituting the basis for the Millennium Africa Recovery Programme. The
areas are as follows: peace, security and governance; investing in Africa’s
people; the diversification of Africa’s production; investing in
information and communication technology; basic infrastructure; and
developing financing mechanisms.

The economic programme was to be extended later into a more comprehensive
programme – the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, Nepad - which the
African Union endorsed and to which it is giving considerable time and
resources for its functioning and success. The success of Nepad will be
judged on its ability to substantially reduce poverty, which is
disproportionately affecting women and children. Part of this programme is
to ensure gender mainstreaming in public policies.

The information technology revolution is a driving force. The information
gap between the continent and the rest of the world determines who has, to
a large extent, access to knowledge, ideas and information that drives
development. Africa’s contribution to international trade lies with her raw
materials. In this knowledge-based economy, it is more imperative to work
towards the benefaction of her products, thereby adding value and ensuring
the exportation of finished products. Developed countries have demonstrated
their commitment to help Africa close the digital gap through specific
projects.

With regard to women in Africa, the incontestable reality is that “African”
is inseparably interwoven with the emancipation of African women. She, who
has single-handedly and disproportionately borne all the ills of the
continent, deserves a frontline position in the battalion for the rebirth
of our continent. The leadership in Africa can only ignore at their peril
the enormous contribution of more than half of the continent’s people.
Women have given so magnanimously in the sustenance of the continent
intellectually, politically and socially. Their creative energy, resilience
and organisational skills will indeed ensure that this century belongs to
Africa.

Seeing into the future in 1961, President Luthuli, the visionary President
of the ANC, had the following to say about the continent’s rebirth:
   Let me invite Africa to cast her eyes beyond the past and to some extent
   the present with their woes and tribulations, trials and failures, and
   some success, and see herself an emerging continent, bursting to freedom
   through the shell of centuries of serfdom.

In conclusion, Africa Day instils in us a sense of responsibility to
improve the quality of life of all people affected in critical areas of
socioeconomic life. It provides a moment to renew our commitment to
ourselves, the African continent and our shared heritage and destiny. We
join other Africans in renewing our pledge to work together for the rebirth
and renewal of the African continent and the advancement of Africans,
wherever they may be. We recommit ourselves to work with other Africans in
our region and the rest of our continent to promote the achievement of the
goal of African unity.

Motho ke motho ka batho. Ke a leboga, Modulasetulo. [Legoswi.] [A person is
a person because of other people. Thank you, Chairperson.] [Applause.]

Pastor E V DUBE (KwaZulu-Natal): Chair, hon members, MECs, Deputy Minister,
this day is indeed being celebrated at a very opportune time, when South
Africa is about to show the world how we will deal with Mexico in our first
game. The celebration of this day is thus the acknowledgement of the
progress that we as Africa have made while we are also aware of the
challenges we are facing in the global environment.

This day marks another point of introspection for us in looking deep within
ourselves to see whether we have been able to cross the barrier of the past
era that was characterised by political instability, poverty and
underdevelopment in our lovely continent, Africa.

In his remarks on 31 May 2007 in welcoming Africa Day, the UN Secretary,
Ban Ki-moon, said that this day provides an opportunity to reflect on the
continent’s prospects, for taking stock of its problems and acknowledging
its achievements. I want to reiterate in this House and emphasise that when
we speak about democracy, unity, peace and prosperity in Africa, we are
speaking about South Africa. We are indeed speaking about the leadership of
the ANC, which has been tried and tested in democracy, unity and peace. As
we look at the subjects of democracy, unity and peace, we are striving to
fully realise and get the results of prosperity. We must not forget the
devastation that is being inflicted by HIV and Aids, including its alarming
spread amongst women, thus surely reversing past developments and things we
have gained. We must strive at this age of democracy to protect those who
are infected and affected by using our spirit of “umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu”
[a person is a person because of other people].

One cannot look down upon important steps taken by our government towards
consolidating peace in Africa. This includes our involvement as a country
in Madagascar, Zimbabwe and Sudan, to mention but a few. This is to ensure
that there is a notable democratic process that will give birth to peace,
uniting Africa towards the destination of a prosperous Africa.

We are also aware of and notice the violence that is still taking place in
small pockets of some countries in our continent, which is motivated by
intolerance amongst human beings. Indeed, there is a definite need to find
political solutions through democratic means in those areas that are facing
crises that are afflicting our people in our beloved Africa. I fully agree
with Kofi Annan when he says that the continent will have a bright future
if its people will stand tall.

Today, we pride ourselves on hosting the World Cup. Of course this puts us
at the centre of global attention. We can surely appreciate the foreseen
GDP growth rate of about 5% by the end of this year, as indicated by the
African Development Bank, ADB, and the International Monetary Fund, IMF.
This can be attributed to our democracy, unity, peace and prosperity, which
we strive for as a country through the mechanism of mature leadership,
obviously, of the ANC in South Africa. One cannot fail to comment on the
growth in trade within Africa and with partners including the global South.

In making sure that democracy, peace, unity and prosperity in Africa are
entrenched and enhanced, we’ll fulfil the dreams of our forefathers - the
likes of Nkwame Nkrumah, iNkosi Albert Luthuli and the one and only Tata
Madiba.

There are notable strides and undeniable achievements when one has to
compare what Bill Clinton did when he was still president. Looking at his
mission in 1998 in Accra, Ghana, he said that from Kampala to Cape Town and
from Dakar to Dar es Salaam, Africans are being stirred by new hope for
democracy, peace and prosperity. Challenges remain, but they must be aware
that there is a call for action; there’s no cause for despair. He said
people must draw strength from the past and energy from the promise of a
new future.

I want to conclude and close by saying that the ANC will make sure that we
keep peace. We’ll build democracy so that we’ll have a prosperous Africa. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Dr I MEYER (Western Cape): Chairperson, hon members, good afternoon. As we
meet on this special day, we rededicate ourselves to the common desire and
aspirations that inspired African leaders to commit themselves to work.
Today I will speak about specific work for the continent – work towards the
total liberation of our continent and the tireless struggle for equality,
justice and progress for all.

Today we also remember the efforts that went into transforming our
continent. Like my hon colleague, I have also travelled the continent, and
many members in this House can testify to the great pleasure it is to
travel the great continent of Africa. Therefore, my next career will
involve travelling around the continent.

We cannot but remember the great leaders of Africa, such as Julius Nyerere,
and I was also very happy to see him speaking in this Parliament. We also
remember Nelson Mandela, as well as a former member of Parliament, the late
Frederik Van Zyl Slabbert, and many others who dedicated their lives to
save the lives of so many other people on this continent.

It is also of critical importance to ask ourselves what it is that we are
doing in the Western Cape to create a better life for people in the Western
Cape. We are committed to living the dream of an open society as contained
in the preamble to the Constitution of South Africa. Page one of the
Constitution of South Africa commits us to an open society. That society,
we believe, is one in which people have choices, take personal
responsibility and can excel.

So, colleagues ...

... dit is ook ’n bekende feit dat die provinsiale regering poog om alles
in werking te stel om die provinsie ’n wêreldklas provinsie te maak. Dit,
op sigself, stel geweldige hoë eise, veral ten opsigte van die ontwikkeling
van dienslewering oor die hele spektrum van die administrasie, deur
gemotiveerde en gewillige amptenary. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph
follows.)

[... it is also a known fact that the provincial government is trying to
put everything into action to make this province a world-class province.
That, on its own, demands extremely high standards, especially in regard to
cultivating service delivery over the whole spectrum of the administration,
by motivated and willing public servants.]

Hon members of this House, I believe deeply in a modern, African public
service. A modern, African public service is one in which we give content
and meaning to the spirit of Batho Pele. Batho Pele means “we share, we
care and we belong”. But people must experience this when they go to Home
Affairs, Sassa or any of the other government departments. This is a great
challenge. We are not there yet.

We are also proud of what we have done and achieved in the Western Cape in
the areas of HIV/Aids, malaria and TB. We are also proud to have a world-
class hospital – the Red Cross Children’s Hospital – not only for the
Western Cape but for the continent of Africa.

Agb lede, met sy ryk verskeidenheid van intellektuele dryfkrag, gee dié
provinsie die toon aan waarby die land en Afrika groot baat kan vind. Ook
op die pad van die tegnologie het die Wes-Kaap reeds sy bydrae gemaak.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Hon members, with its rich variety of intellectual driving forces, this
province takes the lead from which the country and Africa can greatly
benefit. Even in the field of technology the Western Cape has already made
its contribution.]

I believe in the people of Africa. I have travelled the continent and I
also led a Commonwealth delegation of east and southern African countries
18 years ago. It is because of my love for Africa that I co-edited a book
on public and development management for Africa. But my love for Africa
does not blind me to the challenges we face.

I’m equally not shy to boast about our rights and our historical, cultural
and community value systems. Whenever I meet foreigners, I take the liberty
to explain why we, despite all the obstacles and shortcomings, are a nation
proud of our history and our culture. I am proud when I tell them about the
first African who paid US$20 million to fly into space.

I am also proud of the many organisations in South Africa that are
excelling in their work. Last week, Dr Rhoda Kadalie, at an awards
ceremony, presented certificates to people who, despite all the odds,
delivered excellence. The people who took part in this certificate ceremony
were not only from across the Western Cape but were in fact from different
parts of the country’s different provinces. Although we have pockets of
excellence, we believe we have to fast-track a culture of rewarding
excellence. I am deeply worried that at times we get the impression that we
reward mediocrity.

Therefore, Africa also needs to take serious stock of why development aid
has not worked. We don’t have the time to go into why development aid is
not helping Africa. But there is a great book – Architects of Poverty –
that helps us understand why development aid is not working in Africa.

There is another great book – Dead Aid, by Dambisa Moyo – that explains in
great detail why development aid is not working in Africa. Moyo, who is
from Lusaka, believes – and I share this view – that if we stop development
aid in Africa, a new spirit of entrepreneurship will be ignited.

My plea is therefore that we must create opportunities in and for Africa.
We must not put Africa on sale to China, to India or to America. We must
find African solutions to African problems; we must celebrate what we have
already achieved in the 2010 Fifa World Cup. We must invest more in the
protection of our children and women on the African continent; and we must
recognise and reward our many social entrepreneurs.
Now, I want to ask this House to take the lead in convincing the African
Union and the Pan-African Parliament to start a new project to give Africa
life - the manufacturing of a car, a motor vehicle. One could start with
North Africa and arrange a competition to encourage the North African
students to design the car. Then one could go to West Africa and get the
West African students to design the interior of the car for competition
purposes. Then one could have a competition in East Africa for the design
of the electrical parts of the car. And one could come to South Africa,
where the engine of the car could be manufactured.

In this way, we can have a car for Africa. We can export things. Millions
of people can buy cars. Africa, thus, doesn’t have to import cars; we can
export cars. If you want to be a great continent, Africa, come alive!
Manufacture a car. The technology is so simple. You can take the brain
power in this room and manufacture a car in your backyard! Africa, come
alive! I greet Africa. I dream of a day when I can drive in an African car.


Malaysia is now manufacturing a car called Proton. The Chinese are
manufacturing a car called Chana. I dream of a day when I no longer drive a
car from Germany but a car from the great continent of Africa. I believe
that if you give my passion for Africa, the content that hon Tim Harris has
spoken of, we can make Africa come alive. I thank you.

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, at a recent dinner in Limpopo, the hon
Chairperson of this House, Mahlangu, raised the most critical question
regarding today’s very topical debate on Africa. He asked, “What went wrong
with Africa?” I want to add Cope’s voice to that question.

A continent alive with opportunities, wealth and prosperity, but in all
reality a continent that cannot rid itself of the stench of poverty, the
hardship of oppression, the images of fruitless wars and dictatorships,
crippling disease and the looting of state resources. Because of this, Afro-
pessimism labels Africa as the dark continent of the world.

But on the eve of hosting the biggest and most glorious sports event in the
world and on behalf of Africa, South Africa can boast as a nation that we
have paved the way for millions of Africans. By presenting alternatives,
creating hope and building a future built on the principles of freedom,
respect, and equality, South Africa, through qualitative leadership
influenced by, inter alia, Nelson Mandela, F W de Klerk and Thabo Mbeki and
implemented by many respectful and credible leaders, became a beacon of
hope. That was through decisive leadership!

The Nobel Peace Prize Laureate from Kenya, Wangari Maathai, remarked:

   One of the major tragedies of postcolonial Africa is that the African
   people have trusted their leaders, but only a few of those leaders have
   honoured that trust.

The answer to our extremely relevant question is not far removed from this
notion of credible leadership. Must Africa be satisfied with mediocre
leaders who, in the name of liberalisation, destroy the principles of
constitutions? Must Africa be satisfied to remain the skunk of the world
whilst warlords, military juntas and the politically connected loot the
wealth of their country? Or must we as Africans remain patient whilst the
neglect of our people reflects in the rising infant mortality rate and the
declining levels of our education?

No, the voices of credible African leaders must fill the boardrooms and
chambers of the world. Africa cannot remain the stepchild of the world,
living on grants and handouts from the developed world. We must take
responsibility for our future. I also want to drive an African car.

The reality that freedom brings responsibility must always be superior in
our behaviour and conduct. This freedom also presents opportunities to us
as Africans to make our place of birth and the home of our ancestors the
continent of hope and prosperity. Through visionary leadership, the
opportunities created by globalisation and climate change must be used.
Credible institutions, a transparent and participative democracy, effective
and efficient governance, commitment to all the people who elect us and
other representatives in all spheres of government must be the glue that
cements us together.

But as leaders, we must reinstate the trust of the people who elected us.
This is the answer to the question put by the hon Mahlangu. The majority of
African leaders have betrayed the trust that their own people put in them.
As Africans, we must put the interests of our continent and our people
first again. Only then will we achieve sustainable democracy, unity, peace
and prosperity in Africa. [Interjections.] [Time expired.]

I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: House Chair and hon Deputy Minister, what is it to be an
African? Being an African means embracing the rich diversity that makes up
this beautiful continent. An African is also someone who feels solidarity
with all the people of the continent and the enormous struggles that are
being waged by them on a daily basis.

Despite the images that are continuously presented by those with an Afro-
pessimistic outlook, this is a continent of hope, which is busy lifting
itself up from centuries of abuse at the hands of slave merchants,
colonialists and dictators who have all exploited Africa’s wealth for their
own ends.
The greatest challenge facing us in Africa now is to grow strong democratic
and accountable institutions that can ensure that the immense wealth of
this continent is no longer used to further the interests of elites, but
rather those of the people themselves. The people of Africa need to be
economically empowered. The wealth of Africa must belong to the people of
Africa. This is a struggle we must never pull back from!

It is time for us to rebuild the strength of Africa by unlocking the
resourcefulness of our people to overcome adversity and by giving the world
the human face that it so desperately requires. Being African and being
proud of that also demands a certain kind of behaviour from us.

We should at all times be guided by the principles of those who have led
the way, like Steve Biko, Robert Mangaliso Sobukwe, O R Tambo, Lilian
Ngoyi, Kwame Nkrumah, Nelson Mandela and thousands of ordinary citizens
that have fought for real freedom over centuries. This means that the
behaviour of our currently leading government’s front company Chancellor
House in acquiring a majority share in the Maloma Colliery in Swaziland
must be condemned as an act that strengthens the authoritarian Swaziland
monarchy and regime. Is this the ANC’s response to Amnesty International’s
call on the ANC government to take action against Swaziland over the death
in detention of Swazi political activist Sipho Jele?

The South African government is fast becoming like those western
governments that encourage democracy at home while at the same time
propping up authoritarian nations oversees through a variety of selfish
neocolonial policies and investments. I thank you, Chairperson.

Ms B S MOHLAKA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson and Deputy Minister, the
history of South Africa is tragic, and our future is opaque. Africa is
currently the most impoverished and least developed part of the globe.
Africa’s population growth rate is increasing by the day, putting pressure
on limited resources and leaving future generations of Africans with
nothing but absolute poverty. Africa is very poor in terms of education,
economic improvement, infrastructure, health care, etc.

It is hoped that economic growth would help drag the African poor above the
poverty line. However, so far economic growth has been highly uneven,
benefiting the skilled and wealthy disproportionately. Many of Africa’s
rural poor have yet to receive any tangible benefit from Africa’s economic
growth. The global economic crisis has also impacted negatively on Africa’s
growth prospects and posed challenges for job creation and development.

On this year’s celebration, let us think about the global economic picture
and reflect on the reasons for the persistent and extreme poverty in many
African countries. Let us not only say, but truly believe, that we will
never be able to tackle the multiplicity of African problems in the face of
poverty.

We are therefore calling on Nepad to channel the aid and investments to
public education, health and the struggle against HIV, and to restoring
roads, airports, ports, telecom infrastructures and water supply and
sanitation.

There can be no development for future prosperity if African governments
are failing to meet their Millennium Development Goals and targets, which
are aimed at improving Africa’s vulnerable populace, including women,
youth, children and the disabled.

Still, we are not powerless. There are reasons why optimism should prevail
over pessimism. Indeed, in this global world of unprecedented knowledge and
skill, we have great opportunity. The trend towards multiparty democracy,
and thus peace, seems to be irreversible, and countries like China have
identified Africa as an economic partner. All Africa needs right now are
investors who will come and invest in Africa and create jobs, so that the
poor mothers and fathers can get meaningful jobs to do in order to cater
for themselves and their children. Solutions to the crisis facing the
African continent should not be left to a few outside countries, but Africa
should take the lead in tackling its own problems.

South Africa should be conscious of its privileged position in Africa,
given our economic power and resources. Consequently, the opportunity to
host the 2010 Fifa World Cup gives us further leverage in our attempts to
elevate the African agenda at a global level. Up, Bafana Bafana, up! We
must make the most of this wonderful opportunity, and ensure that the rest
of the world realises what a beautiful and culturally unique continent
Africa is. I thank you, Madam Chair. [Applause.]

Mr A J NYAMBI: Chair, I am so fortunate because I have this opportunity to
speak after the historic revival of the ANC during the past weekend in
Mpumalanga. To those who are raising things like us having an African car,
that is not a bad idea. But as members here, some don’t even have a gold
watch, yet they are extracting gold from South Africa. To give you some
brotherly advice, I will take what was named by Gandhi as the seven things
that can destroy us: politics without principle; knowledge without
character; pleasure without conscience; wealth without work; commerce
without morality; worship without sacrifice; and science without humanity.

On 25 May 1963, several African states converged in Addis Ababa in Ethiopia
to establish the OAU with the view of creating a continental platform to
debate the total liberation of the African continent. This was inspired by
the spirit of unity and solidarity of all African people in addressing
political and economic challenges facing the continent.
While the overall political objective of the OAU was to eradicate the
remaining aspects of colonialism on the continent, African leaders who
gathered in Addis Ababa had a vision to promote the unity and solidarity of
African states and socioeconomic and political co-operation, so as to
stabilise Africa. Therefore, 25 May of each year has become the day on
which Africa observes the creation of the OAU and pays tribute to African
leaders who sought joint intervention to challenges that faced the African
continent.

Even though the OAU was transformed into the African Union in July 2002, 25
May remained the day on which Africa remembers the formation of the OAU and
the intervention it made to advance the African cause. With its
transformation into the African Union, the mandate was widened to include
the promotion of democracy, human rights and economic development.
Therefore, in celebrating Africa Day, we reflect on the challenges of
instability, underdevelopment and abuse of human rights on the continent
and the collective efforts that are required to address these challenges.
While recognising challenges and acknowledging advances made since the
establishment of the OAU, we need to identify required collective
interventions and confront the challenges.

Throughout the painful period of colonial domination, the necessary
emergence of country-specific movements for national liberation within the
boundaries defined by the colonial regime took place. The people of our
continent never lost their sense of being African. Their shared suffering
at the hands of colonial powers and the fact that they were united by their
common struggle for national liberation reinforced the sense of a common
identity as Africans. This sense of common identity was reinforced by the
position that independent Africa took from the start - that no African
country could be genuinely free until all African countries secured their
liberation.

We salute the OAU for its contribution to this historic outcome. It
established the political basis that informs the approach of its member
states to the struggle for the total liberation of Africa, including our
country. It created its own committee for the liberation of Africa, the
liberation committee which played a critical role as a partner of all
African liberation movements, including the ANC. For us, the celebration of
the OAU must necessarily also be a moment to pay special tribute to the OAU
Liberation Committee. This will give us the opportunity to acknowledge the
early support we received from a number of African countries as soon as we
reached out to them after the banning of our movement and the decision to
all resort to armed struggle.

The socioeconomic development of the continent involves both quantitative
and qualitative changes in society. The concept of development involves
both economic growth as well as the improvement of the living standards of
the people. Both economic growth and socioeconomic development on the
African continent could best be explained by developmental state policies.

With regard to developmental initiatives, the funding for African
development has come all too often with structural adjustment programmes,
which undermine the capacity of African states to realise economic
development. These programmes require African governments to be more
concerned about capital inflow at the expense of the demands of its
citizens.

A market-driven economic strategy has been imposed in many states as a
development strategy, and this paradigm still dominates the continent.
However, it is true to say that in the last two years this paradigm has
been challenged. We have emerging countries who have displayed the market-
driven strategy, especially since the global economic crisis hit the
continent. This has forced countries in Africa to rethink the essence of
developmental economies - who drives this and how it should be funded.

There has been widespread disillusionment with the neoliberal policies of
international financial institutions. Instead of promoting development in
Africa, these policies have exacerbated unemployment, poverty and
marginalisation. States pursuing these policies have recorded positive
economic growth while performing poorly in improving the living conditions
of the people in Africa.

During the course of the South African liberation struggle, sacrifices were
made across the continent. This was a period during which the liberation
movement received food, shelter and facilities from various countries to
enhance its endeavour to destroy colonialism and apartheid in South Africa.
In the same spirit with which fellow Africans acted in unity and solidarity
to defeat colonialism and apartheid, they are now expected to act together
to transform Africa into a peaceful and prosperous continent that is
capable of resolving its own challenges and providing a better life for
all.

The ANC joined the OAU in 1963, and our democratic government is part of
the African Union because it views such structure as a forum where it can
contribute to continental attempts to deepen the unity of Africa’s diverse
people and cultures and advance their common wellbeing. We have to
encourage all African states to participate in these continental structures
because this is where these states will develop a common understanding and
common approaches to challenges which continue to undermine peace and
stability on the continent.

Africans need unity, and this unity can be effected by continental
structures. It is these continental structures that are supposed to unite
the people of the African continent through their uniform decisions.
Uniting people around decisions will result in, among others, the success,
growth and strength of these continental structures.
In conclusion, within the context of promoting access to social justice on
the African continent, we have to ensure that African states become
relevant to people’s lives. States have to facilitate the redistribution of
wealth because democracy is meaningless without the fulfilment of the
economic aspirations of the people. Economic redistribution promotes
redistributive and social justice.

Economic growth must result in qualitative development which considers the
impact of such growth in relation to the changing of the quality of life of
a nation. Let us use Africa Day to debate these socioeconomic issues with
the view to unite African people behind one economic vision that will
produce both quantitative and qualitative development on the African
continent. I thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION (Ms S C van
der Merwe): Chairperson, colleagues and hon members, thank you very much
for a very engaging and lively debate. I wish I could come here a little
more often because I think the kind of debate you have in this forum is
very conducive to talking to one another, and I think it’s important.

Let me also say how wonderful I thought it was that so many of you lifted
out the comments and remarks made by great African leaders - Kwame Nkrumah,
Mwalimo Nyerere, Marcus Garvey and, indeed, some of our adopted heroes,
such as Gandhi. I think that those things will stand us in very good stead
as we talk to each other into the future about where we plan to go with our
continent.

Let me also say that I was very impressed with the practicality of the
suggestions that came from many of our members, including discussions
around education, health and the prevention of conflicts. I think these are
all extremely important points which we can take forward, not only from our
department’s side but also as a South African Parliament, into the debate
on where South Africa is going.

I also want to highlight something that I spent very little time on - but I
think it is very important - which is the role of women in the whole
process of developing the African continent. Our approach to diplomacy has
always been to keep the doors open for discussion with everybody. It is no
good only to talk to your friends. We believe that we must remain engaged
with the countries that do not agree with us so that we can persuade them
of our views. This is why I’m so glad that the hon member of the DA was
complimentary on a few of the things I said. Clearly, we had an effect in
our persuasion of them about our views.

I also would like to thank the hon member for the compliment on the
consular services. I think we have a very, very good cadre of diplomats
working abroad, and sometimes they go unnoticed. I would like to pay
tribute to those good ones out there who provide the services and
contribute to our country in this way.

Let me underline as well that South Africa’s foreign policy is based on its
domestic priorities; this is very important. There are five key domestic
priorities - you all know them - namely health, education, reduction of
crime, rural development and decent jobs. This is what underpins the way in
which we look at our international relations. In this sense, we have a
Constitution that is paramount in our domestic policy. This is a
Constitution that protects the rights of all people in our country and
promotes the rights of all people. It looks at issues to protect people in
every sphere of our lives, as underpinned by the Constitution and the Bill
of Rights.

Here we do enjoy respect for the human rights of all people, and that
includes gender rights and rights with regard to sexual orientation. I do
not think that this country can be faulted on our approach in this regard.
Every time somebody passes a law in another country that we disagree with,
we do not necessarily comment on it. We use our diplomatic force and our
diplomatic agenda to persuade them of our views on these matters
underpinned by our Constitution. I do not believe that we can comment on
every single law that we do not agree with in another country. But I think
our record, particularly on sexual orientation, stands for itself.
[Interjections.]

Well, I’m coming to that.

I also want to point out that there is no such thing as a declaration; you
must get your facts right. There was indeed a statement made by one country
in the United Nations, which some countries supported, but South Africa
found it to be faulty and did not support it. It has no status of law at
the United Nations and it does not hold any water. It was simply a
statement made by some country, and I don’t know off-hand what it was.
There is no such thing as a declaration.

The next question, which I think is extremely important, was raised – I
believe – by a member from the DA. South Africa does have a car, which is
called the “Joule” or the “Jol” or the “Yol” or the “Jouvielle”. It is an
emission-free car. It has been developed by our scientists in science and
technology. It is under production in Cape Town as we speak. [Applause.]
So, let’s just remember that. [Laughter.] This is going to be a green, eco-
friendly car. We will hopefully drive it in the near future. The prototype
has been designed; it is on the floor. The car is being developed as we
speak.

The next question I want to address, which was raised by many people, is
about the contribution of other big players in the world, such as China and
India. Many people here, especially from the opposition, spoke about these
countries in a negative sense. Let’s face it: China and India are driving
world growth. Should we not be partners with them in this driving of world
growth? I think China and India offer an opportunity for South Africa - for
our products and co-operation - in a way that no European or American
market can offer at this point. I think it is negative to suggest that
China and India are only here to take our resources. We, as a stand-alone,
sovereign country, should use the opportunities that we have through our
diplomatic relationship with them to build our own economy.

I think this is a very important point. Let’s face it. Let’s not talk about
Africa - like some of you did - as “the dark continent”, and so on. Africa
has a young and growing population; not an old population like some other
continents. Africa has a growing economy in a situation where many
economies are in the doldrums. Africa also has resources and the potential
to generate energy. I think we should use these as opportunities to take
our advantage now and go forward in partnership with other countries that
want to do business with us.

One of you, who doesn’t agree with me on anything, said, “Africa must come
alive”. I can agree with that person on that. Africa, come alive! Somebody
else said, “Mayibuye iAfrika” [Let Africa return], and that’s how I would
like to end. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Council adjourned at 17:21.
                                  ________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

TABLINGS

National Council of Provinces

1.    The Chairperson

   (a)      Progress Reports on the interventions to Alfred Nzo District
        Municipality and Kou-Kamma Local Municipality in the Eastern Cape,
        issued in terms of section 139(1)(b) of the Constitution, 1996.

Referred to the Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional
Affairs for consideration and report.


