---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 03 June 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2010-06-03
---

THURSDAY, 3 JUNE 2010
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 14:04.

The Speaker of the National Assembly took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

                        DEBATE ON 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Order! Hon members, there should be no
vuvuzelas in the House, please.

Hon members, members of the public and our esteemed guests, as we know, the
first Fifa Soccer World Cup tournament on African soil kicks off in seven
days. The elected representatives of the people thought it proper that they
should express themselves on this important event on the sporting calendar
and in the country’s history, in the form of a debate.

At this point, I would like to acknowledge the Deputy President, and
current Acting President of the Republic, for his work as chairperson of
the interministerial committee on the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup.
[Applause.] The hon Deputy President is himself a renowned footballer,
having played football even in prison.

Hon members, we will be joined shortly by the representatives of Fifa and
the SA Football Association, Safa, and we will announce them once they have
arrived. I now invite the hon B M Komphela to address the House.
[Applause.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Speaker, Deputy President, Ministers, and our people in
the gallery, to us as the ANC, and as the Parliament of the Republic of
South Africa, this is an exciting chapter that we are closing today. It has
been a long walk by Madiba to be where we are, at times against difficult
odds — at times we would wonder what kind of country we are that nobody was
willing to give us a fair chance!

It has taken a painful and concerted effort by the people of this country,
led by Nelson Mandela, for the world and the nations of the world to
finally give us a fair chance. Today we are celebrating the fruits of a
democratic country. Today we are celebrating this important event, the 2010
Fifa World Cup, because we have been given a fair chance. That is the only
thing that we needed: a fair chance. [Applause.]
History tells us that on 15 May 2004 at 12:21, the exact same time in South
Africa and Switzerland, the president of Fifa walked into a packed
auditorium, opened the envelope, and in that envelope was fair play: South
Africa had been given the honour of hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup.
[Applause.]

At the press conference at the World Trade Centre in Zürich, in that
auditorium, the vuvuzela was blown and our own “national anthem”,
Shosholoza, was the order of the day to demonstrate that when we as South
Africans are happy, we sing. When we as South Africans are in pain, we
sing. That is how we express ourselves as a country and as a people.

Having been given this chance to say something, I would like to convey the
following message, Deputy President. Nelson Mandela stated: “South Africans
should treat this decision with humility and without arrogance because we
are, after all, equal.” [Applause.] The message that we as a Parliament are
conveying today to Tat’ Nelson Mandela is that we are demonstrating the
greatest humility ever in accepting the message that he has given to us.
With the greatest humility, we are saying to the nations of the world that
because they have given us a chance, we will accept them. They will never,
ever in their lifetimes forget South Africa. [Applause.]

A dream of the nation has come true. Stadiums are ready; airports are
ready; roads are ready; accommodation is ready; above all ...
... Nyambose, baza kulala ngoxolo bevule iminyango.  [Nyambose, they will
sleep peacefully with their doors open.] Security is ready in this country.
[Applause.]

It is so wonderful today to be an African. It is so nice today to be an
African, because we pride ourselves on working diligently on the little job
that we have been given as a country, and we have surprised people many
times because as a people, as a nation, we always come together when there
is a problem that is confronting us as a nation, as South Africans.

I would like to say that at the time, four years ago, when South Africa was
given the honour of hosting the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup – and I want to
say this today as we close this chapter — there was never a dissenting view
from the opposition in regard to its being right that the tournament was
given to South Africa because it was judged and adjudicated on a fair
basis. Therefore, we in South Africa, all of us, must come together and
make sure that this Soccer World Cup is a success. [Applause.]

Regarding the members of the portfolio committee, I don’t want to mention
the mighty ANC, so I will talk about the very important humble people of
the opposition.

Mr M J ELLIS: Donald Lee.

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Donald Lee, yes. You are right, my friend. Donald would
say that whatever side of the political divide we are on, this is a matter
that concerns the nation, and therefore we cannot differ but should support
each other in making the Soccer World Cup a success. [Applause.] Deputy
President, it is true: you can go and check the records of our
parliamentary proceedings. Donald Lee broke the cycle and said that even if
other people were running us down by saying that we would never succeed in
hosting this World Cup, we were confident as a country that we would, and
we were going to have the best World Cup ever in our lifetime. [Applause.]
We have given this undertaking, and we have lived up to that undertaking.

In the IFP ...

... Shenge, kukhona umfana okuthiwa laphaya nguDlamini omncane. [...
Shenge, there is a boy called Dlamini junior.]

He has been representing the IFP and has been saying that the mandate he
got from his party was that we should celebrate the 2010 Fifa World Cup. We
will be at the forefront of leading the celebration. Today we are at that
point of celebrating. [Applause.]

Deputy President, we have a deal with the FF Plus, and Minister Naledi
Pandor, that today I am going to tell South Africans a story I know. It
demonstrates that all of us as a country are behind the 2010 Fifa Soccer
World Cup success. When the director in the Office of the President, Frank
Chikane, was in Cape Town, there was nobody to hand over a letter, a
deciding letter for the delegation from South Africa and to go to Zürich.
That letter from government was needed, and there was nobody in Cape Town
to hand it over. The only person who was there was a certain hon member
called Pieter Mulder. This Pieter Mulder took the letter to O R Tambo
Airport and said that it was a letter that he had been requested to give to
the delegation so that when they arrived in Zürich with Madiba, the country
would be making a submission saying that as a country we were supportive of
this, and that we should please be given a chance and the honour of hosting
the 2010 World Cup. [Applause.]

Pieter, baie dankie. Jy kon onbeskof geraak het en nie die brief geneem het
nie, maar ons sê baie dankie dat jy deelgeneem het sodat ons ŉ beter
sokkerwêreldbekertoernooi in 2010 kan hê en in staat sal wees om fees te
vier. [Gelag.] [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Pieter, thank you very much. You could have been rude and not have taken
the letter, but we thank you for participating so that we can have a better
2010 Soccer World Cup Tournament and will be able to celebrate. [Laughter.]
[Applause.]]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, on that happy note, your time has expired.
[Laughter.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Thank you, Speaker. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I have to say, sir, that earlier today I promised
you that there would be no points of order, so this isn’t a point of order.
But one cannot stand here and not notice that there is a very, very
important person in the gallery. I suspect, sir, that you would want to
welcome that person.

The SPEAKER: I will, sir, when you sit down. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I wish, on your behalf, to recognise and
welcome to the gallery our football mascot, Zakumi. Kindly give a warm
welcome to our mascot. [Applause.] A warm welcome to you.

Mr T D LEE: Mr Speaker, Mr Deputy President, Ministers, colleagues and
friends in the gallery, I can feel it! It is here!

HON MEMBERS: Yes. [Applause.]

Mr T D LEE: I can feel it to such an extent that I feel like behaving
unparliamentarily and blowing a vuvuzela, as well as asking my friend, the
hon Butana Komphela, to join me at the podium, so that we can address you
together. That is how we feel. We feel it together! [Applause.]

Today is not a day for politics, but rather a day for diski dancing and
celebrating. We have so much to celebrate on this joyous occasion, on this
joyous day. It is a beautiful day! We must celebrate the fact that this is
the first Fifa World Cup to be staged on African soil. What we should be
even more proud of is the fact that it is happening here in our beautiful
country, South Africa, and what a beautiful country we have! [Applause.]

We should be proud of the legacy that this event is going to leave behind.
The roads, the stadia, the fan parks and the public viewing areas bear
testimony, not only to our dedication and our will to succeed, but also to
the vast pool of technical skills this country has.

Messrs Jérôme Valcke – I don’t know if he is here – Jordaan and Khoza, I
want to direct a special request to you: To make sure that the massive
Bafana Bafana World Cup jersey remains in South Africa as part of this
legacy.

Vir ŉ maand kry ons die uitsonderlike geleentheid om ons land in al sy
glorie aan miljoene kykers regoor die wêreld ten toon te stel. Kom ons
gebruik die geleentheid om ŉ positiewe beeld van ons land uit te straal.
Laat ons vir die wêreld wys dat daar geen beter land as Suid—Afrika is nie,
en dat dit winsgewend is om in Suid—Afrika te belê. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[For a month we will have the exceptional opportunity to showcase our
country in all its glory to millions of viewers across the world. Let us
use this opportunity to reflect a positive image of our country. Let us
show the world that there is no better country than South Africa, and that
it is profitable to invest in South Africa.]

We should be ever grateful to the team who made all of this possible. Here,
I want to thank the Deputy President – the Acting President — and his team,
the Ministers. Thank you very much for what you have done for us. It is a
job well done. [Applause.] I also want to say to Dr Irvin Khoza and Dr
Danny Jordaan the same thing: it is a job well done, a big team effort.
[Applause.]

My sincere appreciation goes to the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee
on Sport and Recreation, Mr Butana Komphela, because he knows what
inclusiveness means. We walked this road together. It was a nonpartisan
project. Thank you, Butana, for the leadership you have shown. [Applause.]

To Mr Carlos Parreira and the coaching staff: your dedication and hard work
is much appreciated. To Aaron Mokoena and the team: congratulations to all
of you on being in the final 23. I know that you will make us all proud and
we are all behind you.

Aaron, I have penned a battle cry for Bafana Bafana, which I hope will
inspire you. Here, I must thank my co-author. His name is James Selfe. He
said that he would sue me if I didn’t mention his name! Here is Bafana
Bafana’s battle cry:

   B stands for brave — to battle we call!
   A stands for agile when chasing the ball.
   F stands for fast — fleet-footed they go.
   A stands for aggressive, but nonsense no!
   N stands for nation’s pride with heads held high.
   A stands for ambitious — till the end we will try!

[Applause.]

   Say it once, you say Bafana.
   Say it twice, you say Bafana Bafana!

[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon member! You left before your time had expired.
Thank you very much.

Mr G P D MAC KENZIE: Speaker, Deputy President, hon Ministers, Members of
Parliament, and guests in the gallery, we have eight days to go. It is
here! Feel it! South African flags are flying high. Motorists have attached
flags to their car windows and are draping South African flags on the backs
of their rear-view mirrors. Those who have tickets in their hands can’t
wait for next Friday to come.

The South African squad has been picked and Bafana Bafana has started to
impress. There is an air of excited expectancy everywhere. To Aaron, Tsepo,
Surprise, Steven, Teku and the other Bafana Bafana players: Please keep the
cup here. Do not let it go back. [Applause.]

Already, even before the whistle has blown, South Africa is looking like a
changed country. Some of the unintended positive consequences of the Fifa
World Cup are that two great rugby matches were played at Orlando Stadium,
which brought white and black together on a scale never before witnessed in
South Africa. Our people, regardless of colour, partied late into the night
in Soweto, and those two days did for race relations what we as politicians
can only envy. International TV crews have exposed some unpleasant sights
in our country, but all that will refocus our energies in order to put
those things right as well.

Likewise, our cities are the cleanest they have ever been. Our transport
system is in the best shape it has ever been. Our airports are world-class.
Anyone who left South Africa five years ago and was returning might say:
What miracle was wrought here? Indeed, we have never had stadia like the
ones we have today, and we have never had such excitement either.

South Africa looks like a country destined to be transformed, not by
politics, but by sport. Firstly, there was the Rugby World Cup with the
iconic Nelson Mandela donning the No 6 Springbok jersey and peaked cap.
What a moment it was when President Mandela presented the Rugby World Cup
to Springbok skipper Francois Pienaar in 1995. The President said he had
never been so tense in his whole life as when he was waiting for a
favourable outcome in the clash with New Zealand. Hon Ministers Stofile and
Gordhan, maybe we can still twist your arms to increase the sport budget.
South Africa also hosted the Cricket World Cup.

Now, however, comes the biggest spectacle and biggest opportunity to
achieve a common national identity. As South Africans we are destined to
achieve great things together and that togetherness must be forged in the
burning excitement that is the World Cup. Never mind the costs we will have
to carry; we as South Africans can use sport to achieve what other nations
have done through war.

South Africa has enormous passion for rugby and cricket. But when it comes
to soccer, not all the vuvuzelas in South Africa can capture how enormous
that passion is. Like cricket is religion in India, soccer is religion in
South Africa. What we are about to witness is going to live with us for the
rest of our lives.

Hordes of people from all around the world will be invading our cities and
shores. Many different languages will be spoken and the world will see a
country that is unlike any other in the world. This is the opportunity for
us to flaunt our scenic beauty, our vibrant culture, our natural
friendliness and our attractions as a tourist destination.

The story of the World Cup for South Africa is one of promises, betrayal,
hardship, struggles and triumph. Many people never thought it was going to
happen and never believed that we had the capacity to deliver on time. So
far, we have done everything by the book, and if we attend to all the minor
details remaining, we will, in a month from now, have exceeded everyone’s
expectations. To the doomsayers I say: Don’t fret. Relax and enjoy the
soccer. To The Sun newspaper in Britain, I say: Don’t print rubbish about
snakes being the biggest problem for the English football side.

To Fifa, I wish to say a big thank you for letting South Africa host the
World Cup. It will be the best and greatest ever.

What is unique about the Fifa World Cup is that this is something for the
whole continent of Africa to enjoy. It is a giant awakening. This World Cup
will change the stereotypes about us in South Africa, as well as the
continent. It will energise sports in Africa like never before.

Beyond the unbelievable excitement that is now reaching a crescendo, there
will be legitimate questions about the maintenance of our stadia. The point
is that government and sports administrators will have to maintain the
present intensity to ensure that the legacy going forward remains strong,
intact and enduring.

To you, chairperson Khompela, and my fellow committee members, I wish to
say with pride that we evinced unity and worked with purpose to ensure that
the finest details were attended to during our oversight work together.

The excitement must be built on and must never be allowed to flounder.

Phambili, Mzansi Afrika! Phambili! [Forward, Mzansi Africa! Forward!]

HON MEMBERS: Phambili! [Ihlombe.] [Forward! [Applause.]]

Mr G P D MAC KENZIE: Phambili, Bafana Bafana! Phambili! Laduma! [Ihlombe.]
[Forward, Bafana Bafana! Forward! Goal! [Applause.]]

Mr E J LUCAS: Mr Speaker, Acting President and colleagues, with the Fifa
World Cup just seven days away, it is good to see signs of a united South
Africa with one goal in mind, which is for the World Cup to be a success.

It is wonderful to see the colour, song and dance of all the South African
people. The World Cup buzz has certainly affected or, should I say,
infected me, my family and the community. It is fantastic to be able to
share the excitement with all South Africans, regardless of race or class.

I find it particularly satisfying to see the negative attitudes towards
South Africa’s ability to host the games crumble one by one. We are
certainly not failing. Our achievements are amazing. South Africa now has
nine new stadia, which are of a world-class standard. Does that not make
you proud? I am sure it does.

The construction of the stadia has created many new jobs and has developed
many new skills in the South African labour force. This is good for the
future of our country.

It is the IFP’s hope that effective maintenance of and upgrading mechanisms
for all these new developments have been or will be instituted in order to
ensure that these facilities stay in tiptop condition to be enjoyed by our
children, our children’s children and all following generations. If
properly taken care of, this could be a tangible inheritance that we will
leave for them to enjoy.

The Durban stadium, with its viewing arch and the facility for bungee
jumping, is an indication of futuristic thinking on how a stadium can be
utilised to its fullest capacity. The roadworks around the stadiums and
cities have improved transport infrastructure drastically. Other facilities
constructed for people coming to the World Cup will certainly improve the
quality of life of South Africans once the World Cup has ended.

This will also be an opportunity to sell South Africa to the world. For the
duration of the World Cup and hopefully beyond, all South Africans have to
become South African ambassadors by being helpful and treating people with
kindness and respect, which will hopefully encourage them to make South
Africa their next tourist destination. This will eventually be a major
boost for tourism, which will help strengthen our economy.

I can only hope, however, that the South African hotel industry and ...

The SPEAKER: Hon members, there’s too much noise in the House. Please allow
the speaker to be heard. Continue, hon member.

Mr E J LUCAS: I can only hope, however, that the South African hotel
industry and the transport service providers have learnt the negative
lessons that come from overpricing their services, thereby losing customers
and raising perceptions of exploitation. It is, unfortunately, a very
expensive lesson that the whole country has to pay for. But let us hope it
will never happen again.

The stage has been set for a wonderful World Cup and we know that Bafana
Bafana will do us proud. Even though our chances of winning don’t seem very
high on paper, we South Africans know what it means to struggle and come
out victorious. Their underdog status might also make other teams
underestimate their abilities. We, sitting on the sidelines, have to play
our part by cheering and supporting them to victory.

But the fact of the matter is that whether Bafana Bafana wins or loses on
the soccer field, South Africa has won the World Cup. We won it when we won
the bid. We won it again when we met deadlines set along the way in order
for the World Cup to be a success. We win it every day as excitement to
kickoff draws nearer. Mostly, we win it by making sure all guests feel at
home with us during the World Cup. Yes, South Africa has won the World Cup,
but we will be depending on Bafana Bafana to keep the trophy in South
Africa!

This is an African World Cup, and as Africans we have a different rhythm, a
different climate and a unique way of doing things. Let us embrace our
uniqueness and make this a proudly African World Cup. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Ms D Z RANTHO: Hon Deputy President, hon Speaker and Deputy Speaker, hon
Chairperson and Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces,
hon members, representatives of Fifa and the SA Football Association, Safa,
ladies and gentlemen, today all of us, by our presence here and by our
celebrations in all parts of our country and the communities in which we
live, confer glory on this and show our happiness by our nation’s readiness
to welcome the people of the world to the shores of our beautiful land.

Former President Nelson Mandela, the icon of our nation, once said that out
of the experience of an extraordinary human disaster that lasted in our
country for far too long, our nation takes each day to rise on the
shoulders of the world.

Indeed, I feel honoured to join the people of South Africa and the rest of
the African continent in saying

“Ke Nako ya Aforika!” [“It is time for Africa!”] Lixesha loMzantsi Afrika.
[It is time for Africa.] Feel it! It is here! We are ready to welcome the
world. [Applause.]

We, the people of South Africa, feel fulfilled that humanity has taken us
back into its bosom and that we, who were reeling from our divided past,
have today been given the rare privilege to be the host of the nations of
the world on our own soil.

We as a Parliament are honoured to have among us the outstanding
compatriots of our nation, who spent sleepless nights preparing for the
2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup, and those who continue to work tirelessly to
make sure that it continues to be a success.

I would like to take this opportunity to express the ANC’s profound
appreciation to the entire leadership of Fifa, particularly its president,
Mr Sepp Blatter, a distinguished ambassador of the people of Africa, whose
life is intimately attached to the soil of this beautiful country, as are
the famous jacaranda trees of Pretoria and the mimosa trees of the
Bushveld.

Allow me also to pay special tribute to Fifa secretary-general Mr Jérôme
Falcke, who has spent most of the past two years in our country. I must say
that in the past few weeks I wondered whether I should not concede equal
citizenship to this outstanding compatriot, who has grown to be a true
South African. [Applause.]

Mr Falcke and Mr Blatter stood firm in defending our nation against those
who stopped at nothing to question our capability of hosting the World Cup.
They went to all corners of our country, ensuring that we defeated the
prophets of doom, who never retreated in their quest to speak ill of our
people and our country.

Let me also extend my profound appreciation to Dr Irvin Khoza, who is the
chairperson of the 2010 Fifa World Cup Local Organising Committee, the Safa
executives, and the entire soccer fraternity.

Allow me also to thank all the men and women — the workers, the volunteers
and the contractors — for their tireless and heroic sacrifices in ensuring
that this World Cup will truly be a success. [Applause.]

Indeed, our people have a great sense of humanity, and pride in the hard
efforts and sterling work they have rendered to our nation. I say to them:
Your sacrifices and commitment to our nation are truly deserving of the
highest national tribute for your contribution to South African life and
the history we envisaged when we fought against racial subjugation.

Since the demise of apartheid in 1994 we have committed ourselves as a
nation to ensuring that our daily deeds produce an actual South African
reality that will reinforce our commitment to sustaining all our hopes for
a better South Africa and a glorious life for all our people.

We are humbled that our nation has yet another opportunity to stand tall on
the shoulders of giant nations and display our capability to deliver a top-
class tournament, and also to show our spirit of ubuntu and humanity.

As the ANC, we remain convinced that our people have shown the world that
we are indeed a nation filled with pride, hope, aspiration and
determination. We have men and women with endless heroism who are committed
to advancing our nation to fulfilling the tallest orders of the world. I am
sure that all of us say with the utmost pride that South Africa is alive
with possibilities.

With just eight days to go to the kickoff of the world’s biggest soccer
event to be held on African soil, there is no question that our nation is
ready to host a spectacular and memorable soccer extravaganza.

With the teams steadily streaming into the country, the roads and the
infrastructure systems look set to transport the millions of fans who will
be travelling countrywide to watch the games. Each time one walks through
the streets of our communities, one is moved by the sense of joy and
exhilaration displayed by those communities.

The spiritual and physical oneness shown by our people indicates the depth
of the path we have travelled in order to build a nonracial and united
South Africa. Many of us have seen how the World Cup has united our people
and encouraged all South Africans to rally behind our national team, Bafana
Bafana, and the symbols that define us as a nation.

We have witnessed our national flag displayed on the walls of shopping
malls, on bridges, on buildings, on cars and in houses. We have seen some
of the host cities glittering with images of our national flag and icons of
our national team. Indeed, this is a clear indication that our nation has
triumphed in its effort to implant hope and a common identity in the hearts
and minds of our people.

We as the ANC remain committed to our covenant that we will continue to
build a society in which all South Africans, both black and white, will be
able to walk tall without any fear in their hearts, assured of their
inalienable right to human dignity, and to a rainbow nation at peace with
itself and proud of its identity and diversity.

We are also aware that South Africa is the first country in the history of
the 2010 Fifa World Cup to offer an event visa. This is a true African
innovation, which has been hailed by Fifa and will surely be emulated by
other countries from now onwards.

The SA Police Service is spending over R640 million on the deployment of 41
000 officers specifically for the event. The vast majority of the police
deployed for the World Cup will be trained officers with experience in
major events. This is not only intended to ensure the safety of our guests,
but to send a clear message to criminals and those who want to follow their
misguided agendas that we will not tolerate any transgression that will
undermine this important event. Let us show them our warm spirit of ubuntu
and unequivocally say that we take the safety of our guests and their sense
of security very seriously.

On behalf of the ANC and the people of South Africa, we say to the people
of the world and our guests: Welcome, and we hope you will enjoy the beauty
of the hills and the valleys, the mountains and the glades, the rivers, the
deserts, the trees, the flowers, the seas and the ever-changing seasons
that you find on the face of our native land. [Applause.] We are humbled
and elevated by the honour and privilege that you have bestowed on us. We
wish you a wonderful and joyous stay in our country. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Thank you, hon member. I wish to welcome back our
mascot up there. Welcome back, Mascot Zakumi.

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Speaker, there were those who said that our country, let
alone Africa, should never have been awarded the 19th Fifa World Cup. “The
stadiums will never be built on time,” they predicted. “Fifa has Australia
waiting in the wings as Plan B,” they whispered. Some even said we would be
engulfed in a machete civil war after the murder of Eugene Terre’Blanche —
just to sell a few more newspapers. We have proved those hollow doomsayers
wrong, and we have shown that we have left our past far behind. [Applause.]


Sir, 49 million South Africans have proved to the world that the most a
pessimist can ever achieve is the empty consolation of being right. Yes, 49
million South Africans stand before the world today and say with one voice:
“Ke nako!” [“Now is the time!”] We are ready! [Applause.]

But more than that, we are ready to deliver a uniquely African World Cup.
As Africans, we celebrate our common heritage in the calabash setting,
nestling in its ring of fire at Soccer City, the Moses Mabhida arch at
eThekwini, and the giraffe supports at Mbombela stadium.

We ask the football gods to echo the words of Isaiah and bestow upon us
wings to soar like eagles, and midfielders who will run and not grow weary.
Let us hope our strikers will be swifter than cheetahs on greased
lightning, and that the Mexican, Uruguayan and French defenders will be
slower than turtles swimming through peanut butter. [Applause.] Now
wouldn’t that be ayoba [nice]? We wish for referees with eyes sharper than
the African fish eagle in our opponents’ penalty area and that they will be
especially vigilant on 22 June in Bloemfontein, where we hope Thierry Henry
will keep his hands strictly to himself. [Laughter.]
 |Phambili, Bafana Bafana! Phambili, Aaron Mokoena! Phambili! [Forward,
Bafana Bafana! Forward, Aaron Mokoena! Forward!]

HON MEMBERS: Phambili! [Forward!]

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Shoot straight, Katlego Mphela! Show them, Stevie P!
Masiziqenye [Let us be proud], Bafana Bafana! [Laughter.]

But late on July the 11th the sound of the last vuvuzela will fade into a
chilly Highveld night and the World Cup will be over. Each one of us must
ensure that the gift of the World Cup carries on giving for the next 30
years.

For if truth be told, we did not successfully bid for this World Cup to
turn a profit on the tournament.  No host nation ever does. We are hosting
this tournament because it offers the once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to
rebrand our country as a safe, friendly, value-for-money destination. If we
get that right, then the expertise of our engineers, the vision of our
architects, and the labour of the tireless workers who built our iconic
stadiums will live on in the legacy of 2010.

Hosting a zero-defect 2010 World Cup, as perfect as a Teko Modise pinpoint
pass, could increase our tourist numbers by as much as 10% per year. That
is equivalent to 125 000 extra jobs, an extra R20 billion of GDP every
year, and around R6 billion more in tax revenue annually. That’s enough to
pay off the stadiums within three years and the national fiscus’s
contribution to the tournament of R33 billion within six years. That’s the
legacy we need to protect.

So, let’s make sure we give all our football fans Africa’s warmest welcome
and do not overcharge them. Let’s keep our country spotlessly clean and our
tourists safe. Let’s make sure that for the next 40 days the only strikers
around are those surging towards our opponents’ goals. Thirty-four billion
people will be watching. [Laughter.]

The year 2010 has accelerated our growth towards one nation with one
future. We must be doing something right if Blue Bulls fans from Pretoria
now blow the vuvuzela with their nearest fellow supporters in Soweto. And
that legacy, as the credit card commercial suggests, is “priceless”. Nkosi
sikelel’ iAfrika. [God bless Africa.] Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: I thank the hon member. Before I invite the next speaker to
the podium, I would like to remind hon members to resist the great
temptation to blow the vuvuzela in the House. [Laughter.]

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Speaker, we are seven days from the World Cup and usually
the number 7 is equated with the notion of good luck. As a young boy, I
played the game. I also coached the game. This game is about scoring goals.

After watching Bafana Bafana’s preparation for the World Cup we can see
that our boys have really improved. Unlike other coaches who rely on
international superstars, Coach Carlos Alberto Parreira has kept his word
by announcing a squad that consists mainly of locals. [Applause.] Local is
lekker, and our boys have the spirit to win.

June 11 will certainly be a significant day in our country’s history, when
all of us will stand united in a free South Africa. Our critics and the
Afro-pessimists will be dumbstruck, while Mexico will be forced to confront
a powerful African-Mexican wave.

The World Cup is on African soil, and we have six teams from the continent
competing, which makes me proud to say: “I am an African.” All of us must
get behind what our hon Deputy President has christened the African
continent’s “six-pack”. The ID calls on all South Africans to support all
African countries to the bitter end, which we hope will actually be sweet!

We are not going to listen to anyone who tells us that an African team will
not put their arms around the World Cup, because we know that the ball is
round and that here in Africa Madiba magic reigns supreme. [Applause.]
Those critics have also not recognised the trump card of South Africa’s
12th player, better known as the vuvuzela. Speaker ...

... ndiyayiva entliziyweni, ndiyayiva esandleni, ndiyayiva ezinyaweni,
ndiyayiva entloko, ndiyayiva jikelele. [Kwaqhwatywa.] [... I can feel it in
my heart, I can feel it in my hand, I can feel it in my feet, I can feel it
in my head, I can feel it all over. [Applause.]]

Speaker, I have managed to sneak in a very small vuvuzela. Viva Bafana
Bafana! [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon member! [Applause.] [Laughter.] Order!
Order! Order, hon members! Hon members, I am advised that our guests have
just arrived. I would like to take this opportunity to recognise the
presence in the gallery of the vice president of Fifa, Mr Issa Hayatou ...
[Applause.] ... the chairman of the Local Organising Committee, Dr Irvin
Khoza ... [Applause.] ... the CEO of the Local Organising Committee, Dr
Danny Jordaan ... [Applause.] ... and the president of the SA Football
Association, Mr Kirsten Nematandani ... [Applause.] ... as well as all
other representatives of both Safa and Fifa. [Applause.] Could you all
please stand up so that we can acknowledge you all? [Applause.] Thank you
very much. To our distinguished guests: welcome to Parliament and please
know that we are honoured to have you here.

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Mr Speaker, the Acting President, the Chairperson of the
NCOP and hon members, the UDM wishes Bafana Bafana the best of luck. We
will be supporting them all the way.

Allow me to salute former President Mandela and the leadership of football
in South Africa during the 1990s. They had the vision and gumption to mount
a serious bid which eventually succeeded in convincing the world. We also,
once more, thank the Local Organising Committee for turning the idea into
reality once we had won the bid.

We are on the eve of an historic event for our country. The value of such
an event cannot be measured in rands and cents alone. If we are committed
and fortunate, the Fifa World Cup will deliver to us a month of goodwill
amongst South Africans, as well as between us and the rest of the world — a
month of goodwill that could add immensely to nation-building and to our
standing among the peoples of the world.

We are a country of intense emotions at certain times. However, for the
next month we are in a position to show first-hand to hundreds of thousands
of visitors how friendly and easy-going we are most of the time, not to
speak of the opportunity to showcase our beautiful country to tens of
millions of potential tourists via television broadcasts.

Finally, in terms of infrastructure development, the World Cup has had an
impact on the socioeconomic landscape of the country. As a result, we were
cushioned from the effects of the recession when it occurred. It is our
hope that these developments will be cascaded beyond the host stadiums and
cities. How I wish that the SA National Roads Agency, which has done a
sterling job on certain highways, could be empowered to expand its efforts
to all provincial roads.

Mr Speaker, if I may advise Bafana Bafana, in a spirit of noninterference,
I would like to offer this reminder to the national coach: It is goals that
win matches. The recent trend of goal-scoring by Bafana Bafana is a welcome
development. May they continue to strike the back of the net regularly for
another five weeks. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Speaker, hon Chairperson of the NCOP, hon Acting
President, Members of Parliament, and officials of Fifa and the SA Football
Association, Safa, it is an honour and a privilege for me to participate in
this debate on the eve of the 2010 Fifa World Cup, which starts in a couple
of days.

I think we all remember how, not very long ago, many, many people in South
Africa were very sceptical about our ability to do exactly what we are
doing now. In a month’s time names like Aaron Mokoena, Steven Pienaar, Teko
Modise, Bongani Khumalo and others will be household names and will be
remembered forever.

I think it is important to know that if we can succeed, united as we are
today in this endeavour that we are now undertaking, then there is no
reason why we cannot also succeed with social cohesion and all our other
challenges in South Africa. We can do it, just like we are doing it today.
[Applause.]

I want to send a message from the FF Plus to our team, Bafana Bafana:
Victory always starts in the head. It is a state of mind. It then spreads
with such radiance and such affirmation that destiny can do nothing but
obey.

I also want to say the following to Bafana Bafana: To handle yourselves,
use your heads; to handle your opponents, use your hearts. And to our
opponents: You must remember that we South Africans don’t take any
prisoners. [Laughter.]

My final word of advice to Bafana Bafana is to accept the well-known slogan
of Vincent Lombardi, coach of the Green Bay Packers — that is exactly what
we expect of Bafana Bafana: Remember, winning is not everything; it is the
only thing. [Applause.] It is the only thing.

We expect Bafana Bafana to win and to make us proud. Go, Bafana Bafana, go!
[Applause.]

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Speaker, Deputy President of the Republic of South
Africa, vice president of Fifa, hon members, members of the Local
Organising Committee, our guests, ladies and gentlemen, fellow South
Africans, and Bafana Bafana, siyawina! [we are going to win!]

I cannot express the honour that I feel has been bestowed on me by my being
amongst the participants in this very important and historic debate on
South Africa’s readiness for the all-important 2010 Fifa World Cup. We
address you to confirm that, as I speak, our country is giving of its best
in welcoming teams from across the world, who will be our guests here for
the next month and a half. As I speak, our security agencies, our roads and
transport agencies, our stadiums and, indeed, our people are ready.

Let me assure you that our National Joint Operational Centre, under the
leadership of the SA Police Service and with the most sophisticated
technology, has become operational and is working 24 hours a day to ensure
that the football teams, the delegations from participating nations, the
officials, the Fifa leadership, heads of state and VIPs are safe.
[Applause.] All security operations related to the 2010 Fifa World Cup,
including the close protection of the 32 teams, the Fifa family, various
visiting heads of state and dignitaries; policing at ports of entry; route
security; inner city security; stadium security; air and maritime defence;
and general crime prevention duties, will be commanded from the National
Joint Operational Centre, Natjoc.

In addition, the Natjoc will liaise closely and continuously with Fifa and
the organising committee, as well as with other police centres which are
linked to operations. Playing countries and neighbouring countries have
sent their representatives to work with our 44 000 police officials. Non-
South African police will perform nonexecutive tasks — that is, they have
no powers to arrest.

Risk assessment has been completed and has determined that in this World
Cup we will adequately and actively be policing nine international
airports, three sea ports and 59 land ports, of which seven have been
prioritised. Our provincial Joint Operational Centres are up and running.
We also have plans for policing certain high and medium-risk matches.

The German team’s accommodation issue has been finalised. The hotel has
been granted a temporary certificate of occupancy. Our Home Affairs
department has already set up an advanced passenger processing system to
make it easier to screen passengers before they depart from their own
countries for South Africa. We have also set up dedicated express lanes at
selected international airports and co-located border posts with
neighbouring countries. Our 24-hour operational centre in Pretoria will
provide statistical information for operational purposes.

Our Home Affairs department is also working with the SA Revenue Service,
Sars, to implement an enhanced movement control system to facilitate the
secure movement of people in and out of the country at 33 priority ports of
entry. We have set up procedures to deal with foreign nationals that we
will adhere to strictly. We have prepared our people and our team to
deliver the best World Cup ever.

Of course, Mr Speaker, I have prepared another, alternative team. Let me
thank the people of South Africa for appointing me to coach a team of
Badala Badala. [Laughter.] That team will be on standby to assist Bafana
Bafana should the need arise, thus becoming the reserve team. [Laughter.]

As the self-anointed coach, let me take this opportunity to announce my
alternative winning team. I have appointed my assistant coach and he is
Butana “The Fire” Komphela; my No 1 head of the technical team is Mathole
“The Activist” Motshekga; my No 1 goalkeeper is Nelson “United Nations”
Mandela; my No 2 defender is Sandile “Rider” Ngcobo; my No 3 defender is
Max “Order!” Sisulu; my No 4 defender is Thabo “T-bo Touch” Mbeki; and my
No 5 sweeper and marshalling defender is Kgalema “The Brains” Motlanthe.
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

My No 7 attacking midfielder is Irvin “Iron Duke” Khoza; my No 9 attacking
midfielder is Kaizer “Shintsha Guluva” Motaung; my No 8 defending
midfielder is Makhenkesi “Vuvuzela” Stofile; my No 6 attacking and
defending midfielder is Mangosuthu “Laduma” Buthelezi; and my No 11 deadly
striker is Danny “Shosholoza” Jordaan. My No 10 playmaker midfielder,
“Captain! my Captain!”, is Jacob “Commander-in-Chief” Zuma, who will also
be the captain. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

My No 1 South African supporter is Sepp “Afrika, Ke Nako” Blatter; my No 1
reserve goalkeeper is Kenneth “Titanic” Meshoe; my No 1 substitute is
Kirsten “My Ambassador” Nematandani; and my No 2 substitute is Mike
“Calling for Division” Ellis. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

I offer my apologies to all those good and potential players who could not
make it on to the Badala Badala team. Fifa wants only 23 players!
[Laughter.] [Applause.]

Speaker, as much as I need support and prayers that none of my team players
should suffer from any old-age diseases during this time, our team, Bafana
Bafana, and our coach, Carlos Alberto Parreira, require all our support,
all our encouragement, and all our vuvuzelas for them to play like true
maestros, and to make us as a nation proud.

A sense of pride, a sense of dignity, a sense of expectation has engulfed
our people as the date for the opening matches gets closer.

Yingakho, Somlomo, ngithi ngivumele ngisike kwelijikayo, ngithi ndoda
yom’Afrika gqoka ingubo yakho yamakhosi, haya ingoma yakho yezimbongi, giya
uqephuze uthi ibuyile i-Afrika. Ntombi yomAfrika butha abantwana bakho
ubafukamele, yisho ngezwi lakho elipholile uthi: ”Kuhle kwethu e-Afrika.”
Kikiza uhalalise uthi lethwese ihlobo. Iyasho nenyoni emthini ithi:
“Amdokwe amabele, avuthiwe e-Afrika.” [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[That is why, Speaker, I request that you allow me to state briefly:
African man, wear your kingship attire, sing a poetic song, celebrate,
dance, and say, “Ibuyile i-Afrika.” African lady, collect your children and
protect them; with your dulcet voice say: “It is good in our Africa”,
ululate, congratulate, and say it is good. Even the beautiful bird in the
tree says, “It is well in Africa.” [Applause.]]

I am a proud South African! I feel it, because it is here! [Applause.]

Aforika, ke Nako! [Africa, it is time!]

Nkosi sikelel’ i-Afrika. [God bless Africa.]

I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I want to say, sir, that the hon member who has
just spoken has chosen the best team she possibly could have, ever, for the
World Cup, and I want to thank her very much indeed! [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, I agree with the hon Mike Ellis: she did
very well; that is the best team. [Laughter.]

On behalf of the ACDP it is my privilege to thank Fifa president Sepp
Blatter for not only backing South Africa’s bid to host the 2010 Soccer
World Cup, but also, in the midst of sceptics, coming to the defence of
South Africa’s ability to host a successful World Cup. We are grateful that
President Zuma has also recognised Blatter’s outstanding leadership of
world football and his support for our country through the many challenges
and obstacles we faced as we prepared ourselves to host the greatest soccer
spectacle of all time, when he awarded him gold in the Order of the
Companions of O R Tambo.

The hard work and many sacrifices made by Bafana Bafana, their coach and
the technical team have not gone unnoticed. We appreciate all of it very,
very much.

We want to thank the Local Organising Committee led by Danny Jordaan and
Irvin Khoza, Safa officials and the workers who built our magnificent
stadiums for doing the job so well.

This is indeed a momentous occasion for South Africa in particular, and for
the African continent as a whole. Seeing thousands upon thousands of cars
flying the South African flag and their rear-view mirrors adorned with
gloves in the colours of our national flag evokes patriotic emotions in all
of us. Not to be outdone by motorists, most South Africans not only fly our
national flag, but also wear the Bafana Bafana replica jerseys,
particularly on Fridays. Looking at all Members of Parliament today, one
cannot but say that they look outstanding and beautiful! [Applause.]

The vibe, excitement and anticipation of the greatest World Cup ever, to be
held on the African continent, can be felt all over the country. The sound
of vuvuzelas continually reminds us that the greatest sporting event on
earth has finally arrived. “It is here! Can you feel it?”

HON MEMBERS: Yes!

Rev K R J MESHOE: We wish our national team, Bafana Bafana, all the courage
and confidence they will need to do to Mexico what they did to Guatemala.
Give the Bafana Bafana another high five! The nation is behind them.
Phambili, Bafana Bafana! Phambili! [Forward, Bafana Bafana! Forward!]
[Applause.]

Mrs M N MATLADI: Chairperson, it is obvious to everyone that the excitement
that has been generated by our hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup is probably
good for sports lovers and for the nation’s morale. Nevertheless, as
realists we have got to look at some issues that will build the nation.

The government spent R34 billion to host an event that was expected to
attract 450 000 spectators. That number has now dropped to 250 000. This
will probably be termed a disadvantage if one looks at the expenditure. We
planned for ... [Interjections.] Yes, but what is important ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order!

Ms M N MATLADI: ... is that we look at things after the event. If we
consider the huge capital expense, we have to know what the investment in
tomorrow is. [Interjections.] Therefore we must have plans for meetings,
incentives, conferences and exhibitions. We have to look at the advantages
for South Africa internationally in the future.

But, as the UCDP, we say that we acknowledge all the good work that has
been done by way of the stadia, the roads, and the improvement in Bafana
Bafana’s performance, especially in the past three matches they have
played. We say to them: “On Saturday, 5 June 2010, do as well as you have
done in the past three matches. “We say ...

... katlego, masego, nala. Ra re, mmogo re ka kgona. Kgetse ya tsie e
kgonwa ke go tshwaraganelwa. Re a leboga. [... “Good luck!” We believe that
together we can. We thank you.]

Mr D B FELDMAN: Hon Chairperson, Deputy President, hon Ministers, hon
members of the National Council of Provinces and distinguished guests, let
me take this opportunity on behalf of Cope and Comrade Terror Lekota and
Comrade Shilowa to say to Comrade Nelson Mandela, thank you very much for
everything you have done for our country and for bringing the 2010 World
Cup to our country.

As you know, the name “Terror” comes from the hon Lekota’s soccer skills.
We want to say here now that Bafana, our boys, will go onto that field
ready. Let me send this message to all the teams in this World Cup: We are
ready. We don’t fear any of you. We are ready to win.

Chairperson, let me send a message to our coach: We support you all the
way. We will be there in the stadiums, we will be there blowing our
vuvuzelas, and we will be there, singing Shosholoza.

On security, let me commend our Minister of Police and the Minister of
State Security for doing an excellent job. We know that everybody will be
safe in our country. Our prisons are ready for any troublemakers! I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr D M GUMEDE: Hon Chairperson, hon members and our esteemed guests, after
visiting all the host cities, the airports and some ports of entry, health
facilities, stadiums and venues for fan parks and public viewing areas, and
after having held hearings with almost all the main stakeholders, we are
ready to report to Parliament.

Starting with the tourism aspects, the progress and plans for fan parks
took into account arrangements for small businesses, convenience for fans
and security for all. The same applied to the public viewing areas. We
believe that we shall be ready in all these aspects.

At the time of the oversight visit, signage was a concern. But right now,
coming from different parts of the country, our members have expressed
satisfaction with what they have seen since then. Overpricing has been a
concern and has been watched closely by the Minister as a result. We can
report now that the industry is well aware of the undesirable impact of
overpricing and will be in line with pricing associated with peak periods.
Although we might have had some problems then, all of them now seem to have
been sorted out. Indeed, we are also proud to report that all our airports
are clean and well maintained, as well as well resourced.

On matters of health, we checked casualty wards, chemists, trauma units,
intensive care units, burn units and blood banks — all resources and
capacities. We are satisfied and say that we are ready in as far as looking
after injuries and any trauma that could be experienced during the World
Cup is concerned.

We are confident about the future of our motherland and that of our
continent. We love being African, given the quality of what we have
produced with our own hands. None of the airports has failed to impress us.
The character, creativity and beauty of being South African cannot be
better expressed. I have been to many modern countries, including England,
France and Belgium, and I can confidently say that our airports are without
doubt among the best and cleanest in the world. [Applause.]

On other deliverables, we have to look at the optimisation of the legacy of
the 2010 Fifa World Cup. What type of legacy are we likely to get from this
mega event, the biggest event on earth? For instance, we have to look at
the managerial risk, the security risk and the reputation risk. The type of
hospitality, the quality of service our guests receive, together with the
provision of a safe environment will go a long way as far as these are
concerned.

We have confronted our tasks with all the vim, verve and vibrancy we are
capable of. Using our capacity, four days ago we hosted one of the biggest
ultramarathons on earth, spanning about 90 km between Durban and
Pietermaritzburg — that is the Comrades Marathon. It could be even longer,
at 96 km. This marathon really tests your mental state, your physical
state, your capacity, your dedication, your guts — and every runner is
pushed to the limit.

It consists of more than 20 000 athletes and more than a million
spectators, and organisers are tested to the limit in the process. Not a
single incident was reported with regard to crime associated with this
event. The only injuries reported were those associated with the sport, and
they were all attended to on time, appropriately and effectively. It was
spectacular, despite its daunting magnitude. Logistically, everything went
as planned. The Comrades Marathon is one of the biggest events on earth
and, four days ago, we accomplished it with flying colours.

That is what South Africans, black and white, working together, can
achieve, as they do every year. In that event everyone, irrespective of
their outlook, is a comrade, prepared to help anyone without any questions
asked. We may say many things about ourselves, but this clearly indicates
that we are a great nation, warts and all.

Let me use this opportunity to thank the hon Thabethe and the members of
committees that went on the oversight visit. Let the games begin. The
lights are on. It is time for South Africa to shine. We are ready. Ke Nako!
[It is here!]

Tshifhinga ndi tshone. Murumba nga u tambele tshanda. Kha i shome! Ndi a
livhuwa. [U vhanda zwanda.] [It is time. Let the games begin. Get ready! I
thank you. [Applause.]]

Shine, South Africa! Shine! Shine, Africa! Shine! Feel it! It is here. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr L M MPHAHLELE: Hon Chairperson, hon Acting President, hon members and
hon guests, the Fifa World Cup has arrived. We can touch it!

South Africa should be proud that both President Zuma and Deputy President
Motlanthe were great footballers in their day. Of course, they can still
dribble the opposition today! If my facts are correct, the hon President
captained the Rangers Football Club and the hon Deputy President played for
the Komesho football team. [Interjections.]

Amagama ayafana, ungacabanga ukuthi yinkomo, hhayi inkomo kodwa Inkomesho.
[Uhleko.] [Words sound the same; you might think that he is referring to
inkomo [cow], when he is in fact referring to Komesho. [Laughter.]]

Both teams were affiliates of the Makana Football Association. The
association was founded by the Robben Island political prisoners in June
1969. All credit goes to Fifa for granting honorary membership to the
Makana Football Association. We want to urge the SA Football Association,
Safa, to follow suit and pronounce itself on the Makana Football
Association. Nobody knows where Safa stands in relation to the Makana
Football Association. We also urge the Minister of Arts and Culture to make
sure that a section of Robben Island is used to preserve the glorious
legacy of the Makana Football Association.

The nation has been warned of possible xenophobic flare-ups after the World
Cup. This is not xenophobia; it is Afro-phobia because only Africans,
foreign and local, are victims of this violent self-hatred.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Hon member, your speaking time has expired.

Mr L M MPHAHLELE: Lastly, hon Chair, I humbly offer my services, free of
charge, to serve as a referee in the game between South Africa and Mexico.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Chairperson, one of the greatest achievements in
postapartheid South Africa is our success in getting the World Cup.
Furthermore, we have proved to the world that South Africa has outstanding
organisational ability, and the very fact that our facilities have been
hailed as world-class by Fifa president Sepp Blatter is a clear indication
of the fact that our country will stage the greatest Soccer World Cup in
history.

In 1994 Madiba wrote a message on how sport could lead to reconciliation
and unity in our country, and it is clearly evident that right across the
country all South Africans are united behind our country, our flag and our
team.

The MF is very encouraged by the words of our coach, Carlos Parreira, in
saying that Bafana Bafana is ready to take on any team. We also want to
congratulate all the cities and everyone who has played a role in bringing
this great spectacle to South Africa. Let us march forward all the way,
with courage, conviction and determination. Let us never stop, until we
have delivered a winning nation.

When it comes to a team, you need players to play with their hearts if you
want to succeed, and Bafana Bafana is one such side. To Bafana Bafana: As
you kick off after years of hard training, you have been chosen as the best
team. Aaron Mokoena, you will master your game plan and go forward in the
field of life. Always strike like Teko Modise, defend like Booth, score
like Maradona and Tshabalala, and never, ever fall like Zidane.

May you always tackle your problems, dribble your opponents, and achieve
more through team effort. When the vuvuzela sounds, make sure that you’re
on the right side and, finally, you must never get red-carded.

One nation, one vision, raising the level of expectation and the spirit of
winning, — together with Bafana Bafana, we can score the winning goal and
make South Africa a winning nation. Halala, Bafana Bafana! Halala! I would
like all hon members to give Bafana Bafana a huge round of applause in
advance. I thank you. [Applause.]

Prince M M M ZULU: Sihlalo, Phini likaMongameli wezwe elibambile, malungu
ahloniphekile aleNdlu, mhlonishwa Mkhathini nekomidi lakho ...
[Chairperson, Deputy President of the country, who is also the Acting
President, hon members of this House, hon Mkhathini and your committee ...]

... on behalf of the IFP I am standing here today, proud as an African ...

... ngoba izwe lakithi liphumelele ukubamba le ndebe yomhlaba kule ngabadi
yakithi i-Afrika. Kunezinto ezimbalwa okufanele ngizibale njengokuthi,
abantu abayizivakashi ezweni lethu kufanele sibahloniphe futhi sazi ukuthi
beze kithina.

Sicela bonke abezokuphepha mhlonishwa Nyambose, bame ngomumo, ukuze uma
senza ubugebengu basiqoqe basifake phakathi. Egameni leNkatha Yenkululeko
Yesizwe ngifisela iNingizimu Afrika yonke nezwekazi lase Afrika impumelelo.

Sengigcina, Sihlalo, ngeke ngikwazi ukuthi ngizibongele ngokuthi
isifundazwe sakwaZulu-Natali sinenkundla enkulukazi, kodwa, ngicela abantu
bakwaZulu-Natali ukuthi bangaphoxi, babaphathe kahle abantu bokuhamba
njengomakoti. (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[... because our country has succeeded in hosting this World Cup in our
land, Africa. There are a few things that I must mention, such as that the
people who are visitors to our country should be respected and we must know
that they have visited us.

We request that all the state security, hon Nyambose, should be ready, so
that when people are involved in criminal activities they should be
arrested us. On behalf of the IFP, I wish South Africa and the entire
African continent success.

In conclusion, Chairperson, I won’t be able to sing praises for myself by
saying that the province of KwaZulu-Natal has a very big stadium, but I am
requesting the people of KwaZulu-Natal to behave themselves and to treat
the visitors well.]

I request the House to join together and say, “Viva, Bafana Bafana! Viva!”

HON MEMBERS: Viva! [Applause.]

Mr K J DIKOBO: Hon Chairperson, hon Acting President, hon members, dear
guests, during the bidding for the hosting of the Fifa 2010 World Cup many
analysts did not give South Africa a chance. There was talk of Morocco’s
being closer to Europe and therefore having a better chance. Well, we got
the bid.

After our winning the rights, the same analysts went on about how South
Africa would not complete the stadia and other infrastructure in time. Fifa
president Mr Sepp Blatter and Fifa as a whole were put under pressure to
make a Plan B. Well, all host cities are ready; in fact, they are more than
ready.

There is now talk of Bafana Bafana not being ready and that our team will
not proceed to the knockout stage. There is an African proverb about a dog
barking, but the barking will not stop the wagon from moving. We declare
here today that we are ready, South Africans are ready, and our team is
ready.

To those South Africans who want Bafana Bafana to go on to the second round
we say, you have no ambition! Azapo says to Bafana Bafana: “Go all the
way!”

We wait in anticipation for the next session of Parliament, when we will be
hosting Bafana Bafana, led by the chairperson of the committee, the hon
Komphela, in order to congratulate them on a job well done. [Applause.]

We wish everybody — Fifa, Safa and all spectators — a successful and
peaceful World Cup. God bless South Africa. God bless all of us. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Hon Chair, hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, hon members,
all protocol observed. Let me echo the words of the Fifa leadership when
they said that the man who brought the World Cup to Africa, and
particularly to South Africa, was Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela.

We would like to thank you, Tata, in your absence. One of your dreams has
become a reality. Stafford Heginbotham once said, “Football is the opera of
the people.” The great Pelé said: “It is encouraging to hear that men of
great ability themselves think that we have talent in our ranks.” Former
President Thabo Mbeki said: “The Soccer World Cup in Africa reaffirms our
common humanity and proves we all belong to one family.” Lastly, former
President Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela himself said: "The World Cup will help
unify people. If there is one thing on this planet that has the power to
bind people together, it is soccer."

Hon Chairperson and hon members, I would like to thank all South Africans,
especially those who made it possible to have such a great event in this
country and possible for people to see the beauty of this country, to see
the real ubuntu of Africans, to see the people of South Africa, and see
that this country is part of the world and is not an island, that this
country can offer the world what no other country can offer. We can offer
everything in this country. We have everything in this country.

We wish Bafana Bafana well and we will support them every step of the way.
We feel it; it is here. And we will move Bafana Bafana with our support.
Viva, Bafana Bafana! Viva! I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N T GODI: Hon Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Mr
Speaker, comrades and hon members, with the kickoff of the World Cup just a
few days from now, we are about to reach the exciting climax of a long and
arduous journey. Thanks go to our government, the Local Organising
Committee and the African Union for the meticulous organisation thus far
and, above all, the people, for their energy and patriotism that see us
poised to deliver the best World Cup ever.

Let us hope that the patriotism, energy and ingenuity that were unleashed
in building the stadia and other related infrastructure will remain
mobilised to solve the enormous developmental challenges that are still
facing the majority of our people. If we can sustain that, it will be the
lasting legacy of the World Cup in our country and on the continent.

In the euphoria of this moment we have forgotten about Charles Dempsey. We
are thrusting to the far corners of nothingness those who were advocating a
Plan B in Australia; those who said we would not have the money; those who
said that we would not meet the deadlines; and all the negative commentary
that we have had to put up with. All these negatives, both at home and
abroad, are part of a historical question as to whether we as Africans have
an equal share in the brotherhood and sisterhood of mankind.

Whilst we wish all the participating teams the best of luck, we cannot
disguise our partisan support for our national team, Bafana Bafana, in
particular, and the African teams in general. The generation of Roger Milla
first, and subsequently the youthful squad of Senegal, have raised the
African flag high. The six African nations have a unique opportunity to
raise the African flag even higher. After all, all the major football
leagues have African boys amongst their superstars. They do it for their
European teams; they can and should do it for the continent.

We would be remiss if we did not thank Fifa for their steadfast support and
guidance throughout the preparations, and especially Fifa president Comrade
Sepp Blatter. His confidence and belief in us were singular and unwavering.
Comrade Blatter, you will live in the hearts and minds of our people for a
long time to come. You are truly a son of the soil, a son of Africa.

As we enjoy the greatest sporting spectacle on earth, let us not forget
that the world still exists around us with its thrills, dangers and misery.
Let us remember to continue to raise our voices in support of the besieged
but heroic people of Palestine. After all, we are all Palestinians. Long
live Palestine! [Applause.]

HON MEMBERS: Long live!

Mr W F FABER: Hon Chairperson, Deputy President and honoured guests, it is
indeed an honour for me to be part of history in the making and address you
seven days before the biggest sporting event Africa has ever experienced.
South Africa is ready! Viva, Bafana Bafana! Viva!

HON MEMBERS: Viva!

Mr W F FABER: Viva, Bafana Bafana! Viva!

HON MEMBERS: Viva!

Mr W F FABER: The DA would like to welcome all the football supporters from
all over the world to our beautiful country, because it is them that we
need to become tourism multipliers. However, without the world’s best
football players we would not have a World Cup! To all the players from all
over the world, namkelekile! [you are welcome!]

We sincerely hope that your preparations for the World Cup event have gone
well, so that we can enjoy the best quality football ever experienced. This
will be a celebration as never seen before. The rainbow nation that Nelson
Mandela dreamt of will now be visible for the whole world to see. This will
be the highlight of Madiba’s dream. Our World Cup slogan clearly reflects
our vision: One team, one nation, proudly united under one rainbow.

The first World Cup was hosted by Uruguay in 1930 and, incredibly, they won
it. Uruguay beat Argentina 4-2. Francisco Varallo is the only player still
alive from the 1930 inaugural World Cup. He played for Argentina. He turned
100 years old on 5 February 2010. We salute this living legend.

As a representative from the Northern Cape, I am proud to be from
Kimberley, the host city of the Uruguayan team. This in itself is an
historic occasion for the Diamond City. Kimberley was also the first city
in the southern hemisphere to have electric street lights, in September
1882. Kimberley hosted South Africa’s first stock exchange, the Kimberley
Royal Stock Exchange, which opened on 2 September 1882. The Uruguayan team
will also stay in the hotel next to the Big Hole, the largest hand-dug hole
on planet earth.

On 16 June 2010 our national team will face Uruguay in the first round. Our
support for our visiting side stops there! [Laughter.] Bafana Bafana
recorded their biggest international win yet when they thrashed Guatemala 5-
0 at the Peter Mokaba Stadium in Polokwane on Monday night. You must keep
this momentum going, guys!

It was a fitting celebration for our captain, Aaron Mokoena, who is the
first South African footballer to win 100 international caps. We
congratulate our Bafana Bafana captain, Aaron Mokoena, on his great
achievement.

In 1996 we won the Africa Cup of Nations with stars Lucas Radebe, Doc
Khumalo and John “Shoes” Moshoeu. Who will ever forget Clive Barker flying
Boeing-like across the pitch after the 1996 African Cup of Nations? But
that is all water under the bridge. It is now time for our new stars to
shine.

Aaron Mokoena, Steven Pienaar, Matthew Booth, to name just a few, this is
your time! South Africa stands behind you as one nation, the rainbow
nation. You will hear us in the crowd shouting, blowing our vuvuzelas. You
go and make us proud! Feel it! It is here! Viva, Bafana Bafana! Viva! [Time
expired.]

HON MEMBERS: Viva!

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: No vuvuzelas! [Laughter.] [Applause.] Order,
hon members! The ruling was that there would be no blowing of vuvuzelas in
the House. Remember that.

Mr G S RADEBE: Hon Chair, on a point of order ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Yes, hon member? But who is out of order,
because no one is speaking? [Interjections.]

Mr G S RADEBE: I will tell you now, Chair. I think I should run vuvuzela
classes. Outside people must ...

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Take your seat, hon member. You can do that
later on. [Laughter.]

Mrs E THABETHE: Chairperson, Acting President, Ministers present, Deputy
Ministers, MECs present, Members of Parliament and our guests, “Afrika ke
nako.” [“Africa’s time has come.”] We can feel it; it is here.

In order for Parliament to exercise its oversight role, a joint ad hoc
committee was established to determine South Africa’s state of readiness to
host the Soccer World Cup. The ad hoc committee was composed of members of
both the portfolio and select committees from both Houses. We would like to
thank the Speaker and Chairperson for allowing us to do that oversight
work, because we as Members of Parliament were able to check the state of
readiness.

We must say that this was a committee of men and women from all the parties
— all of us united — who had to make sure that we could check our state of
readiness for hosting this spectacular event. What we were doing included
checking host cities and stadia. In short, we were all of one voice in
saying that without any doubt South Africa was ready to host the 2010 World
Cup.

Allow us, then, to cite examples of what we came across as we were moving
around. We talked to people and some of them were eager to tell us that
they were ready for 2010, and that they had even been ready beforehand. We
hoped that we would be able then to get the necessary support and make sure
that we could move as one.

After the oversight visits we called the Ministers who signed the Fifa
guarantees, the supporting departments and the stakeholders, such as Acsa,
the SA Petroleum Industry Association and SAA — all of them – as well as
the host cities. We were assured that, by hook or by crook, we were going
to host a spectacular World Cup.

We were happy because the collective spirit and resilience carried us
through in overcoming the insurmountable task of proving our detractors
wrong by meeting all the deadlines that were set by Fifa. Most of our
stadia and accommodation — almost everything — met Fifa requirements. We
hope that we make use of the legacy of the World Cup as a developing
country. This has come about because all of us were working together —
stakeholders, departments and even ordinary people in South Africa.

After this teamwork with all of the committees was over, I’m sure that what
wasn’t mentioned was that I was their “super induna”. They were reporting
to me, though I am not sure why they are so jealous now that they are not
saying that they were under my supervision. They had to kneel before me and
then I would give them permission! All in all, it was a great experience
for me to do this job. After all, we were able to do proper oversight work
– to be “an activist Parliament” as the President has said. We were also
happy to get assistance from MECs, host cities, mayors, and so on.

With regard to the energy side of things, it is quite important, not
because I chair the Energy Portfolio Committee, but because you can do what
you need to in the stadia and with accommodation, but if you don’t get the
energy and power supply right, you may experience problems. What I am
reporting here today is that in all these aspects everything went okay, and
we even did dry runs. In all the stadia we tripped the power, and saw that
with all of them there was power again in less than one minute. In some of
the stadia, you wouldn’t even have known that there was load shedding. That
is how prepared we are for the World Cup, unless there are ...

... abantu laba abathakathayo. Abazohamba-ke bagijime ngomshayelo lapho
singaba nenkinga, kodwa uma kungekho abantu abathakathayo ... [... people
practising witchcraft. That is the only thing that can give us problems,
but if there are no witches ...]

... we are ready. All those systems will have uninterrupted service, so we
hope that this is really reassuring.

What is left for us to do then is to welcome these people. I am sure that
all of us will be seen at the stadia. But we must give them our cuisine.
Let’s encourage them to have pap and steak. Let us encourage them to have
morogo. Let us encourage them ...

... ukuthi badle amasonja ngoba alungile futhi anempilo. [... to eat mopani
worms, because they are good and healthy.]

Let us make sure that after this they will come back. Some of them will
definitely come back.

With regard to this World Cup, we are happy as Parliament and as members
that we really did the oversight work in earnest, and we don’t think that
there will be any problems, unless we have ...

... abaningi abahamba ebusuku. [... many witches.]

All in all, let’s have the spirit and the vibe, and make sure that we fly
the flags in our homes too. We must try to do the same with our cars –
everything. We say: “Viva, Bafana Bafana! Viva!”

HON MEMBERS: Viva!

Mrs E THABETHE: Long live, Bafana Bafana! Long live!

HON MEMBERS: Long live!

Mrs E THABETHE: When he opened Parliament this year, our President said
that Bafana Bafana could surprise us. Some people laughed and said that ...

... uMongameli uyazikhulumela-nje. [... the President was merely joking.]

But now, after the friendly match, are we all saying no, no, no?

Sonke sithi angithi bazokwenza ukuba siwine le Ndebe Yomhlaba ize lapha
ekhaya. [We are all saying that they will enable us to win this World Cup
and bring it home.]

Empa ba re jwale dintho di se di le boima haholo. A re ikakgeleng ka
setotswana ebe jwale re keteka le batho, re etse dintho tsena kaofela empa
re hlokomele baeti ba rona hobane re batla hore ba kgutlele mona hape. Ya
senang sekaja mmae a tele hobane ho hobe jwale, re kena kgabong mme re
tshepa hore Bafana Bafana ba tla re etsa motlotlo. Re kopa hore Fifa le LOC
ba sebedisane le Safa ... (Translation of Sesotho paragraph follows.)

[But they are saying things that are now very difficult. Let us join and
celebrate with the people and do all these things while taking care of our
visitors, because we want them to come back again. The one who cannot keep
pace should forget about it, because now things are happening, we are
beginning to work, and we hope that Bafana Bafana will make us proud. We
request that Fifa and the LOC should work together with Safa ...]

... after hosting the World Cup, for the maintenance of the stadia.

Tsena ke dikgothalletso tseo re di entseng komiting. Ke tokomane e tenya eo
re tlang ho e bala empa re re di sebeletse baahi ba Afrika Borwa. A re
sebetseng kaofela. Halala, Bafana Bafana! Halala!

DITHO TSE HLOMPHEHANG: Halala! [Mahofi.] (Translation of Sesotho paragraphs
follows.)

[These are suggestions that we have made in the committee. It is a thick
document that we are going to read, but we are also saying that this should
serve the people of South Africa. Let us all work. Viva, Bafana Bafana!
Viva!

HON MEMBERS: Viva! [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Malibongwe! [Praise!] Chairperson, being
the sweeper — as I will be closing the debate — let me commence by issuing
a disclaimer. There are many hopefuls amongst us who are wearing yellow T-
shirts. The only person who is doing the right thing is the Deputy
President of the country. He doesn’t have a T-shirt. You are disappointed,
but Parreira has chosen. There is no chance that a 24th player will be
chosen from amongst you. [Laughter.]

Hon Chairperson; Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe, Acting President
Kgalema Motlanthe, former President Kgalema Motlanthe ... [Laughter.] ...
hon members of the National Assembly and of the National Council of
Provinces; president of the Confederation of African Football, Mr Issa
Hayatou – and I have been reminded that it is very important to acknowledge
that he has been awarded the highest award in South Africa, the Order of
the Companions of O R Tambo ... [Applause.] ... the president of the SA
Football Association, Mr Kirsten Nematandani; his deputy president, Mr
“Shoes” Mazibuko; Chairman of the Local Organising Committee, Dr Irvin “The
Iron Duke” Khoza; CEO of the Local Organising Committee, Dr Danny Jordaan;
distinguished guests; and Zakumi, who has run away, one of the fundamental
rules of Fifa relates to time, time for the commencement of a soccer game
and its conclusion. This includes extra time or the referee’s optional
time.

When we in the Local Organising Committee presented to Fifa and to the
world our adopted slogan of “Ke nako”, we were conscious of this rule. “Now
is the time.” All LOC board meetings and committees have discharged their
responsibilities on time. All roads and related improvements have been
completed on time. All airports, new and improved, have been finished on
time. All work on iconic stadia, including those that we had to refurbish,
has been accomplished on time.

This World Cup is also about several firsts. It is the first Fifa World Cup
on the African continent; the first Fifa World Cup in Madiba’s country, our
beloved South Africa; the first Fifa World Cup to be broadcast - by a
developing country, we must say - with 3G technology; the first Fifa World
Cup to be broadcast with a signal of high definition; the first Fifa World
Cup to be held in so many iconic stadia; the first Fifa World Cup to be led
by a Khoza ... [Laughter.] ... the first Fifa World Cup to be led by a
Jordaan; and the first Fifa World Cup where we are going to see a
supercharged Bafana Bafana team; and we say, “Ke nako!”

It was due to events in this House, then undemocratic and not representing
the will of our people, that Fifa took a principled decision and expelled
apartheid South Africa from the world community of football nations in
1976. Subsequently, owing to democratic changes that came about because of
the struggle, changes that occurred in this country in 1991, including
activities in this House, Fifa was encouraged to readmit South Africa into
the fold of football nations. Through this act our status as a pariah
nation in football was done away with, and our dignity was restored. This
is something to be applauded. [Applause.]

Today, at this joint multiparty sitting of the National Assembly and the
National Council of Provinces, we all stand a breath away, just one week
away, from the commencement of this momentous event in the history of our
country as many speakers have indicated, and indeed in the history of the
African continent: the hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup. Again, we say,
“Ke nako.” In Venda they say ...

... tshinwe na tshinwe tshi na tshifhinga tshatsho. [... everything has its
own time.]

Each and every thing has its own time.

If one talks from an economic point of view, the Fifa World Cup is the
single largest sporting event for any chosen host nation. To us, as many
other speakers have said before me, its legacy includes infrastructural
development. Fifa is not going to take those things away. Remember what our
detractors were saying — and many of them are applauding with us today —
that we have wasted money. This is a huge economic investment.

The infrastructure development that we are seeing in all provinces is not
going to go away. This development will stay with us. The new hotels will
stay with us. Transportation – don’t shoot down the Bus Rapid Transit
system! — is with us. We are going to retain the Gautrain here. The jobs
created, even if it were just one job, are our jobs. We have created more
than one job, so that many people can put bread on their tables.
[Applause.]

The legacy of this World Cup will be to leave us with an enhanced spirit
regarding nonracialism, as well as patriotism. Witness, fellow members, the
kind of atmosphere this country experienced outside Orlando Stadium deep in
Soweto. On that day many blacks were at Soccer City where the Blue Bulls —
not even a national team — were playing.

This World Cup is also going to leave us closer to our sister African
nations. It will leave us more recognised and respected as Brand South
Africa, and more integrated into the international community of more than
football nations. It will also leave us with a sense of feeling good – the
spirit of, “Feel it! Touch it! “Ke nako!”

We are hoping for the Barcelona effect. Long after the end of the Barcelona
Olympics held in Spain, people kept on remembering that there was something
called Spain, and they kept going back. So the manner in which we receive
the people here must be in the African tradition of being welcoming.

Long after the final whistle, we as South Africans must not let the spirit
of construction happening everywhere in this country dissipate. The
political, the organisational, the patriotic, the financial, the
logistical, the administrative and the project management elements, all of
them, should still stay with us, so that we can make this nation, this
country, one large construction site, creating, amongst other things, human
settlements.

This World Cup is also going to leave us respected amongst nations, because
Bafana Bafana is charged and poised to play soccer like never before. This
is also going to leave us with the spirit of understanding that every South
African and the members in this House have taken part in ensuring that this
is a successful World Cup. It will leave us with the spirit of a people
united, of a nonracial and nonsexist people, a people knowing that there is
life long after the World Cup.

Many people have spoken before me. They have said a lot of things I was
going to say. Therefore, I conclude by extending congratulations to several
people. Well done, LOC. Well done! [Applause.] Well done, Irvan Khoza and
Danny Jordaan! Well done! [Applause.]

Siyabonga, Safa! Siyabonga! [Ihlombe.] [Thank you, Safa! Thank you!
[Applause.]]

Thank you, Mr Blatter and Fifa. Thank you! [Applause.]
Dlala, Aaron Mokoena! Dlala! [Intswahla.] [Play, Aaron Mokoena! play!
[Applause.]]

HON MEMBERS: Dlala! [Play!]

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Go, Parreira! Go!

HON MEMBERS: Go! [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Halala, Bafana! Halala!

HON MEMBERS: Halala!

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Vuvuzela, Mzansi! Vuvuzela!

HON MEMBERS: Vuvuzela!

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Welcome to the whole world! Welcome!

HON MEMBERS: Welcome!

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: I want to say: Let the best nation win,
as long as it is South Africa. [Applause.] [Laughter.] Let the best team
prevail, as long as it is ...

HON MEMBERS: South Africa!

The MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: We are already winners. We are saying
now is the time.

Tshinwe na tshinwe tshi na tshifhinga tshatsho. [Everything has its own
time.]

Sekunjalo! [It is here!]

Feel it! Touch it! Ke nako! [It is here!] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP: Order! Order, hon members! I can’t speak until
you all keep quiet. After I have adjourned the Joint Sitting, I would like
to request hon members and guests to remain in their places until the
procession, which will include the Speaker, the Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, the Deputy Speaker, the Deputy Chairperson of the
NCOP and the Acting President, has left the Chamber.

The Acting President and the Presiding Officers will be joined in the foyer
in front of the National Assembly by the vice president of Fifa, the
chairperson of the Local Organising Committee, the CEO of the Local
Organising Committee, the president of the SA Football Association, Mr
Komphela and Ms Rantho for a photo opportunity. Members should also not
forget to sign the giant T-shirt that is still outside. Those who have not
signed it are reminded to go and do so.

The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces adjourned the Joint
Sitting at 15:59.


