---
title: 'National Assembly - 01 September 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-09-01
---

WEDNESDAY, 1 SEPTEMBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 15:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancy which occurred owing to the passing
away of Dr M E Tshabalala-Msimang had been filled by the nomination, with
effect from 19 August 2010, of Mr J D Thibedi.

                             SOLEMN AFFIRMATION

The member had made and subscribed the affirmation in the Speaker’s office
earlier in the day.

                          QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY

THE DEPUTY PRESIDENT:

 Position regarding implementation of proposals outlined in speech to Energy
                              Advisory Council

9.    Mr N Singh (IFP) asked the Deputy President:


    Whether the key proposals as outlined in his speech to the Energy
    Advisory Council on 8 December 2009 are being implemented; if not, why
    not; if so, what are the relevant details?           NO2863E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Speaker, hon members and hon Singh, yes, there has
been progress with the implementation of the key agreements made at the
Energy Advisory Council meeting on 8 December last year.

The Energy Advisor Ccouncil arose out of the Energy Summit convened by the
National Economic Development and Labour Council, Nedlac, in May 2008. It
consists of government, business, labour and the community as represented
at Nedlac. The advisory council is supported by a national electricity
response team comprising all social partners.

I would like to highlight some of the key areas of implementation; more
details can be obtained from the Minister of Energy. Since the last
advisory council meeting, Eskom’s generator performance level has improved
to the required levels.

In anticipation of increased electricity demand during the Fifa World Cup,
a programme was initiated in the host cities to identify critical
infrastructure that needed urgent attention. A more comprehensive strategy
has since been completed to address the rehabilitation of municipal
distribution infrastructure as a specific focus in the current government
programme of action.

As to the policy framework for private-sector participation and the
introduction of a nonconflicted independent system and market operator,
since the last meeting the issues have been addressed through various
processes through the Interministerial Committee on Energy that was created
through a Cabinet decision. The committee comprises the Departments of
Energy and Public Enterprises, the National Treasury, the Departments of
Economic Development, Science and Technology, and Trade and Industry, and
the Presidency.

The following has been achieved in relation to each of the elements above.
The integrated resource plan will be promulgated by the last quarter of
2010. The plan will indicate the generation technologies that South Africa
will require over the next 20 years, in a manner that diversifies our
energy mix from being coal dominated.
The process to revise the regulations promulgated under the Electricity
Regulation Act, No 4 of 2006, has been completed after consultation with
lenders and potential investors. The draft regulations, licensing framework
and standard power purchase agreement provisions, together with the
evaluation criteria for independent power producers, IPPs, will be issued
by the end of November 2010 to coincide with the conclusion of the
integrated resource plan.

Perhaps the most critical element for private-sector participation relates
to the resolution of the conflicted role that Eskom plays as both a
generator and a buyer. The introduction of an independent system and market
operator will address this conflicted role of Eskom.

The cost recovery mechanism, in terms of which private-sector generators
are given the assurance that their costs will be recovered from the
electricity tariff over the term of the power purchase agreement, has been
concluded in consultation with the National Energy Regulator of SA, Nersa.

Concerning solar water heating and a standard offer incentive, one of the
other initiatives introduced since the last advisory council meeting
involves providing solar water heaters in place of electric geysers to all
residential users of hot water.

The public consultation process for the solar water heaters financial
incentive scheme was concluded in July 2010. The process will culminate in
the determination of the level of the incentive in rands by Nersa and this
is scheduled for later this month. I thank you for your attention.
[Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Hon Speaker, I would like to thank the hon Deputy President for
that response. I must say, hon Speaker, that it was quite difficult to get
information on the Net about what the council does, but I think the Deputy
President has quite clearly elucidated the functioning of this council.

What I would like to ask the Deputy President is this: Given the fact that
the provision of a cost-effective, uninterrupted and available supply of
electricity is core to the economic development and the future growth path
of this country, as well as to rural development – because there are still
many rural areas that don’t have electricity – is he satisfied that the
work being done by this council is going to contribute in a meaningful way
towards ensuring that, 20 years from now, we not only have an alternative
energy supply and sources, but will be on a positive growth path?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Singh, I am satisfied with the work that this
council does. By its addressing, for instance, the control of the greed and
monopoly of Eskom as a generator, buyer and distributor at the same time, I
think we will be able to open up the requisite space for participation by
independent power producers. That, together with the rest of the plan, as
well as the imperatives of moving in the direction of renewable energy,
means that we are looking, for example, at technologies that will enable us
to extract gas from coal without mining the coal, and use that gas for
electricity generation. I think that would also address the commitments to
lower gas emissions with regard to the United Nations climate change
imperatives. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: If hon members do not intend speaking, they should please not
press the “to talk” button; you should only press it when you want to talk.

Mr S C MOTAU: Mr Deputy President, with regard to the Independent System
and Market Operator, ISMO, the Department of Energy has actually confirmed
that this is being done, and we welcome that. However, there is a concern,
as Eskom now says that this authority will initially be established as an
interim body, situated at Eskom, and that it could possibly take 5 to 10
years before a permanent structure is established. Clearly, this would mean
that we are operating as though it is business as usual, and that would
retard the entry of the IPPs into the system. We will therefore not draw
the benefit from this input.

What I would like to know, Mr Deputy President, is this: What will you do
to ensure that the establishment of the ISMO, independent of Eskom, is not
unduly delayed so that the participation of IPPs can be fast-tracked to
relieve the pressure on the national electricity grid?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon member. Hon members, that is certainly
not my understanding. My understanding is that this matter is fairly urgent
and that that is the attitude of the Ministry as well. The gate-keeping
role of Eskom has got to be addressed so that we can, as I said, encourage
and welcome the participation of independent power producers. That is my
understanding. Thank you.

     Position regarding strengthening of co-operation with neighbouring
                  countries on security and border control

10.   Ms S T Ndabeni (ANC) asked the Deputy President:

      Whether the Government has strengthened its co-operation with
      neighbouring countries on security and border control; if not, why
      not; if so, what are the relevant details?         NO2876E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon members, in April 2009
Cabinet took a decision to return the responsibility of border security to
the SA National Defence Force. This therefore makes Defence the principal
department on border security.

Very strong defence co-operation exists with all Southern African
Development Community neighbours, with whom we share a border. These are
underpinned by a SADC co-operation agreement. In addition, South Africa has
signed a memorandum of understanding with all our neighbouring countries.
For each of our neighbouring countries we have a Joint Permanent Commission
on Defence and Security. These ensure maximum co-operation from state to
state and at the levels of affected departments, such as Home Affairs,
State Security, the SA Revenue Service, Justice and Correctional Services.
The commissions meet annually to review co-operation and conduct joint
operations to combat crime and exchange information.

There are quarterly border forums with all our neighbouring countries, and
from time to time they deal with matters that may affect our common border
security.

Even though this level of co-operation has not been in existence for long,
it has yielded very good results. The World Cup was not only protected by
South Africa, but all our neighbouring countries stepped up security on
their own borders to ensure a secure Fifa World Cup. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms S T NDABENI: Thank you, Speaker. Hon Deputy President, does this joint
commission take into consideration the financial implications of the work
done on the borders; for example, the fencing that is usually cut by
illegal immigrants? Thank you.
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Yes it does, hon Speaker and hon members. Thank you.

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Deputy President, we have
taken note of the actions that are being taken by SADC and many departments
in respect of border control, but the facts are that millions of people are
streaming into South Africa from the north. That makes a mockery of the
words “border control”, and it also brings into doubt the Department of
Home Affairs, because people just come here without any authorisation to
enter South Africa.

Why do people from elsewhere have to apply for visas and get permission to
enter South Africa? My question is: Has border control not become obsolete,
and the Department of Home Affairs impotent to attend to this question,
because millions are just streaming into our country?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Speaker. Hon Van der Merwe,
I can assure you that there are not millions of undocumented people
entering our borders. Our borders are not as porous as you suggest. As I
stated, the joint permanent commissions on both sides of the borders also
meet to review this kind of work.

We are aware that there are a number of economic refugees from other
countries. Put very bluntly, these are job seekers who find their way into
South Africa. However, these are people with the requisite travel
documents. The number of those who are without such documents is very
small. That is why the only transit camp of note that we have is the one
out in Roodepoort in the Gauteng province. For the rest, we are really
dealing with pockets of refugees, mainly economic refugees. I am quite
convinced that if our borders were not tightly monitored we would be having
very serious problems, for instance, of drug abuse and all of that.

Every other day you read about our guards and law enforcement officers at
our ports of entry impounding contraband of all manner, and that happens
throughout. Also, some of our own people who hijack cars and try to export
them to the neighbouring countries get arrested. I can assure you that the
next time these Ministers are here, you should put the question to them.
They can even give you figures with regards to the number of people who are
convicted of these offences. Thank you.

Mr K S MUBU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Deputy President, my follow-up
question is: To what extent does this co-operation that we have with our
neighbours guarantee in particular the combating of human and drug
trafficking, as well as car and stock theft? What kind of commitment have
we received from these neighbours in this regard, and can we trust them to
commit seriously to this co-operation?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Speaker. Yes, we do trust
our neighbours, and we do trust that they will continue to work in a co-
operative fashion. That is why, as I said in response to Mr van der Merwe,
our experience and our information is that indeed hustlers, rustlers, car
hijackers and all of those kinds of people who engage in trafficking of
contraband do get arrested and convicted in our courts of law. If you need
the figures, Home Affairs can give them to you, because Home Affairs keeps
the entry figures into the country. That is why we are able to say that
most of the people who enter the country have documents – one kind of
document or the other.

Cabinet has taken a decision to do away with the special dispensation, for
instance for Zimbabweans. As you know, during the special period in
Zimbabwe when everything was collapsing, there was a special dispensation
for Zimbabweans to be in the country for nine months and so on. That has
now been done away with, because the situation in Zimbabwe is a little bit
more stable, and that will reduce the number of people who come from our
neighbouring countries.

President Museveni once said to me that if we really want to make progress
in South Africa, we must consider finding a way of ensuring that there
would be free movement of people and goods from Windhoek to Maputo. Perhaps
that is food for thought - that perhaps one day we will be one country; one
big happy South Africa right from Windhoek to South Africa. It is just a
thought. Thank you.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Deputy President, an article
in The Zimbabwe Times was very critical of the South African government and
accused it of failing to protect women and young girls who were terrorised
by armed gangs operating on the South African side of the Zimbabwe-South
Africa border. The reporter further alleged that the Zimbabwean women were
raped, stripped and tied up at the side of the road, and that, at the time
of writing, about 142 women had sought medical help following the rapes.

What I want to know, hon Deputy President, is whether or not this matter
has been raised in the quarterly border forums that you referred to, and
what has been done to stop these alleged atrocities. Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Meshoe. I am not aware whether or not
this matter was ever raised in the joint committee meetings. What I can say
is that the veracity of the allegations, as reflected in The Zimbabwe
Times, is something that may have to be checked. In the run-up to the Fifa
World Cup, one British newspaper warned the British national team that was
going to be based in Rustenburg that there are pythons in Rustenburg that
ate five human beings every day. [Laughter.] It happens that some
journalists write about these things. It is very difficult to verify the
correctness of these articles.

What I do know, however, is that the police along the Zimbabwean border
have been able to pick up young children who were left in the bush there by
their parents in case they got arrested and so on. Those children were then
reunited with their families. Thank you.

   Position regarding proposal to devolve management of Commission for the
 Promotion and Protection of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities

11.   Dr A Lotriet (DA) asked the Deputy President:

    Whether he has considered a proposal to devolve the management of the
    Commission for the Promotion and Protection of Cultural, Religious and
    Linguistic Communities from the Department of Co-operative Governance
    and Traditional Affairs to the Department of Arts and Culture; if not,
    what is the position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant
    details regarding the timeframes envisaged for the implementation of
    the proposal?            NO2872E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Speaker and hon Lotriet, I assume that the question
you have asked refers to the proposal of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Review
of Chapter 9 and sssociated institutions that was made to the National
Assembly on 31 July 2007.

With regard to the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the
Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities, the ad hoc
committee recommended, inter alia, the incorporation of the Pan South
African Language Board, PanSALB, into the commission and the designation of
the Minister of Arts and Culture as the member of the executive dealing
with the commission.

The ad hoc committee further outlined a process which involved the
appointment of a task team consisting of three members of the commission,
three members of PanSALB and six members of the National Assembly to report
to the National Assembly with a practical plan for implementing the
proposal. I note that when the National Assembly dealt with the ad hoc
committee’s report in the last Parliament on 21 November 2008, whilst
adopting the recommendation on the establishment of a parliamentary unit on
constitutional institutions and other statutory bodies, it resolved that
the rest of the report, including the provisions I have referred to, be
held in abeyance with a view to allow the fourth Parliament – that is this
Parliament – to consider the matter in a manner it deemed fit.

It is therefore up to this Fourth Parliament to debate and discuss these
issues relating to the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the
Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities, and determine
whether there is a need to devolve its management to another department.
Thank you.

Dr A LOTRIET: Mr Deputy President, yes, we are quite aware of the proposals
that were made by this ad hoc committee, but the question is that we should
have some timeframes, otherwise we are going to perhaps wait another three
years before this happens. This morning we even had a presentation by this
commission, indicating the tremendous problems that they have and the fact
that they cannot do their work effectively because of these overlapping
mandates and functions. Therefore, my question to you is the following:
Could you please give a timeframe and more specifics as to how this
Parliament should then go about addressing this?

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon members, the
recommendations of the ad hoc committee were very clear that Parliament
itself would have to appoint six members of this House to serve together
with three from the Pan South African Language Board and three from the
commission, in order to give effect to its recommendations.

The recommendations, among other things, were that the units that fell
under the Pan South African Language Board would have to be integrated and
migrated to the Department of Arts and Culture, as well as its portfolio
committee, and that these two bodies may be merged without the need to
amend the Constitution through legislation. That is why this task clearly
rests with the House itself. I have brought the report – I think it is on
page 144 that the recommendations spell out the steps that need to be
taken, including the timeline.

The suggestion in the report was that within 12 months of Parliament
considering this report such structures should be put in place. As to why
Parliament is not doing that, I have no idea. I suppose this is a timely
reminder of what ought to happen in order to give effect to these
recommendations. Thank you.

Dr C P MULDER: Hon Speaker, the hon Lotriet has made a fundamental mistake
in the question that she asked. The question refers to the Commission for
the Promotion and Protection of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic
Communities. There is no such commission. Section 185 of the Constitution
is the foundation for a different commission, namely the Commission for the
Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and
Linguistic Communities. It is about rights and social cohesion. I can
understand that she has made that mistake, because the party that she
belongs to does not believe in the rights of communities.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, on a point of order, sir: The item on the agenda
is questions to the Deputy President. I was not aware of the fact that we
were on statements here, and I believe that the hon member should put a
question to the Deputy President, rather than stand up and talk nonsense.
[Interjections.]

Dr C P MULDER: Speaker, I will ask a question to the Deputy President in a
few seconds to enlighten the DA about what is in the Constitution. Hon
Deputy President, the question that I would like to ask you is the
following, and the fact of the matter is that ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon members!

Ms A M DREYER: Vier-en-twintig stemme in Carletonville! [Twenty-four votes
in Carltonville!]

Dr C P MULDER: Speaker, the fact of the matter is that there is no member
of the executive that deals with the commission. This commission is a
Chapter 9 institution that is independent and only subject to the
Constitution and the law. The executive only gets involved in terms of the
Budget.

What I would like to ask is the following: Is there a possibility that
government will think about, once again, looking into the mandate of this
commission – what it is supposed to do and not what it is doing at the
moment – because this commission is not living up to what is expected of it
in terms of the rights of communities or the question of social cohesion?
Thank you. [Time expired.] [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members!
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Mulder. The ad hoc committee
report looked into all of these Chapter 9 institutions, including this one.
It has made very clear recommendations, which need to be given effect to by
this House. Therefore, it falls upon this House, really, to take that
process forward, not so much the executive. The executive would be directed
by the legislation which would come out of this House. Thank you.

Prof C T MSIMANG: Thank you, hon Speaker. Thank you, hon Deputy President,
for pointing out that in the ad hoc committee there are three members from
the Pan South African Language Board also serving there, because, in the
first place, the linguistic communities’ rights were misplaced in these
communities when we already had the Pan South African Language Board.

My concern is, since there is an outcry in this country that the Pan South
African Language Board is failing dismally in promoting and developing
languages in this country, how will it help should this ad hoc committee
decide that linguistic communities’ interests should reside with the Pan
South African Language Board? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Msimang. In fact, the recommendation
of the ad hoc report is for the Pan South African Language Board to be
matched with the commission. There were units, if you remember, under the
board which dealt with lexicography. It was recommended in this report that
those units should be located in the Department of Arts and Culture. That
was the first recommendation of the ad hoc committee and, once again, I
think that the next step is for this House to look at that report again –
the House’s decision was to keep it in abeyance – and perhaps dust it off
and select the six members and set the process in motion. Thank you.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Hon Deputy President, whilst your replies have answered me in
part, I think it may still be useful for me to ask my questions, and these
are: Has the work done by the commission justified its existence? Is the
work of the commission adding value to the lives of people living in South
Africa, and how is this effectiveness measured? What are the challenges
facing the commission with regard to fulfilling their mandate and playing a
meaningful role in society? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Speaker, the work of evaluating the effectiveness
and relevance of these Chapter 9 institutions was done by the ad hoc
committee, and these recommendations that I’ve alluded to try to address
their findings, even though there was a qualification in the report to the
effect that this particular commission had been in existence for a much
shorter period than the others. That is why the ad hoc committee felt that
there hadn’t been sufficient time to actually assess its effectiveness or
lack thereof. Thank you.

         Monitoring of increase in number of child-headed households

12.   Mrs J D Kilian (Cope) asked the Deputy President:

      Whether the Government is actively monitoring the increase in the
      number of child-headed households; if not, why not; if so, (a) how
      frequently is it done and (b) what are the relevant details?
                                              NO2882E

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Hon Speaker, yes, the national Department of Social
Development receives reports on the number of child-headed households
identified and serviced as well as on the types of services rendered to
them, on a quarterly basis.

The statistics that government relies on are received from homes and from
community-based care organisations which report to provincial departments
of social development on the number of child-headed households identified
and serviced and the types of services provided.

Government attempts to assist child-headed households through social
workers at the district level who are assigned to these households and
whose responsibility it is to link the children to all government services
including, but not limited to: psychosocial support; linking children with
relatives and extended family; facilitating access to official documents;
and application and access to social grants such as the child support
grant, the foster care grant, grants in aid and also social relief of
distress grants and food parcels.

The reason for the continuing phenomenon of child-headed households in
South Africa is primarily attributed to HIV and Aids. Other reasons
identified are unemployment that results in people leaving home to seek
employment elsewhere; desertion or abandonment of children, and excessive
abuse of alcohol, which renders adults incapable of parenting.

We all have a collective responsibility to ensure that the hardships
suffered by children who have to assume responsibility for their families
are minimised so that all children in South Africa can experience the true
joy and freedom of childhood. Thank you.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Thank you, Speaker. Deputy President, according to
statistics, it seems that we have a particular problem in specific
provinces. Does government keep a tally of the rural-urban divide as far as
this serious problem is concerned? It seems that about 90% of all child-
headed households are located in three provinces: Limpopo, KwaZulu-Natal
and the Eastern Cape. What additional interventions does government plan to
ensure that we actually address this very serious social ill in society, so
that we can help the children who come from these homes to become skilful,
disciplined South African citizens? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Speaker, yes indeed, government, through the national
Department of Social Development, keeps accurate records of child-headed
households. The prevalence of this phenomenon in certain provinces is a
result of unemployment, when parents, tired of staring into the eyes of
hungry children going to bed without food, end up migrating to urban
centres in search of employment.

In certain instances, arrangements are made with relatives who, from time
to time, check on the children. The net effect is that these children are
left on their own, and that is why the national Department of Social
Development has to keep track of all of this. Through the work done by
community-based care organisations and so on, these reports filter through
to the department, which is able to respond accordingly. Thank you.

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI: Thank you, hon Speaker. Mr Deputy President, I am
sure that you will agree with me that the issue of child-headed households
is a serious issue as these children not only lose their parents or
guardians, but their childhoods as well. Many are unable to afford school
fees and other such expenses, even though they get grants. Deputy
President, what is government doing to ensure that planning is done to
address this escalating problem and to make sure that money is budgeted to
address the problems faced by these children? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, hon Lebenya. As I said, government takes
steps to ensure that such children receive support, guidance and foster
care, precisely because if government does not intervene decisively such
children will become a burden on the social welfare system of the country.
To the extent that such a problem is known and properly recorded in
government departments, everything possible is done to ensure that such
children grow up in an environment that is very supportive and that they
receive the necessary education. That is why the general approach is that
no children of school-going age should be out of school simply because they
have no parents or their parents are unemployed and so on. Thank you.

Mrs S P KOPANE: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Deputy President, I have the
government’s own costing report on the Children’s Act in my hand and it
states that if we want to implement this Act properly we need 66 000 social
workers in our country. Currently, we have about 11 000 social workers for
49 million South African citizens. That is a shortfall of 83%.

Given that we only have 17% of the social workers that are needed, it is
impossible for your department to monitor the increase in child-headed
households, let alone ensure that the children are properly cared for.
Could the Deputy President kindly explain to us how the government is
helping children in child-headed households in terms of foster care
placement or permanent adoption?

Secondly, I really appreciate the Deputy President’s answer regarding home
and community-based care, but home and community-based caregivers are not
qualified people. They need supervision by qualified people. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Kopane. Yes, indeed, the
shortfall of qualified social workers is a problem, hence the introduction
of home and community-based caregivers as a supplement to the work that
would normally be done by qualified social workers. This, unfortunately, is
our situation and we can’t say that we will do nothing until we have
sufficient qualified social workers. It is thus a stopgap measure in an
attempt to address this dire challenge.

Where cases are reported in the districts, all the necessary steps are
taken by the national Department of Social Development to ensure that such
children are put up for adoption if they are the appropriate age, and
others receive the requisite support. I have mentioned a number of those
kinds of support measures. That is not an exhaustive list. The government
is able to intervene depending on the situation. The critical point here is
for such situations to be reported to the relevant authorities in the
district and localities and then for such problems to be attended to.
Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Deputy President, legislation, we
know, allows for households to be headed by children of 15 years and older.
As there is no perfect age for children to take on such a responsibility,
has the legislated age of 15 been found to be useful or problematic, either
blocking families being together where the older sibling is perhaps 13 or
14, or placing undue stress on 15-year-olds? Is government satisfied that
the concept of child-headed households and policies around that are working
and in the best interests of these children and what are the relevant
details? Thank you.

The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, hon Dudley. As I said, it is
abnormal for 15-year-olds to be heading families and what government does
in those cases is to lend a supporting hand to ensure that such children
are not burdened with the responsibility of adults. But that is really a
stopgap measure. We should try to address all the other social ills to
ensure that we don’t have many cases of 15-year-olds heading families,
because a 15-year-old is still a minor and may need guidance and support,
rather than being burdened with the responsibility of parenthood. Thank
you.

                             PEACE AND SECURITY
                                  Cluster 1

MINISTERS:

     Effect on SA Police Service of strike by private security companies
             appointed for 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup tournament

171.  Ms A van Wyk (ANC) asked the Minister of Police:


      What was the effect of the strike by private security companies that
      were appointed for the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup tournament on the
      (a) number of additional SA Police Service members that needed to be
      deployed, (b) number of extra working days for the SAPS and (c) costs
      involved?        NO2846E

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Mr Speaker, hon members, after the strike and other
problems related to the deployment of private security bodies appointed by
Fifa, a total of 1 184 additional SA Police Service, SAPS, members were
deployed during the period, and performed functions on match and non-match
days. Some of the functions of private security bodies were taken over by
the SAPS. Members of the SAPS were deployed over a period of 31 days. The
additional deployment costs for personnel have been estimated at
R89,6 million. Thank you.

Ms A VAN WYK: Thank you, Speaker. Thank you, Minister, for the answer.
First and foremost, I think that we need to congratulate the SAPS on the
swift and professional manner in which they stepped in and assumed these
extra duties. We owe each and every man and woman in blue our gratitude and
appreciation. However, Minister, given that the Local Organising Committee,
LOC, and Fifa have budgeted for private security at these venues, are you
considering any legal avenues and taking steps to recover these costs from
Fifa?

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have already written to
the LOC to recoup this amount; it is needed very much by the Police. Thank
you very much.

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Ngiyabonga Somlomo. Mhlonishwa Ngqongqoshe, kukhona
ukukhala okuthi abanye bamaphoyisa abathatha umsebenzi emva kokuba onogada
betelekile, abakakucoshi lokho okufanele bakucoshe. Okokuqala, izikhalo
lezo ezinjalo sezafika kuwena? Okwesibili, bangakanani labo abangakucoshi
okufanele bakucoshe, bayokucosha nini-ke okufanele ukuba bakucoshe?
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon Minister, there is a complaint
from some of the members of the police service who are saying that they
haven’t been paid what is due to them for stepping in when the security
guards embarked on a strike. Firstly, I want to know whether such
complaints have reached you and whether you are attending to them.
Secondly, how many members of the police service must still be paid for
that, and when are they going to be paid?]

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the answer is what we have
said: that the LOC has to pay this money.

Kusho ukuthi izocoshwa kanjalo-ke mhlonishwa. I-LOC kufanele iphendule
ngoba sithe siyayidinga. [This means that they will then be paid that way,
hon member. The LOC must respond because we have told them that we need
it.]

We need that money. Thank you very much.

Mrs D A SCHÄFER: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Apart from action against
Fifa, Minister, is there a provision in the contract with the security
companies themselves for damages to be paid to the state in the event of
the security companies’ breaching the agreement? If not, why not? If so,
what steps is the Minister planning to take to recover the wasted
taxpayers’ money from the security companies? We trust that one way or the
other, either Fifa or the security companies will be sued if necessary.

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Thank you, hon member. I must say that’s not our
call to make, because the contract was between the LOC and those private
companies. So, they must sort their stuff out; we want what is ours.
OkukaKhesare kuKhesare. [Render unto Caesar what is Ceasar’s.] Thank you.

Mrs D A SCHÄFER: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask another question if
there is the opportunity to do so.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you may.

Mrs D A SCHÄFER: Minister, given the fact there were already problems with
procuring the services of suitable private security companies for the
Confederations Cup in 2009, and given that the appointment of private
security companies for the World Cup was left to very late in the day, does
the Minister agree that the strike action could have been prevented with
proper advanced planning? If not, why not? If so, why was this not done?

The MINISTER OF POLICE: We share that sentiment, hon member. We are at one
on that matter. Perhaps that is why we have emphasised the point that those
who are supposed to secure public facilities like the stadia, should indeed
have gone through the processes of the PSIRA, Private Security Industry
Regulatory Authority, in ensuring that they met the requirements. This is
what we have been emphasising, both to Fifa and to the LOC. For them, in
particular, this should have been a lesson because we raised the matter
even before all the things that happened thereafter. Thank you so much.

              Particulars regarding arrest of a certain person

155.  Ms D Kohler-Barnard (DA) asked the Minister of Police:


      (1)   (a) What (i) are the reasons for dispatching approximately 20 SA
           Police Service officers and six SAPS vehicles to arrest a
           certain person (details furnished) and (ii) was the (aa) total
           cost and (bb) impact on the general duties of the SAPS of
           utilising this number of vehicles and officers for the arrest,
           (b) on what basis was the person arrested and (c) how long after
           the person’s arrest was he afforded the opportunity to (i)
           contact and (ii) consult with his attorney;


      (2)   whether the national commissioner was informed of the intended
           arrest; if not, (a) why not and (b) on whose authority was the
           arrest made; if so,


      (3)   whether he authorised the arrest; if not, who authorised the
           arrest; if so, what was the basis for his decision?
                                                   NO2825E

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, according to the reports I
have received, the arrest was made by the local Rosebank police station
after the investigating officer from Mpumalanga had waited for more than
two hours at the Rosebank station for the person to hand themselves over to
the police. When the suspect failed to present himself to the investigating
officer, two other officers proceeded in one vehicle to this person’s place
of work, where a commotion broke out and other vehicles were dispatched to
establish the problem. The costs for any arrest are not calculated on an
individual basis, but are part of the SAPS’s operational budget.

There was no impact on the general duties of the SAPS as the dispatched
vehicles hardly spent 10 minutes at the scene after this person was
arrested. The person in question was arrested on charges of fraud and
forgery after a case was opened in Mpumalanga.

The person’s lawyer was present at the time of arrest and, therefore, there
was no time delay in contacting his lawyer. The National commissioner is
not informed every time the police effect an arrest. Therefore, on this
matter it was not required for the investigating officer to first inform
National Commissioner Gen Cele. As such the national commissioner was not
informed and this should be an obvious thing. Every investigating officer
has the powers and authority to effect an arrest after a docket has been
opened, and this instance was no different. Thank you.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: In January, two and half years ago, Adv Gerrie Nel
who, at the time, was head of the Scorpions in Gauteng, was arrested in
exactly the same manner as the Sunday Times journalist Mzilikazi Wa Afrika
was arrested just one month ago.

In the first instance it was to protect the now disgraced ex-National
Police Commissioner, Jackie Selebi. Then it took 20 armed police officers
to serve the warrant of arrest on Adv Nel. It took the same number to swoop
on Mr Wa Afrika, an unarmed journalist. Adv Nel was driven around all night
in an attempt to intimidate him and his cellphone was taken. Mr Wa Afrika
was driven around, and despite many of us searching throughout the night,
we were unable to locate him as we faced what seemed to be deliberate
obstruction on the part of the Hawks. His cellphone was also taken.

Mr Wa Afrika was one of the authors of a story published just two days
before about the dodgy rental of new police headquarters. Minister, the
arrest of this journalist, in many eyes, has negated gains we made during
the Fifa World Cup. Would you explain who exactly was behind the
extraordinary arrest and assure this House that this jackboot intimidatory
policing is not making a comeback in this country? [Time expired.]

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon Deputy Speaker, I do not know which part of the
answer the hon member does not get, because the issue here is that a human
being was arrested. After that arrest, charges were levelled against the
individual and, by the way, he is not the only person who was arrested on
that charge for that particular incident. She chooses to omit one of the
two people who were arrested and I do not know why.

The fact of the matter is that, if you are arrested and you are being
charged, face the music and do not let a Member of Parliament represent
your case because someone else is not represented. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

Mr G LEKGETHO: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, there is a lot of
fuss being made about the arrest of this Mzilikazi. Could you respond as to
why there should be this sensationalism when two other people were arrested
with the reporter? Why is the DA only mentioning one person, as if the
others were not human beings? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. The question posed
by the member, I think, should be directed to where it comes from, not to
the Minister, because I am as baffled as you are. Let me say that the
individuals concerned were given bail of R5 000 each because of what they
were arrested for, both of them individually. Both of them have had their
passports confiscated, but we are still to hear someone representing the
other individual. Maybe he is not that important. I don’t know. I am
assuming, hon member.

Mr M E GEORGE: Thank you, hon Speaker. Hon Minister, this apartheid-style
display of excessive power and massing of police cars to arrest unarmed
civilians is not consistent with the democracy we have evolved into. My
question to you is: Do you encourage that type of abuse of power?

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Your question is very simple, hon member. I am
supposed to say no and sit down, because it is a very simple question. The
issue here is that I explained that an investigating officer was sent and
was made to wait for more than two hours. He took it to heart having had to
wait two hours. But when he wanted to effect an arrest, the police were
told that the person concerned would hand himself over, hence those two
hours. The police then tried to effect an arrest. I hope you will agree
with me, hon member: Nobody is allowed to obstruct that particular process.
That is when the investigating officer called for others to come and help
him because there was a commotion. There was resistance to arrest. Do you
support resistance to arrest, hon member? You won’t support that, I assume.
I thank you.

Mr M S SHILOWA: Hon Minister, there is a protocol, as I understand it,
entered into between the police, the department and your Ministry on the
one hand, and the National Prosecuting Authority and the SA National
Editors’ Forum, Sanef, on the other, on the kind of processes that need to
be followed as and when there are going to be arrests of media people.

So, this is not so much that they should be treated in a special way. In
our view, the protocol, as outlined, was not followed in dealing with the
issue. Could you indicate whether or not the protocol was followed and, if
it wasn’t followed, what was the problem in following that particular
protocol?

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. As I explained, hon
member, even after that protocol we reported in this House some two months
ago that we were going to further engage Sanef. Whatever we agreed on, it
does not involve forgery and fraud. So, it falls outside of that. But over
and above that and keeping that protocol in mind, the police were very
patient – you would agree with me – as they waited for more than two hours
for a person, being shunted from pillar to post. What else were the police
supposed to do? We took cognisance of everything and we were very patient
and gentle with the gentleman concerned. [Interjections.] Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

  Position regarding compliance with procurement policies in procuring new
                              SAPS headquarters

178.  Mr L Ramatlakane (Cope) asked the Minister of Police:


      Whether procurement policies and tender requirements have been duly
      complied with in procuring the new SA Police Service headquarters; if
      not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        NO2861E

The MINISTER OF POLICE: The SA Police Service, also known as the force, is
not mandated to procure new office accommodation and does not deal with the
procurement policies and tender requirements thereof as this is the
responsibility of the Department of Public Works. The SAPS identifies its
accommodation needs by means of a needs assessment and then takes that to
the Department of Public Works. Thank you very much.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, following your
reply to the question, it has been reported in various media outlets that
Gen Cele was involved in the initial negotiations of that very same
building with someone who is very close to the ruling party, a person by
the name of Shabangu. Now we have seen the abrupt resignation of Gen Hlela
and Gen Siwundla, as well as Gen Strydom. Has this got to do with this
issue - in fact, the question has been raised by the committee itself – of
the same corruption that has been reported, which is going to be
investigated imminently by the Special Investigating Unit? Thank you,
Deputy Speaker.

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Well, hon member, the resignations you referred to
are resignations. I want us to see them that way. But, regarding your
specific question related to the Special Investigating Unit it is the
Ministry and the Department of Police which actually approached the
Presidency, because some of the things related to what the committee
raised, as you’ve said and even before that, were by and large to do with
supply-chain management. So, that process is ongoing. I do not want to
refer to the specific names you referred to, but the people you referred to
have resigned. Thank you very much.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Ngiyabonga Sekela Somlomo. Mhloniswa uma kuthiwa umuntu
wasayina ethi omunye akazange asayine, iqiniso likuphi ngempela? [Thank
you, Madam Deputy Speaker. If it is alleged that somebody has signed for
something and in return the alleged culprit denies that accusation, who is
really telling the truth?]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Minister, did you hear the question?

Mnu V B NDLOVU: Uma mhloniswa kuthiwa wasayina omunye ethi angizange
ngisayine, ngubani okufuneka aphenye ngempela ukuthi lo wakwenza lokho,
iqiniso likuphi ngempela kulokho?

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZAMAPHOYISA: Lunga elihloniphekile, angazi ukuthi kusayinwa
ini baba. Kodwa-ke nami ngiyayifunda lento oyifunda emaphepheni.
Engikwaziyo ukuthi ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[Mr V B NDLOVU: Hon Minister, if it is alleged that somebody signed for
something and the alleged culprit in turn says they did not do it, who
should, as a matter of fact, investigate whether the alleged culprit has
really committed that crime - where does the truth really lie in that
matter?

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon member, I do not know what it is that has been
signed, sir. However, I also read what you read in the newspapers. What I
do know is ...]

... on the issue of procurement, the Department of Public Works is dealing
with the matter because it belongs there. I have been informed by my
colleague, the Minister of Public Works, that most of these procurements,
across the board in government, have been frozen.

Mhlawumbe ukusayina kuyotholakala uma seliyoshona ilanga baba, angikakazi
okwamanje. Siyabonga. [Maybe the signing story will be known towards the
end, sir – but as of now, I know nothing. Thank you.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, more than any
other department, the SAPS is expected to set a good example for all
government departments by upholding the rule of law, which is their core
function. It is therefore inexcusable for the police to violate Treasury
regulations.
Having heard what the hon Minister said about the resignation of the Deputy
National Commissioner of Police, I still want to know whether the hon
Minister will consider looking into the real reasons for the resignations,
particularly because these resignations were made in the middle of the
probe involving contracts totalling more than    R4 billion in the
department. Minister, there must be something that we need to know and
would you please look into that. Thank you, Deputy Speaker.

UNGQONGQOSHE WEZAMAPHOYISA: Sekela Somlomo, ubab’ umfundisi ngabe uyasisiza
nje asithandazele bakwethu, sibhekene nomsebenzi onzima. Cha, ngeke
ngikwazi ukuwuphendula lowo mbuzo angibuza wona kodwa engikushoyo ukuthi
umsebenzi wokubheka izinto ... (Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[The MINISTER OF POLICE: Madam Deputy Speaker, the hon reverend should just
assist us by praying for us good people as we are faced with this enormous
task. No, I cannot answer the question he is asking but what I am saying is
that the oversight functions ...]

... of checking and putting things where they are supposed to be within the
police will continue. But I can’t ask a member why he or she is resigning.
I don’t even want to go there. I don’t wish to take that route. Thank you
very much.

Mr P J GROENEWALD: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, I want to say
that at least the National Commissioner of Police had to complete a needs
assessment, which he forwarded to the Department of Public Works. Now, my
follow-up question is: Is there really a need for a second 18-storey
building for police headquarters when you already utilise the present one?
Is there really a need for that? Was it really a good assessment as far as
that is concerned? At least you, as the Minister, must have known about
this because R500 million is not a small amount. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon member, there is no need for an 18-storey
building. In fact, I do not even know where that comes from, because there
is no such thing as an 18-storey building. The assessment and the needs of
the police have always been raised.

Hon member, because you are a member of this committee, you should know
better in that even last year the matter was raised of building
headquarters for the police. That was supposed to be done as a public-
private partnership option. I was told, after the assessment, that these
headquarters would cost more than R4 billion. The new management then
decided that if that continued, the first point of call would be the
building of the police station rather than building those headquarters.
Thank you very much.

 Position regarding findings on how special courts aid and ensure universal
                              access to justice
167.  Mr M Gungubele (ANC) asked the Minister of Justice and Constitutional
      Development:


      Whether he has made any findings on how special courts like the Small
      Claims Court and equality courts aid and ensure universal access to
      justice; if not, why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        NO2842E

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you, Deputy
Speaker. I would like to inform the hon member that I found that the small
claims courts and the equality courts are successful initiatives of
government that are aimed at improving access to justice for all. However,
these courts should not be seen as special courts as they are normal,
permanent courts established by legislation with specific goals in mind.

The former Chief Justice, Pius Langa, stressed that access to justice
becomes an empty gesture and makes a mockery of the Constitution if it is
not backed by mechanisms that are adequate for the enforcement of rights.
In this regard, both the small claims courts and the equality courts play a
vitally important role.

These courts are powerful mechanisms in aiding the provision of civil
access to justice, especially for the indigent. These courts are based on
speed, simplicity and cost-effectiveness, and they eliminate time-
consuming, adversarial procedures regarding the resolution of disputes up
to R7 000.

No legal representatives are required or allowed to appear on behalf of
litigants in these courts. One of the objectives is to ensure that there is
at least one functioning and active small claims court in each and every
one of South Africa’s 384 magisterial districts. We are just over the
halfway mark in this regard. Currently, the Department of Justice and
Constitutional Development has already established 211 Small Claims Courts,
and the proclamation of a further three is imminent. Significantly and in
keeping with our objective of ensuring access to justice for all, most of
the newly established courts will be in rural areas.

Furthermore, we have initiated a campaign to familiarise various role-
players with Small Claims Courts and popularise their usage amongst as many
people as possible. As you would know, we have also made a call on all
Members of Parliament to assist us in speeding up the establishment of
Small Claims Courts by heeding the call, “One constituency, one Small
Claims Court”. Thank you.

Mr M GUNGUBELE: Thank you, hon Speaker. Thank you, hon Minister. Taking
into account that this is a very noble cause, the intention of which is to
ensure access for the many disadvantaged South Africans and their
challenges and with respect to the intention, we assume that this noble
cause will be accompanied by continual capacitation. Thank you.

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well, as the hon
Gungubele is aware, we are also going to inform the portfolio committee
from time to time on additional capacity. So your valuable assistance in
procuring more funds for matters of this nature will be greatly
appreciated.

Mrs N W A MICHAEL: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Minister, I hear what
you say, and the DA is very pleased with the establishment of these special
courts and these Small Claims Courts. However, at a presentation to the
portfolio committee by the department, we were informed of large numbers of
vacancies in courts ranging from clerks of the court and court officials to
prosecutors and magistrates. Are these special courts adequately staffed,
thus bringing and ensuring universal justice to all South Africans?

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: As the hon member
is aware, there are always competing needs and that is why as Cabinet we
take collective responsibility in terms of our budget. As and when funds
become available, we fill posts. You may be aware that every year we fill
posts for clerks of the court, prosecutors, magistrates and even judges. As
the economy grows, I am sure that we will be able to fill all the necessary
vacancies in the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development.
Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Mr Minister, I
thought that you gave a very good answer. I want to know what reaction you
are getting from Members of Parliament. This is because there was a call on
all of us to assist in ensuring that there is a small claims court in every
magisterial district. Are the Members of Parliament assisting you? How is
that going?

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well, I assume that
Members of Parliament are responsible, so this campaign should be
proceeding. I am aware that hon Van der Merwe is a lawyer as well, so he is
aware that many lawyers in South Africa, from time to time, leave their
offices and participate in these small claims courts, which play a very
significant role in providing access to justice for all the people of South
Africa.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. Minister, following your
reply, I think all of us from this side will support the programme. In
terms of the establishment, you said that a proclamation is imminent in
terms of the plan that you have in the department, particularly for the
rural communities. When do you envisage that all the declared municipal
districts will have functioning small claims courts?

The MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Well, it is our
plan that this should happen as soon as possible, but it all depends on the
resources that are made available to the department. I have indicated
already that we have 211 of these Small Claims Courts throughout South
Africa. Our aim is that in the next three or so years, all the 384
magisterial districts of South Africa will have these small claims courts.
The equality courts are functioning. All Magistrates’ Courts have been
designated as Equality Courts. So it is for the public to utilise them
whenever they feel some injustice has been done to them.

   Position regarding (i) criteria for appointment of ambassadors and (ii)
                   reasons for appointing a certain person

154.  Mr S Mokgalapa (DA) asked the Minister of International Relations and
      Co-operation:


      Whether her department provides the President with any criteria and/or
      recommendations that assist the President with his decision to appoint
      ambassadors; if not, why not; if so, (a) what are the relevant details
      and (b) what are the reasons for appointing a certain person (name
      furnished) as ambassador whilst there are allegations surrounding him?
            NO2824E

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Thank you, hon
Deputy Speaker. Our response to the hon Mokgalapa is, yes, heads of
missions, ambassadors and high commissioners represent the head of state
abroad. Therefore, according to the Constitution, their appointment is the
sole prerogative of the President. The department provides the President
with recommendations on the appointment of ambassadors.

In making the recommendations, the department takes into account, amongst
other things, other priorities and needs at our headquarters, priorities at
the missions where the proposed ambassadors will be sent, and the
experience and profile of recommended designates.

On allegations against the ambassador, which we have read about in the
newspapers, the allegations have not been tested and therefore the
ambassador is presumed innocent until proven otherwise. I thank you.

Mr S MOKGALAPA: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Thank you, Minister, for the
response. In light of the Minister’s response indicating the high calibre
she considers as a criterion for appointing ambassadors, how then,
Minister, was it possible that Mr Rasool was still appointed even though
the ANC secretary-general, Mr Mantashe, admitted publicly at a media
briefing on 4 August 2010 that Mr Rasool had been recalled as premier,
stating that: “Rasool was removed on the basis of this case.”

This was a reference to allegations detailed in an affidavit that money was
paid to a former Cape Argus political reporter. Don’t you think this smacks
of double standards?

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Hon Mokgalapa,
the allegation remains an allegation and remains to be tested through the
proper processes. So, I will not take a quotation from a press conference
to be the basis for me to make those considerations. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, hon Deputy Speaker. Hon Minister, has the question
of making decisions that affect international relations, like the criteria
on appointment of ambassadors, more transparent and people-friendly been
discussed at Cabinet level? Is there recognition of a possible need to make
this and other similar processes more transparent in order to allow the
South African public to better connect with and view international
relations with less suspicion and scepticism? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Deputy Speaker,
well, South Africans are being engaged at large through public diplomacy,
an initiative that’s new, and we engage with all South Africans from all
walks of life.

Talking about transparency in the appointment of ambassadors, one thing
that has happened in this country is that the President of the Republic
even considers making appointments from opposition parties. So, I don’t
know what further transparency is needed. When we make such appointments,
we normally get whispers of “Thank you very much” in the corridors, but
never out here in the open to say: I come from this party, this number of
people were appointed from our party, and they are doing a good job.

Please don’t ask us to judge people when the due process of the law is
taking place. When that comes into play, we will take the necessary action.
So, let’s not confuse reaching out to the public with regard to what we do
in our international work with appointments of ambassadors, because when
the President finds the time and space he does reach out to all political
parties represented in this House. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J H VAN DER MERWE: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I find it very
strange that the hon Minister actually rejects the statement by the
secretary-general of her party - that this person was recalled. I want to
ask the Minister and, through her, the President of course: Is it not wiser
and better to wait until the law has taken its course before a person is
appointed to such a high position?

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: You know, hon
member, through you, Deputy Speaker, South Africa will continue to be
respected in the international arena when all South Africans consider
issues of international relations and national interest in this House as
priorities for all of us.

Firstly, I think it is opportunistic that when a person is nominated there
is no noise made, but when the appointment is confirmed and on the eve of
the ambassador leaving there is a leak to the newspapers and that therefore
we should make decisions based on what the newspapers say.

Secondly, I will not come into this House and wait to be taught how to
listen to the leadership of the organisation I belong to. I take orders
directly from the organisation I belong to, not via media conferences and
third parties. [Applause.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Deputy Speaker, Mr Minister, why do you make such important
positions, as you have explained, a sanctuary for party members who have
done some wrong in the country, because it was made very clear by the
secretary-general? You have explained the importance of these positions
very well. Why do you make them a sanctuary for wrongdoers in your party?
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Hon Mluleki
George, I have never seen a “he” who looks like me, ever. [Laughter.] So
I’m sure you are going withdraw that when I finish. [Interjections.]

Secondly, the President, advised by the department, looks at all South
Africans, largely internally in the department because we do have very
senior and professional diplomats within the department. Also,
constitutionally, the President can also appoint people outside the
department to represent the country. So, if you have a list of sinners,
don’t just pick and choose so that we are able to focus on building the
national interest and the image of South Africa truthfully. I am not about
to pass judgment on a matter that has not arisen as yet. Thank you.
[Applause.]

   Position regarding plans to improve distribution of staff for offender
                                 management

164.  Mr V G Smith (ANC) asked the Minister of Correctional Services:


      Whether, in light of the current estimated ratio of one staff member
      to four offenders at correctional facilities, any plans are in place
      to improve the distribution of staff for offender management; if not,
      what is the position in this regard; if so, (a) what plans and (b)
      what are the timeframes set for completion of the process?
                       NO2837E

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker.
The ratio which the hon member is referring to simply reflects the
calculation of the current staff complement in relation to the estimated
number of offenders, including projections of growth and releases. The
ratio of 1:4 is therefore based on the total number of offenders divided by
the total number of members nationally - that is, 160 000 inmates to 40 000
officials.

This formula is inclusive of all components: support staff, specialised
staff and security staff. Therefore, it is not a reference to the staff to
inmate ratio deployed for case management and security personnel in terms
of the unit management model in centres. The current ratio for the unit
management model at the centres is averaged at 1:17. The international norm
is benchmarked at 1:20.

Following the agreement on the occupation-specific dispensation, OSD, of
2007, the department has implemented a process of migration to ensure that
all officials who are trained as correctional officers are deployed to
centre levels. This was aimed at ensuring increased capacity for the
provision of security and programmes to offenders at the centres.

Following the National Treasury directive that the department’s total
organisational establishment should be reduced from 46 000 to 40 000, a
team was established for the revision of the staffing ratios based on the
alignment of structure and functions of the department. I have since also
directed that an audit of our small centres be conducted to determine which
one of these centres can be rationalised in order to share resources and
improve the rendering of services. Some of these centres have an inmate to
staff ratio of 1:1 and less.

Lastly, the project’s target date for completion of the migration process
is 30 September 2010. In the meantime, the department is currently filling
critical posts in the support sections to allow those correctional officers
who are currently engaged in support work to be redeployed to the centre. I
thank you.

Mr V G SMITH: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Minister, if one looks at the
annual report for 2006-07, the administration staff complement was 7 433;
in 2007-08, it was 6 593; and 2008-09, it was more or less 6 630. The
question that I would like to ask the Minister is: Does the department have
the right number of properly trained staff, in the right places, doing the
right thing?

My own view is that 6 000 people at head office or 6 000 office-based staff
is a bit too much and top heavy. I think that we should be looking at
redeploying some of those office-based staff to working in the centres. I
would be interested in your views on that, Madam Minister. Thank you very
much.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Deputy Speaker, I thought the hon
member understood me when I said that one of the priority areas of the
department right now was that of migration, which means movement of some of
the employees from head office, from doing administration work, to doing
the work of custodial services. There is also a directive given to us by
the National Treasury which says that we should reduce the staff numbers
within the Department of Correctional Services, from 46 000 to 40 000. That
is one of the things that we are doing.

I have also indicated that the last date, which is D-Day for this migration
process to be completed, is 30 September 2010. Thank you.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Mazibuko.

Mr A T FRITZ: Deputy Speaker, it is Fritz. There is something wrong with
our system. It is common cause that with the introduction of the seven-day
establishment and the two-shift system into correctional centres,
incentives had been created for centre-based officials. This resulted in
many office-based officials in critical positions in those administration
posts electing to migrate to centre-based positions. I heard the Minister
talking about this migration process.

But this is purely on paper. In reality, at the centre level, it is not in
existence. The question we want to ask is: What is the Minister going to do
- and specifically doing and implementing - in managing the flow of
critical office-based officials to centre-based positions that we all know
only exist on paper, as I indicated? Secondly, what has she done to remedy
the situation in which the ratio of centre-based officials, in many
instances, at correctional centres, is 1:200 and, in some instances, 1:300?
I thank you.

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker.
Hon Fritz, I don’t know where you get the figures from. The ratio of 1:300
I am not aware of. Nonetheless, you are a member of the portfolio
committee, I expect that at any time on any day you may want to invite the
department, led by me, to come and present the exact figures and the exact
state of affairs in the regions.

One of the issues you raised was the 12 x 2-by-two shift system. You and I
understand very clearly the reasons behind the decision to go the route of
the 12 x 2 shift system. It was at a time when we were introducing the
seven-day establishment. However, we later received reports that this
system was not working. We issued a directive that, in fact, all heads of
centres should use their discretion as to what kind of shift system they
would want to embark upon. We are all aware of this.

Now, what is a problem for me is that this directive was issued in March
2010 to try to rectify the situation. After a lot of lobbying by officials,
Members of Parliament, the South African public and civil society and so
on, we then went back and issued a directive. To my surprise, to date, 80%
of the centres continue to use the 12 x 2 shift system.
When you talk to officials, they will tell you that they were satisfied
with the 12 x 2 system. Yes, there are challenges of human resource
capacity here and there, but, in fact, this is the ideal shift system. It
is the only shift system you may want to have in a centre in order for you
to meet the requirements which have been created by the seven-day
establishment.

Therefore, with regard to the written question you gave us, I actually
tabulated in the response all the regions and all the centres to try to
prove that, in fact, it is a very strange development that people complain
about the 12 x 2 shift system. We issued a directive, but people still
retained the 12 x 2 shift system. Therefore, we are now at 80% at all the
centres, and we are using the 12 x 2 shift system. Maybe you and I need to
sit down and engage on what best we can do to turn the situation around.
Thank you very much.

Mr V B NDLOVU: Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. Minister, you said that
the directives sometimes are issued and then turned by those people who are
working under the two-day shift system. How do you monitor that? I ask this
question because some of the people who escape from Correctional Services
escape because the human resources are not equal to the numbers they were
looking after. As management, how do you monitor that?

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: Thank you very much.
Tat’ uNdlovu, andikholelwa nakancinane ukuba into yokubaleka kwamabanjwa
kumaziko ibangelwa yinto yokungabikho kwabasebenzi aboneleyo. Ewe, ikhona
ingxaki esinayo yokungabikho kwabasebenzi abaneleyo kwiZiko lezoLuleko,
kwaye nokuba singafaka inkqubo yamaxesha okungena amathathu, amane okanye
amathandathu siyakuhlala sinayo ingxaki yabasebenzi kwisebe.
Njengoko besenditshilo ngaphambili ukuba iNational Treasury sele isixelele
ukuba kufanele ukuba sithoba ukusuka kuma-46 000 amasentile ukuya kuma-
40 000. Khawube nombono woko kuza kwenzeka ngenxa yaloo nto.

Into ebalulekileyo yeyokuba sibe neenkqubo ezifanelekileyo ezizakusincedisa
ekubekeni iliso kakuhle, ngaphandle kokuxhomekeka kuthi bantu. Kufanele
ukuba sibe neenkqubo eziza kuthi zikwazi ukusibonisa amabanjwa xa ehamba-
hamba, kanti naxa ebaleka.

Ingxaki esinayo ikakhulu yeyokuba, iinkqubo esinazo apha kwiZiko lezoLuleko
azisebenzi ngendlela ezifanele ukuba zisebenze ngayo. Kufuneka siphucule
iinkqubo zethu sizidibanise nabo.

Ikhona enye ingxaki eyaziwa ndim nawe yokuba ngamaphuth’ ahlathinye apho
abasebenzi bamaZiko ezoLuleko anceda amabanjwa ukuze akwazi ukubaleka.
Yenye yezinto ezi ekufanele ukuba sizilungise kwiZiko lezoLuleko.

Abasebenzi beSebe lezoLuleko abazange benziwa uhlolo lwabaqeshwa
ukuqinisekisa ukuba ababandakanyeki kulwaphulomthetho. Ngoku enye yeengxaki
esijongene nazo kukuhlolwa kwabalawuli ukuqinisekisa ukuba ababandakanyeki
kulwaphulomthetho.

Ukusuka kwethu kuhlolo lwabalawuli kwizenzo zolwaphulomthetho siza kuhla
siye kumaziko. Sesiqalile ngabalawuli abazintloko zamaziko, kuba oku
kokunye kwemimngeni yethu emikhulu. Umngeni ngowokuba likhona eli yelenqe
phakathi kwamabanjwa kunye nabasebenzi bamaZiko oluLeko. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Mr Ndlovu, I don’t believe at all that the escapes of prisoners from the
centres are caused by a lack of human resources. Indeed, we have inadequate
human resources at correctional centres and whether we introduce a three-,
four- or six-shift system, we will always have the problem of inadequate
human resources within the department.

As I have indicated before, the National Treasury wants us to reduce the
organisational establishment from 46 000 to 40 000 warders. Imagine the
consequences of that.

What is important is that we must have proper systems that will help us
monitor without relying on human resources. We must have systems that will
be able to show us prisoners moving from place to place and also when they
escape.
The major problem that we have is that the systems that we have at
correctional centres are not working the way they are supposed to. We must
improve our systems and consolidate them.

There is another problem that we both know about and that is that some of
the warders are colluding with the prisoners to escape. This is one of the
habits that we need to rectify at correctional centres.

Workers at the Department of Correctional Services have never gone through
a security clearance to ascertain that they are not involved in crime.
Another problem that we have now is the security screening of the managers
to ascertain that they too are not involved in crime.

From screening managers for criminal acts, we will go down to the centres.
We have already started with the chief executive officers because this is
one of our major challenges. The challenge is that there is collusion
between the prisoners and the warders.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon Minister. Hon Mnqasela?

Mr A T FRITZ: Hon Speaker, again, I am at his desk.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you hon Mnqasela?

Mr A T FRITZ: No, no, I am Fritz. I am at his desk; my thing does not work
at the back. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Don’t do that, because there are other people here who
want to speak.

Mr A T FRITZ: I pressed this button. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said, don’t do that. You should press “Fritz” because
you spoke earlier.

Mr A T FRITZ: “Fritz” does not respond.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no, no, there’s “Fritz” here. Before that, there
was “Fritz” who responded. So, you are not the hon Mnqasela? Hon Mnqasela,
you didn’t press your button.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, it seems as if a lot of things are not
working in Parliament at the present time. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are working.

Mr M J ELLIS: I can assure you that the hon Fritz is working very well; it
is just his microphone that is not working. [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I doubt it. [Laughter.]
Mr M J ELLIS: His name is Fritz and not Mazibuko. Please give him a chance
to speak.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: His microphone is working. It’s him who is not working.
[Laughter.] That’s for the last time.
Mr M J ELLIS: We actually think he works quite well, Madam Deputy Speaker.
[Laughter.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: I wouldn’t want to say: “Don’t touch me on my studio”.
Hon Fritz, you can speak. [Laughter.]

Mr A T FRITZ: Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I want to really thank the
Minister for the response. I will take you up on your invitation to go on a
site visit. We can go to Pollsmoor - it’s just 25 kilometres from Cape Town
- unannounced. You will find a ratio of people on duty at any time of
3:300. I want to suggest to the Minister that we should do this. We should
go there unannounced. We should not tell them that we are coming.

I further want to say to the Minister that the reason why so many people
say to you that they are happy with the two-shift system is because they
work for four days, get two days off and then stay off three more days on
sick leave. They do not come back. You have an absenteeism rate of 40% to
50% at any given time at correctional centres. This is our problem.

Hon Minister, how do we address the absenteeism rate relating specifically
and directly to the two-shift system? That is the point we are making.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: So, finally, your thing is working?
[Laughter.] I was just wondering what I was supposed to do with your thing
that was not working. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

Hon Fritz, I fully agree with you that it’s good to go on unannounced
visits, because that is where you get to know and understand the system
better and how its managers do their work at a centre level. But ...
[Interjections.] I’m sorry. [Laughter.] You see now ... [Laughter.] ...
Minister of Home Affairs. Which Minister of Home Affairs?

The hon Ellis seems to understand that his thing works better. [Laughter.]
[Applause.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, hon members!

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Deputy Speaker, the reason why I said Mr Fritz’s thing
was working very well, was because he came to me earlier today and said, “I
just want to let you know that my thing is working very well indeed.”
[Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF CORRECTIONAL SERVICES: I am sorry, Madam Deputy Speaker.
Yes, the rate of absenteeism is a big problem. I agree with you, and I am
sure all members of the portfolio committee are aware of it. Actually, we
have just discovered that we have officers who have been on leave for more
than two years. [Interjections.] We have had to give a deadline for them to
report to work; otherwise, medical boarding will be the next step. This is
because most of them are said to be on sick leave. These are big numbers we
are talking about; this, when in fact we could actually use the posts they
have been occupying.

So, I do agree. But this is not as a result of the 12 x 2 shift system. You
should remember that the 12 x 2 shift system was introduced in September
last year. So the high rate of absenteeism has everything to do with a lack
of management and supervision by managers who are supposed to be managing
at the centres; and, secondly, with the laissez faire attitude of
officials, something that all of us need to tackle. This certainly cannot
be tackled by us on our own.

That is why we are also encouraging the portfolio committee to embark on
unannounced visits, but not only that; individual members of the committee
or MPs in their constituencies, where there are centres, have the right to
go in. So whatever you pick up, you sensitise us about it, so that we can
deal with it. Thank you very much.
Your thing must now work. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

  Position regarding impact of Zimbabwe’s refusal to comply with rulings of
                                SADC Tribunal

165.  Mr H T Magama (ANC) asked the Minister of International Relations and
      Co-operation:


      (1)   Whether she has found that Zimbabwe’s refusal to comply with the
           rulings of the Southern African Development Community Tribunal
           has had an impact on (a) the credibility and effectiveness of
           SADC and (b) the regional integration process; if not, what is
           the position in this regard; if so, what are the relevant
           details in each case;


      (2)   whether the Government will propose measures to SADC that will
           ensure that member states do not repeat such behaviour; if not,
           why not; if so, what are the relevant details?
                                        NO2839E

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Deputy Speaker,
let me say from the outset that South Africa acceded to the treaty of the
Southern African Development Community Tribunal. We think it is a very
useful institution.

However, SADC has realised that there are challenges in running the SADC
Tribunal. These challenges make the judgments which emanate from the
tribunal difficult to implement in member countries. Zimbabwe leads in this
regard.

In light of these several challenges, let me just quote the decision taken
at SADC’s 30th jubilee summit which was held in Windhoek, Namibia, from 16
to 17 August 2010: “A review of the role, functions and terms of reference
of the SADC Tribunal should be undertaken and concluded within six months.”

This is a follow-up of an endorsement of a recommendation that was made by
SADC Ministers of justice in April 2010 in Kinshasa. It was not just a
meeting of Ministers of justice; the meeting included a delegation of
attorneys-general of SADC.

Now, this review is necessary to give this tribunal the necessary
credibility and effectiveness to which the hon member referred.

The interpretation of how the SADC Tribunal itself should have been put to
use differed across SADC member countries. Many SADC countries assumed
that, by acceding to the treaty, there would be no need to ratify the
protocol in their respective parliaments. So, this is just one of the big
challenges with which the SADC Tribunal is faced.

We truly hope that by the end of the six months, Ministers of justice and
attorneys-general of SADC would have applied their minds and taken care of
the many loopholes that have been identified by the learned Ministers of
justice and attorneys-general. Thank you.

Mr H T MAGAMA: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Minister, in view of the
decisions of the summit that you have just outlined, what then are the
implications for the tribunal in the interim and, of course, for the matter
of the Zimbabwean farmers on whom the tribunal has passed judgment? Thank
you.

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Deputy Speaker,
one of the key challenges, as I said earlier, is the enforceability of the
outcomes or judgments from the tribunal, particularly on member countries
that have not ratified the protocol itself.

What will happen within the six-month period to the life of the tribunal is
that it will continue its work, pending the outcome of the review by the
Ministers of justice and attorneys-general.

Mr K S MUBU: Deputy Speaker, I would like to thank Madam Minister for her
response.
It is true to say that the SADC Tribunal was known to have taken certain
decisions to punish one of the member states – that is Zimbabwe, of course
– but it appears now that, in turn, the summit itself decided to punish the
tribunal by not reappointing the judges. Surely this raises suspicions that
there must have been some kind of interference from the Zimbabwean
government, because that is the government that was in breach of the
decisions of the tribunal itself? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Hon Deputy
Speaker, for the hon member’s information, Zimbabwe has actually withdrawn
from participating in this matter. They actually had a sitting judge who
they have officially withdrawn. So, the decisions were not taken or
influenced by what is happening in Zimbabwe.

Member countries, who so dearly respect the tribunal and want it to
continue, deemed it necessary and important to strengthen it and give it
the necessary legitimacy, after having realised the shortcomings in the way
in which this matter came up.

But, there is also an issue around the number of countries that have
actually ratified the protocol itself, which will then have to be taken
into consideration within this period of six months.

So, the decision by the Ministers of justice and the summit leaders or
heads of state was not influenced by Zimbabwe at all.
Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Chairperson, I’d like to ask the hon Minister whether
South Africa was able to discuss the impact of Zimbabwe’s refusal directly
with Zimbabwe, in view of the significant impact Zimbabwe has on South
Africa owing to a common border. If not, why not, and is government
concerned about the situation? If we have discussed it directly, what are
the relevant details in terms of a one-on-one relationship? Thank you.

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Madam Deputy
Speaker, I don’t understand the question. Is it about the tribunal or
Zimbabwe-South Africa relations in general? I need clarity, so that I’m
able to respond to the question.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Deputy Speaker, it will be linked to the tribunal only in
terms of the relationship we have with Zimbabwe. Are we able to discuss
this sort of issue with them directly on a one-to-one basis?

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Well, hon
President Zuma remains the facilitator who, on behalf of SADC, monitors the
full implementation of Zimbabwe’s Global Political Agreement. Now, yes, we
are engaging with Zimbabweans on other matters relating to the full
implementation of the Global Political Agreement. But, on the matter of the
tribunal, one of the difficulties is the enforceability of judgments passed
by the tribunal which actually do not consider Zimbabwe’s own national
Constitution.
So, we cannot choose to engage Zimbabwe on outcomes of the tribunal outside
the SADC summit. If we were to do that, it would have to be within the
parameters of where the matter is being discussed. We will wait for the
outcome of the review by the Ministers of justice and attorneys-general.
Thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Deputy Speaker, I would like to know what the hon
Minister’s understanding is of this matter of Zimbabwe refusing to comply
with the SADC Tribunal. Does Zimbabwe want to cherry-pick by asking for
SADC to help them resolve their problems, yet refusing to honour SADC
decisions when it does not suit them? If this is so, what does South Africa
do generally, especially with regard to other SADC members, including
Zimbabwe, when they act this way?

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Deputy Speaker, I
have said that member countries, starting with South Africa, have acceded
to the treaty and have all acknowledged – the acknowledgement was made and
confirmed by the Ministers of justice and our attorneys-general – that
there are challenges within this tribunal, particularly on issues of
enforceability. Enforceability is one of the key problems, particularly
enforceability of the judgments taken by the tribunal itself.

Now, Zimbabwe has withdrawn from the tribunal and they were not even part
of the meeting of April 2010 to which I have referred. Even the member
countries that want to continue with the tribunal and strengthen it, have
themselves said: Give us time to strengthen this institution.

How do we then turn around – even before we get the full review report of
the Ministers and the attorneys-general of all our member states, 14 of
them – and say, “No, let’s first deal with Zimbabwe and their cherry-
picking”, when we ourselves are still waiting for the report that will come
out of the review process of the Ministers of justice and attorneys-
general?

I think we should also not cherry-pick; we should wait for the outcome of
the review process so that we can duly deal with this matter accordingly.
[Applause.]

See also QUESTIONS AND REPLIES.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Deputy Speaker, on the next sitting day of the House,
I shall move:

   That this House debates the impact of toll roads on the economy and
   alternatives that could be considered.

Mr D A KGANARE: Deputy Speaker, on the next sitting day of the House, I
shall move:
   That this House debates the 36% increase in robberies in many of our
   cities where people are followed home from banks where they had gone to
   withdraw money. This unacceptable state of affairs goes against the
   grain of the rights of individuals to have freedom of movement and the
   right to protection.

Ms P BHENGU: Madam Deputy Speaker, on the next sitting day of the House, I
shall move:

   That this House debates how to reduce the number of fatal accidents on
   our roads with special emphasis on public transport.

Mrs P TSHWETE: Deputy Speaker, on the next sitting day of the House, I
shall move:

   That this House debates how to strengthen the current safety nets that
   deal with child poverty, ongoing killings, disappearances, abuse and
   neglect.

Mrs F F MUSHWANA: Deputy Speaker, on the next sitting day of the House, I
shall move:

   That this House debates how to strengthen collaboration between the
   Departments of Basic and Higher Education and Social Development and
   other related departments in the provision of early childhood
   development.
Mr P D DEXTER: Deputy Speaker, on the next sitting day of the House, I
shall move:

   That this House debates the massive cost of the installation by the
   Department of Correctional Services of 50 television sets in the New
   Kimberley Prison, at a cost of R31 021 each, especially at a time when
   the Minister for the Public Service and Administration is pleading
   poverty and suggesting to the unions that the envelope is not empty, but
   broken, and especially since when these things are put up, they end up
   being broken.

                             NATIONAL ARBOR WEEK

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Deputy Speaker, I hereby move
without notice:

  That the House -


    1) notes that the first of September marks the start of National Arbor
       Week which ends on 7 September;


    2) recognises that the purpose of National Arbor Day in South Africa is
       to increase public awareness of indigenous trees within this country
       by encouraging the people of South Africa to plant a rare tree and a
       common tree during the course of the week and to highlight the
       importance of preserving our environment for future generations;


    3) further recognises that planting trees is one of the means by which
       carbon emissions, driver of anthropogenic climate change, can be
       offset; and


    4) encourages all South Africans to honour the week, plant trees, and
       get involved in communal events that will help clean up our
       environment.

Agreed to.

          STATE-OF-THE-ART WEATHER RADAR SYSTEM LAUNCHED IN MTHATHA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Deputy Speaker, I move without
notice:

  That the House -


     1) welcomes the South African Weather Service’s launch of a new state-
        of-the-art weather radar system in Mthatha in the Eastern Cape,
        which will enhance the monitoring capability in an area of the
        country which is prone to natural disasters that often go unnoticed
        by the general public;


     2) notes that this new weather radar network forms part of the
        government’s programme to upgrade and replace current weather
        radars, many of which are over 30 years old; and


     3) believes that the new weather radars will play a vital role in
        enhancing adaptation tools and products, such as the Severe Weather
        Forecast project and the Flash Flood Guidance System that minimise
        loss of life and damage to property in events of severe weather.


Agreed to.

  CONGRATULATIONS TO LEE-ANNE PACE ON WINNING FINNAIR MASTERS TOURNAMENT IN
                                   FINLAND

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move
without notice:

   That the House -

    1) congratulates Lee-Anne Pace on winning the Finnair Masters
       tournament in Finland, to claim her third title of the season on the
       Ladies European Tour on Sunday, 29 August 2010;

    2) notes that the 29-year-old South African first won the Deutsche Bank
       Ladies Swiss Open in June, and later on, a fortnight ago, she won S4C
       Wales Ladies Championship of Europe;

    3) believes that she has put our country on the international map, and
       is an inspiration to other young women; and

  (4) wishes her all the best for future games.

Agreed to.

The House adjourned at 17:13.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson
1.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) Local Government: Municipal Electoral Amendment Bill [B 27 -
             2010] (National Assembly – sec 75).

National Assembly

The Speaker

 1. Progress report on recommendations in Public Protector Report No 1 of
    2010-11

    (1)     A letter dated 26 August 2010 has been received from the
        President of the Republic, informing members of the National
        Assembly that –
          a) the Cabinet, on 21 July 2010, agreed that the sanctions in the
             parliamentary rules that are applied to members of Parliament
             who are found guilty of violating the Code of Conduct would,
             as an interim measure, be applied to members of the Cabinet
             who breach the Executive Ethics Code; and


          b) a full report on the implementation of the Public Protector’s
             recommendations will be submitted to Parliament as soon as the
             Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development has
             finalised a comprehensive report on the matter.

        Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
        Development and the Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’
        Interests.

2.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Energy for consideration and report:

          a) Amendments to Articles VI and XIV.A of the Statute of the
             International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), tabled in terms of
             section 231(2) of the Constitution, 1996.


          b) Explanatory Memorandum to the Amendments to Articles VI and
             XIV.A of the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency
             (IAEA).

    (2)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Police for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on Women,
        Youth, Children and People with Disabilities:

        (a)      The Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate on
             Domestic Violence for the period July – December 2009, tabled
             in terms of subsection 18(5)(c) of the Domestic Violence Act,
             1998 (Act No 116 of 1998).

    (3)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report:
          a) Submission of policy directives issued in terms of section
             79(13) of the Criminal Procedure Act, 1977 (Act No 51 of 1977),
             as amended by section 10(b) of the Judicial Matters Amendment
             Act, 2008 (Act No 66 of 2008).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Parliament of the Republic
        of South Africa, Vote 2, for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010, tabled in terms of section 60 of the
        Financial Management of Parliament Act, 2009 (Act No 10 of 2009).
        Correction:    The above entry replaces item 1(a) under Tablings
                  (Speaker and Chairperson) on p 2544 of the ATC of 31
                  August 2010.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
        Rights Commission (SAHRC) for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 167-2010].

    (c)    Report and Financial Statements of the  Public  Protector  South
        Africa for 2009-2010, including the Report of  the  Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information  for  2009-
        2010 [RP 212-2010].

 2. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
        Southern Africa (DBSA) for 2009-2010, including the Report
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 and the Report and Financial Statements
        of the Development Bank of Southern Africa Development Fund for
        2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information of the Development
        Fund for 2009-2010.

 3. The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Scientific
        and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2009-2010, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 194-2010].\


 4. The Minister of Basic Education

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Quality
        Assurance in General and Further Education and Training - Umalusi
        for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
        Relations Council for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of the Transformation Fund of the Education Labour
        Relations Council for 2009-2010.

 5. The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information of Vote 25 for 2009-2010 [RP 181-2010].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the iSimangaliso Wetland
        Park for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on
        the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Biodiversity Institute for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.
    (d)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Weather
        Service  for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
        2010 [RP 121-2010].


     e) Report and Financial Statements of the South African National Parks
        (SANparks ) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 208-2010].


    (f)     Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living Resources
        Fund (MLRF) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Transport on a Study Tour to China
  from 17 to 30 July 2010 dated 31 August 2010.

   The Portfolio Committee on Transport, having undertaken a study  tour  to
   China on 17th to 30th July 2010 reports as follows:


   1. Introduction

      The Portfolio Committee  on  Transport  embarked  on  a  fact  finding
      mission to China to establish how the government of China responds  to
      challenges of  transport  and  the  use  of  transport  transformation
      processes  to  address  social  problems  and  improve  the   economic
      conditions of China.




      The committee used the report on the National Household Travel  Survey
      on Public Transport and the National Transport Master Plan as  guiding
      documents for engaging with the  Chinese  government  departments  and
      State owned companies that make  up  the  transportation  industry  in
      China.




      A multi-party delegation of seven members took part in  the  visit  to
      China:

   a) Hon. Ruth Bhengu, leader of the delegation (ANC);

   b) Hon. Phumzile Ngwenya-Mabila (ANC);

   c) Hon. Joyce Ngele (ANC);

   d) Hon. Peter Maluleka (ANC);

   e) Hon. M. De Frietas (DA);

   f) Hon. P. Mbhele (COPE);

   g) Hon. Lucas (IFP)

      Accompanying the committee was  the  committee  secretary  Miss  Dineo
      Martin and the Deputy Director General Dr. L  Situma,  who  is  spear-
      heading the development of the National Transport Master Plan (NATMAP)
      of the Department of Transport.
      The delegation focused mainly on challenges that were  raised  in  the
      National Household Survey on Public Transport as  well  as  challenges
      that inform the National Transport Master Plan, including;
   a) The high costs of travelling and transporting of  goods;

   b) The long time taken in  travelling a short distance;

   c) The lack of integration of different modes of transport;

   d) The unsafe and unreliable  transport services;

   e) The high level of congestion on South African roads;

   f) The congestion of traffic in big cities;

   g) The degraded road and rail network;

   h) The degraded rolling stock;




      The study tour was also aimed at learning how the  Chinese  government
      uses  the  transportation  industry  to  develop  China  socially  and
      economically.




   2. The delegation visited specific government departments and state owned
      companies that make up the railway transportation industry. The  South
      African Embassy in Beijing and the South African Consulate in Shanghai
      co-ordinated  the  programme  and  facilitated  all  visits   of   the
      delegation to government  departments,  state-owned  companies  and  a
      university that plays a central  role  in  science  and  technological
      skills required to develop the transportation industry in China.




      Hereunder is a list of entities visited by the delegation:




      Beijing

   a) Beijing maintenance depot;

   b) Shanhaiguan manufacturing workshop for high speed railway turnout  and
      major bridge steel structures;

   c) Qinhaungdao offloading terminal of Jinqin Coal Railway;

   d) Tangshan Railway Locomotive Factory;

   e) The Badaling Great Wall via the Badaling Express Way.




      Shanghai

   a) Shanghai 2010 Expo;

   b) Maglev Transportation Development Company Limited;

   c) Taking High Speed trains;

   d) Maglev train;

   e) Tongi University.



   3. The Ministry for Railways

      His Excellency, Mr Wang Zhiguo, the Vice-Minister of Railways  started
      by congratulating South Africa on the successful hosting of  the  2010
      FIFA World Cup. He commented that South Africa was  a  well  developed
      country in Africa and acknowledged the technology he saw when visiting
      South Africa.




      He outlined that the Ministry of Railways  is  in  charge  of  Railway
      Cooperation and Governance. The following departments fall  under  the
      Ministry of Railways:

   a) Department of Planning;

   b) Department of Technology;

   c) Department of Safety;

   d) Department of Bureau;




      There  are  eighteen  Bureaus  responsible  for  the  entire   Railway
      Transportation Industry. These Bureaus operate everyday.



   1. High Speed Rail

           The Chinese government  takes  pride  in  the  construction  and
           development of rail in China. There is a plan to develop railway
           construction to reach more than 90 000km in two years. The  main
           aspects of this plan concern  high  speed  railway  and  freight
           transportation.




           The high speed passenger train travels at  a  maximum  speed  of
           350km/h makes passengers feel safe and is convenient for them to
           reach their destinations.




           All high speed trains are on standard  gauge  and  by  2015  the
           narrow gauge will be completely phased out.




           There  are  a  lot  of  rail  projects  that  are  still   under
           construction, such as; the 1061km  rail  link  from  Beijing  to
           Shanghai that will start operating  in  2011.  Another  link  is
           Beijing to Huanguan which will also start operating in 2011.




           China started with the rehabilitation of existing railway  lines
           that  were  mostly  over  hundred  years  old.  The  process  of
           increasing the speed of trains in  China  began  30  years  ago,
           after the Chinese government adopted a policy of  “opening  up”.
           It is the implementation of this policy that gave  rise  to  the
           economy of China.




           Some trains travelled at 120km/h before  the  rehabilitation  of
           existing railway lines. After  the  rehabilitation  they  travel
           between 160-250km/h and are regarded as fast trains.




           China has been in cooperation with other countries including the
           USA and Asia  on  high  speed  rail  technologies.  It  now  has
           agreements  with  many  other  countries,   although   all   the
           technologies used are Chinese.



   2. Freight Traffic

           Heavy haul  freight  transportation;  10  000-20  000  tons  are
           transported daily by roads while 1, 2-million  tons  of  freight
           are transported daily by train.  Rail  lines  allow  400-million
           tons annually. 80% of coal is transported by rail. In 2009 2, 3-
           billion tons of freight was transported  while  in  2010  2,  6-
           billion has already been transported to date.



           China covers a large territory and is densely  populated;  as  a
           result rail is the most convenient  mode  of  transport.  1,  6-
           million people are transported daily. These  trains,  which  are
           energy and environmentally friendly, are regarded as the best in
           the world.




   3. Challenges

   a) Having to work day after day and night after night;

   b) Too much freight and people to be transported;

   c) Mass work accommodating ⅓ while ⅔ had to be rejected; 140  000  trains
      in operation,  10-million  freight  a  day,  6-million  people  to  be
      transported daily, 1000-billion tons of coal to be delivered  annually
      including transportation of minerals;

   d) No capacity to transport by road;

   e) When the demand is more than rail can take then road is an option;

   f) Construction of rail in humid and hot coastal areas.




   3. The Ministry of Transport

    The Vice Minister of  Transport  reported  that  the  Chinese  transport
    sector experienced bottlenecking and congestion by 2008. The budget  was
    inefficiently used at that time.  The  current  developments  are  as  a
    result of good systems and policies that had been put in place. In 2009,
    60 000km of expressway and highways were developed. From  then  on,  the
    total volume of cargo in mainland ports were ranked number  one  in  the
    world.




    Such achievements were because of good planning and the “open  policies”
    that were adopted by the Chinese government.

    China has a Transport Master Plan that is currently  being  implemented.
    The Central government has introduced certain taxes to be paid  by  all.
    Funding is done by government, public enterprises and the World Bank.




    All expressways are tolled. There are positive results borne out of toll
    roads. In future only expressways will be tolled and not provincial  and
    local roads. China’s integrated transport system is  to  make  available
    easily accessed public transport and corridors. People are encouraged to
    use public transport




   4. China Railway Construction Corporation Limited (CRCC)

    The CRCC is involved in design, construction and maintenance. They  deal
    with the work of planning and design.




    The CRCC has designed 53% of China’s railway lines and has acquired  all
    technologies for  high  speed  rail.  They  are  the  champions  of  all
    construction groups in China. They are ranked 132 out of the Fortune 500
    Companies. They are ranked number one in engineering globally. They  are
    involved internationally in 41 countries with  191  projects.  They  are
    currently involved in projects in Africa, some include:

   a) Algeria – ongoing project 1000km

   b) Libya – ongoing project over 2000km

   c) Nigeria – Survey and design in railway




    Their turnover in 2009 was $51 billion with a staff turnover of 250 000.
    The most critical works in China are done by the CRCC.




   5. China Railway Group Limited (CRGL)

    The CRGL is responsible for  construction,  contracting,  machinery  and
    engineering. They have a personnel complement of 280 000 responsible for
    construction, contracting  and  machinery  of  which  160  000  who  are
    engineers.




    They are specialists in innovation advancements from slow speed to  high
    speed rail. Real estate development is an extension of what they do.




   6. Financial Economic Committee of the People’s Congress

    China’s economy has grown  rapidly  in  the  past  year.  The  Committee
    acknowledged the fact that the South African GDP is $600 while China  is
    $2 600. China believes they can learn a lot from South Africa.




    China’s rapid growth in development is not free from criticism.  Critics
    believe that China is investing too much on high speed while the returns
    are low. Debates are still ongoing.




    Different modes of transportation are integrated though they  belong  to
    different  ministries.  They  have  seen  growth   in   improvement   of
    transportation and it is regarded as the safest in the entire world. The
    intra-relationships of government ministries are  very  good  and  their
    systems talk to each other. A law was passed on transportation safety to
    reduce technicalities and fatalities on the roads.




   7. Beijing Municipal Commission of Transport (BMCT)

    It is an administrative organization that takes charge of the management
    of the traffic and transportation industry in Beijing.

    Its role includes the following:

        1. Action and implementation of the laws, codes and regulations
           related to the transportation industry promulgated by the State
           and the city;
        2. Take charge of studying and drafting out the annual plan of the
           transportation industry in Beijing, and organizing
           implementation;
        3. Take charge of organizing and drafting out the local technical
           standards and operation service codes in the transportation
           industry in Beijing, and organizing implementation;
        4. Take charge of the industry administration of the transportation
           in Beijing;
        5. Take charge of the supervision and administration of the safe
           production in the transportation industry in Beijing,
           collaborate with relevant departments to investigate and deal
           with safety in the transportation industry, and the water safety
           supervision and administration;
        6. Take charge of the transportation organization and security on
           emergency;
        7. Take charge of the organization and coordination of the
           transportation in Beijing and the administration of the common
           use of the railway special lines, and joint transportation
           between roads and railways;
        8. Take charge of the of administrative in the transportation
           industry;
        9. Take charge of the administration of public parking facilities
           in Beijing;
       10. Handle other issues delivered by the municipal government and
           municipal commission of communications.


   8. Organisation of Public Transport Network

    Its aims are the following:

   a) Bus travel speed increased with dedicated lanes;

   b) Low taxi prices for the public transportation system  with  integrated
      ticketing. Students get 80% discount, the public gets a  40%  discount
      and the elderly ride for free;

   c) Accelerated upgrading of existing vehicles;

   d) The promotion of the development of rail systems;

   e) Formulation of subsystems. RMB 270-billion has been allocated  by  the
      government;

   f) The reformation of the reform of subway systems in terms of security;

   g) Integrated ticketing systems;



   1. Infrastructure construction to promote services

   a) In 2008 the Beijing government upgraded taxis.

   b) Taxi drivers’ rights were improved

   c) Relations between taxis and government were improved.

   d) A socio-economic system for taxi drivers has been introduced.

           The Chinese government remains committed to promoting  a  public
           transport culture. Integration of public transport in the cities
           is highly regarded and the government is committed to reach  45%
           of the population by 2015.




   2. Public transport systems

           Total allocation for public transport is RMB 150- million.  This
           amount has already surpassed taking into consideration security,
           costs and capacity to integrate the rail infrastructure  system.
           By the end of 2010, five new subways will be open to the public.




           The following are China’s Transportation Departments:

   a) Traffic and Transport – major roads and  construction,  transportation
      of cargo and goods;

   b) Hub and Ports Administration;

   c) Railway Department – railway maintenance;

   d) Public Security – management of vehicles, traffic, lights;

   e) BMCT is in charge of strategic planning transport systems;

   f) The Department  of  Transport  is  in  charge  of  leasing  of  public
      transportation systems;

   g) Traffic Law Enforcement.




           Vehicle inventory is very difficult  to  determine  in  Beijing,
           especially in  the  inner  city.  This  poses  a  major  problem
           especially after Beijing  had  been  declared  an  International
           City. Authorities have therefore realised that  the  development
           of public transport system is the only solution.




   9. Shanghai Municipal Transport and Port Authority

    The City of Shanghai is a cosmopolitan city with  a  population  of  20-
    million. The City is regarded as an international  Shopping  Centre  and
    therefore all development is being done taking that into  consideration.
    It   also   has   Executive   Administration   Authority   over   public
    transportation; taxis, subways, car parking, freight and cargo transport
    as well as shipping.

    Millions of people come to Shanghai adding to the existing population of
    the City; therefore public  transport  has  to  be  enhanced.  The  City
    transports 15-million passengers daily. The number has risen to  16,  4-
    million with  the  Shanghai  Expo  currently  being  held.  Subways  are
    estimated to transport 5, 2-million people daily while  buses  transport
    7, 8-million daily. Buses are regarded as a main transport  mode;  taxis
    supplement them while subways are regarded as  the  backbone  of  public
    transport.




    Shanghai experiences great  congestion  on  major  roads  of  the  City.
    Despite government interventions, problems still exist.




    The City embarked on a curbing mechanism where supporting infrastructure
    connecting various modes of transport was developed; seven stations were
    constructed, a hub station for the airport, taxis and  buses  for  local
    and longs distances as well as a subway. This makes life easier for  the
    community to access different kinds of transport  at  one  spot.  Subway
    operating hours run parallel with airport and train  station  hours.  In
    cases of delayed flights the Municipality  puts  temporary  measures  in
    place.

   1. Sea Port

           The Shanghai Port is regarded as one of the largest ports in the
           world; it is a hundred years old. It  is  also  regarded  as  an
           international shipping centre. It has experienced an increase in
           cargo in the last ten years. In 2010 there was  an  increase  in
           cargo despite the economic recession. In the beginning of  2010,
           320-million tons of cargo was carried, this is  an  increase  of
           15% while containers experienced a load of 13, 8- million  which
           means a 19% increase. The distribution systems  used  are  road,
           water and rail.




           60% of cargo use smaller vessels, while 40% seldom use  rail  to
           transport cargo. In future they plan to use water as it is  also
           regarded as environmental and energy friendly.  Rivers  will  be
           used to transport vessels to other cities and that  will  reduce
           traffic congestion.




           Although the City has similar situations to South  Africa,  some
           solutions may not work in South Africa.




           With regard to parking in the city,  there  is  limited  parking
           space. Some companies have  their  own  parking  spaces.  People
           working in the city prefer to use public transport while  others
           use the park and ride facilities outside the cities.




  10. China Railway Signal and Communication  Shanghai  Engineering  Company
      (CRSCS)

    The company was established in 1954 and it is responsible for  technical
    services. They plan to build 35 high speed routes by 2012.




    They have researched the South African situation and found that SA  does
    not  have  to  suspend  railway  operations   while   working   on   the
    improvements, should they be contracted to do the work.



  11. Maglev Transportation Development Company Limited

    The Maglev train system is a 20th century invention. It is a new type of
    non-track bound transport  system  which  is  high  speed,  comfortable,
    energy  saving  and  environmentally  friendly.  It   has   no   wheels,
    transmissions or overhead wires. The wheels and rails  of  the  railroad
    are replaced by a non-contact, electro-magnetic levitation, guidance and
    propulsion system. The Construction of the Shanghai Maglev Demonstration
    Operation Line started in March 2001.

    The line begins at Longyang Road Station in the west and ends at  Pudong
    International Airport station in the east. The total length of the  main
    track is 30 km and is a double track turn around operation. It  has  two
    stations, two propulsion substations, one operation control  centre  and
    one maintenance centre.




    The designed maximum speed is 430km/h. The time of a  one  way  trip  is
    about eight minutes. As the first  commercial  operation  line  for  the
    Maglev  train,  the  Shanghai  line  greatly  improves   the   transport
    conditions from downtown to  Pudong  International  Airport  and  is  an
    additional bright landscape to the modern metropolis.




   1. System characteristics

   a) It operates up to 400-500 km/h.

   b) The non-contact and non-wearing levitation,  guidance  and  propulsion
      technology is independent of friction.

   c) High acceleration and braking power.

   d) No contact with a track and the stepless speed control  makes  a  ride
      steady and comfortable.

   e) With no danger of derailment and collision means the train runs  at  a
      constant speed.

   f) There are no combustion emissions or other pollutants both inside  the
      vehicle and along the routes.

   g) The magnetic field in the vehicle or  outside  is  comparable  to  the
      earth’ residual magnetic field, far less than a hair dryer.

   h) There is energy consumption and low operating costs.

   i) There is a flexible route alignment of the guideway  due  to  a  small
      curve radii and high grade climbing ability (10%).

   j) Minimal land is used for this rail link.




  12. Tongji University

    There is a Transport Faculty within this University with  the  following
    departments; Road Transport, Rail,  Airport  Engineering  and  Logistics
    Engineering. The university has signed  a  memorandum  of  understanding
    with  the  Tshwane  University  of  Technology.   The   university   has
    scholarship programmes that they offer to South African students,  which
    covers tuition only.




14.   Committee findings

   1. Planning for transport development happens  at  national  level,  they
      have a 2020 master plan.

   2. An investment in transport development  is  more  informed  by  social
      needs and happens even if there is no economic costs recovery.

   3. The Chinese government positions transport as  an  enabling  tool  for
      economic development.

   4. Rail transportation is the  backbone  of  transport,  other  modes  of
      transport complement rail.

   5. The Chinese government developed the entire value chain of the railway
      transportation industry including science and technological  training,
      planning and  design,  equipment  manufacturing,  rail  infrastructure
      development,  manufacturing  and  assembling  plants,  signalling  and
      control systems, servicing and maintenance of trains;  each  train  is
      cleaned after each trip. Railway lines are integrated to  other  modes
      of transport such as road, aviation and shipping.

   6. China started by focusing on skills  development  and  partnered  with
      developed countries where they learnt relevant  skills  for  transport
      development, for that  led  to  the  establishment  of  a  faculty  at
      university level focussing on transport studies.

   7. There is a dedicated bureau for training all  employees  for  specific
      fields.

   8. The Chinese transport situation was similar to the one in South Africa
      in terms of challenges 30 years ago

   9. China adopted two approaches;

   a) Rehabilitation and upgrading of existing railway lines to increase the
      speed of trains from 80 km/h to 200km/h;

   b) Building new railway lines suitable for introducing  fast  trains  and
      high speed trains. A fast train is a train that travels at a speed  of
      100-250km/h while a high speed train is one that travels between  250-
      350km/h. A bullet train is one that travels between 350-430km/h.

  10. The system of developing the whole industry created a lot of jobs.

  11. High speed trains are serviced every 48hrs and 5000km travelled.

  12. High speed trains connect major cities of all provinces to each other.

  13. Fast trains link cities within provinces.

  14. High speed trains  move  passengers  from  city  centres  to  airports
      reducing travelling time; e.g 30 km in 7 minutes, the benefit of  this
      is that  space  in  airports  is  utilised  to  park  planes.  Traffic
      congestion between airports and the city is reduced. People travelling
      in private cars utilise the park and ride facilities  near  the  train
      stations as was the case in SA during the 2010 FIFA World Cup.

  15.  In  cities,  subways  are  built   to   integrate   rail   and   road
      transportation.

  16. Railway lines are also linked to shipping  ports  to  facilitate  easy
      transportation of goods between land and water.

  17. Railway sleepers for trains are made of concrete slabs and cables  are
      made of micro- fibre.

  18. Railway tracks for fast and high speed trains are made of steel,  iron
      ore, manganese and concrete slippers.

  19. The Chinese have moved away from the use  of  copper  cabling  due  to
      challenges similar to those in South Africa.

  20. It is advisable to build new railway coaches than to  rehabilitate  as
      the latter is short term.




  14. Social and Economic  development  imperatives  relating  to  transport
      Development

   The Portfolio Committee on Transport looked at the  social  and  economic
   conditions China was previously at  and  how  the  Chinese  reform  model
   relates social and economical conditions in South Africa that we seek  to
   address.




   The Portfolio Committee on Transport identified  that  there  are  common
   social and economic conditions  between  South  Africa  and  China  which
   include the following;

   1. The rural areas of both countries are poorer than the urban areas  and
      the Chinese model of developing the  entire  value  chain  of  railway
      transportation serves to attract  economic  investment  to  the  rural
      under-developed poor areas. An example of that strategic  approach  is
      the location of a manufacturing plant of high speed trains at an under-
      developed semi rural area that is more than  three  hours  drive  from
      Beijing.



   2. The transport infrastructural development in rural areas is central to
      the economic development strategies of China. China  has  invested  in
      transport  infrastructural  development  as  an  enabling   tool   for
      attracting investment to rural areas. A  similar  situation  exist  in
      South Africa where thirteen  areas identified as Presidential  Poverty
      Nodal Points have failed to  attract  meaningful  economic  investment
      partly due to poor transport  infrastructure  that  would  link  these
      under-developed areas to developed cities.



   3. The majority of the population in China and South Africa are poor  and
      therefore dependent on public  transport.  China  has  chosen  railway
      transport as the back-bone of transport because railway  transport  is
      cheaper than all other mode of transport. The cost  of  travelling  in
      South Africa is high for both public transport  commuters  and  people
      who use their own private transport. If railway transport  is  cheaper
      than other modes then South Africa has to emulate the model  of  China
      and reduce the cost of travelling in South Africa.



   4. There are substantial number of  cities  and  villages  that  are  not
      efficiently linked to each other in China. This restricts the movement
      of  goods  and  people  in-between  cities  and  villages.  China  has
      prioritised the linkage of Major cities in all provinces through  high
      speed trains that travel  at  a  maximum  speed  of  350km  per  hour.
      However, there are critical cities  that  are  connected  to  villages
      through fast trains that travel at a maximum speed of 200kms per hour.
      Village to village connection is through buses and taxis. South Africa
      has similar conditions and we should use Chinese experience to respond
      to our conditions.



   5. The population size  of  China  is  huge  and  requires  the  mode  of
      transport that is able to transport high volumes of goods  and  people
      faster. A similar need exist in South Africa  where  huge  volumes  of
      poor public transport commuters are found in taxi ranks and bus ranks.
      Such commuters are forced to sleep  at  these  ranks.  Therefore  high
      speed  trains  in  South  Africa  would  transport  high  volumes   of
      commuters’ in-between major cities as  well  as  routes  that  connect
      South Africa to neighbouring states.



   6. There is high traffic congestion on roads in South Africa.  China  has
      reduced traffic congestion on their roads by developing the  park  and
      ride sites similar to those that were established in South  Africa  by
      the host cities of the 2010 FIFA Soccer World cup. These park and ride
      sites are used in China to park privately owned cars and taxis used by
      commuters who use such cars and taxis to get to Fast Trains  that  are
      used on daily basis, by mainly workers travelling to and from work  in
      between  cities.   South  Africa  could  emulate  this  approach   and
      developing the park and ride  sites  next  to  train  stations.   This
      approach would be aimed at discouraging the daily use of private  cars
      along train  routes  thereby  reducing  traffic  congestion  on  South
      African roads.



   7. The majority of goods are transported through roads in South Africa  a
      situation that China reduced by developing an effective railway  goods
      transportation system. The road infrastructure is  degrading  fast  in
      South Africa with visibly huge  potholes  and  high  accident  claims.
      China was able to arrest this situation by improving the speed of  the
      goods trains as well as the tolling of roads.



   8. The movement of goods on the roads is restricted  to  off-peak  hours.
      This system links the  railway  network  to  ports  and  its  shipping
      facilities and container terminals. China rehabilitated  and  upgraded
      railway infrastructure to increase the speed from  60km  per  hour  to
      between 100km and 160km per hour. This resulted with a shift from road
      use to train use when transporting goods. Transport modes and networks
      in China were previously not interlinked.

   9. Thirty years ago, China had  a  shortage  of  science  and  technology
      skills required to develop the transport  industry,  South  Africa  is
      faced with that same challenge today.



16.   Proposals by the Chinese

   1. The CRCC proposed signing a strategic partnership agreement  with  the
      Department of Transport to plan and  strategise  on  the  Department’s
      2050 Plan.

   2. The CRCC is also willing to contribute  and  share  their  experiences
      with South Africa to develop rail.

   3. The CRGL is willing to have the exchange programme with  South  Africa
      which is aimed at skills development.

   4. China is willing  to  cooperate  with  South  Africa  with  regard  to
      construction of transport projects.

   5. The Chinese government and state owned companies met by the delegation
      proposed that a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  be  signed  so  as  to
      formalise the interaction between the two countries.

   6. The Chinese are willing to establish cooperation with ports,  such  as
      the Port of Durban.

   7. The CRSCS is willing to  offer  South  Africa  free  training  on  the
      upgrading of existing rails signalisation.

   8. The Chinese observed that out of the RMB200 million made available  to
      South Africa for bursaries  only  RMB30  million  has  been  utilised,
      therefore adviced that South Africa consider utilising  the  remaining
      RMB170 million to develop skills required for transport development in
      South Africa.



  16. Positive assumptions

      The benefits of introducing high speed  trains  and  adopting  railway
      transportation as the back bone of the South African transport  system
      is much broader than just transport  services.  There  would  be  far-
      reaching social and economic benefits that include;

   1. Reduced levels of mushrooming of informal settlements due  to  reduced
      costs of travelling to and from work.

   2. Family units would not be disturbed  as  is  the  case  where  working
      members of families live closer to places  of  work  away  from  their
      families.

   3. There would be reduced queues of commuters at buses and taxi ranks.

   4. There would be a reduced level of road accidents, degradation  of  our
      secondary road networks, and traffic congestion as a result of reduced
      transportation of goods by road.

   5. Different transport systems and modes would be integrated resulting in
      seamless travelling for commuters from one mode of  transport  to  the
      other.

   6. Commuters would be able to budget time and travelling costs.

   7. There would be a reduced burden on the budgets of the Health and Human
      Settlement Departments that are currently negatively impacted upon  by
      the inadequate services of the department of Transport and  Transnet’s
      transport-related services.

   8. There would be increased investment in South Africa.

   9. The investment opportunities in rural areas would increase.

  10. The development and resuscitation of existing branch lines of the rail
      system would open job opportunities in South Africa.

  11. South Africa would further the NEPAD objectives and position itself as
      the gateway for investment in Africa.

  12. There would be reduced levels of carbon emission due to reduced levels
      of private cars. Rail uses electricity instead of diesel.



  17. Conclusion

     The development of the rail industry would generate economic investment
     and be a tool for social development in South Africa.




     The rail technology used in China needs  to  be  analysed  on  a  sound
     economic  model  that  is  sustainable  suitable  for   South   African
     conditions where rail would be used  for  the  transportation  of  both
     goods and passengers.




     The Portfolio Committee on Transport will follow up on  recommendations
     made by the Chinese government in  relation  to  further  exposure  and
     participation of the  committee  in  workshops  and  conferences  where
     issues of rail transport are discussed. This would help  in  broadening
     the knowledge of the committee on international trends and debates that
     are taking place regarding transport.  The Chinese government and State
     owned companies have offered to  sponsor  some  of  the  workshops  and
     conferences that would benefit South Africa and help build the capacity
     of the Department of Transport.



  18. Recommendations

      The Portfolio Committee on  Transport  hereby  recommends  as  follows
      that:

   1. The Department of Transport considers the Chinese model, taking  South
      African conditions into account.



   2. South Africa accepts the Chinese high  speed  rail  technology  to  be
      amongst the proven state of the art worldwide. It must be  noted  that
      the Chinese technology is now patented and can  only  be  accessed  in
      China.



   3. The offer made by the China Railway Construction Corporation regarding
      their technical assistance  in  fine  tuning  our  National  Transport
      Master Plan be followed through on by the Minister of Transport.



   4. The South African government takes advantage of being viewed by  China
      as a  gateway  for  investment  in  Africa  on  transport  development
      especially the SADC Region.



   5. The structural arrangement that exist in South Africa  where  Transnet
      falls under  the  department  of  Public  Enterprises  yet  performing
      transport related services be reviewed. Transnet should fall under the
      department of transport so as to streamline transport services, reduce
      duplication and  contradictions  in  planning  and  prioritisation  of
      transport services. The proposed structural change would also  address
      the ongoing conflict that exists between PRASA and Transnet which  has
      a huge negative impact on railway commuters.  The  current  structural
      arrangement makes Transnet both the referee and a player which  has  a
      negative impact  on  planning  and  the  homogeneous  coordination  of
      transport infrastructure development and provision of rail services in
      South Africa.



   6. The South African government should adopt rail as backbone of  freight
      and commuter transport systems in South Africa with all other modes of
      transport complimenting rail.



   7. South Africa moves away from the rehabilitation of old  rolling  stock
      and begin with a process of investing in new  and  modern  locomotives
      and coaches as a means of reducing time and cost of travel.



   8. South Africa should adopt an approach of rehabilitating and  upgrading
      the existing rail infrastructure to accommodate new technologies where
      appropriate.



   9. South Africa should follow up on  the  skills  development  programmes
      offered by the Chinese government  to  the  South  African  government
      particularly to link universities in South Africa and those  in  China
      with a view of  developing  the  required  expertise  in  science  and
      technology with a specific focus on transport development.

  10. South Africa should review the public transport subsidy in  line  with
      the Chinese model



  11. South African government quest  for  social  economic  development  be
      central to the planning, development and provision  of  transportation
      in all modes.



  19. The Portfolio Committee on Transport recommends that the House  adopts
      this report and approve recommendations contained herein.



Report to be considered



