---
title: 'National Assembly - 02 March 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-03-02
---

TUESDAY, 2 MARCH 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:00.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms A T LOVEMORE: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House, on behalf of the DA, I shall move:

  That the House debates the state of waste-water treatment in South Africa
  and the urgent interventions required of government to effectively
  address the situation in order to protect environmental and human health.

Thank you, Speaker.

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move:

  That this House debates the roles and responsibilities of teacher unions
  in the formal education sector.

I thank you.

                  CONDOLENCES ON DEATH OF ALDERMAN E STOTT

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes with regret that Alderman Eulalie Stott, a founder member of
        the Liberal Party and of the Black Sash, passed away on Sunday, 28
        February 2010;


     2) further notes that Eulalie Stott was a leading campaigner for the
        abolition of the iniquitous pass laws and a fearless and outspoken
        opponent of the tyranny of the apartheid regime;


     3) acknowledges that Eulalie Stott served as a Cape Town City
        Councillor for 33 years and was a long-serving member of the
        council housing committee, in which capacity she won numerous
        awards for her efforts to speed up housing provision for the
        homeless;


     4) recognises that Eulalie Stott was a proud daughter of our great
        nation who dedicated her life to the service of others and the
        eradication of injustice and tyranny within South Africa;


     5) further recognises that she will be remembered by those who knew
        her as a charming, dedicated, generous and moral woman, who will be
        deeply missed by the community which she selflessly served for so
        many years; and


     6) extends and expresses its sincere condolences to her daughters
        Louise and Rene, her grandchildren and all who loved her.

Agreed to.

                  CONDOLENCES ON DEATH OF PROF S DE GRUCHY

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs J D KILIAN: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –

      1) notes with a deep sense of loss the passing away of Prof Steve de
         Gruchy, a deeply religious man who promoted an appreciation with
         the church of the important theological connections between the
         economy and ecology;

      2) further notes that Prof Steve de Gruchy was a man who stood
         uncompromisingly for justice and promoted righteousness no matter
         what the circumstances were;

      3) acknowledges that over his productive lifetime he rigorously
         pursued the family tradition of ecumenism through his unselfish
         services in the World Council of Churches, World Alliance of
         Reformed Churches, Council for World Mission and the SA Council of
         Churches and that he made a signal contribution to all of these
         church bodies; and

      4) conveys its heartfelt condolences to his wife, Marian, and his
         children, Thea, David and Kate, as well as to his parents and
         siblings.


Agreed to.

  APPOINTMENT OF DR P JORDAN AS SOUTH AFRICAN AMBASSADOR TO UNITED NATIONS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without
notice:
   That the House –

      1) welcomes with pride the appointment of former Minister of Arts and
         Culture, Dr Pallo Jordan, as the South African ambassador to the
         United Nations;


      2) recalls that his appointment comes at a time when the African Union
         Summit endorsed South Africa's candidature for a non-permanent seat
         on the United Nations Security Council;

      3) further recalls that the endorsement of his appointment is guided
         by the commitment to strengthen the multilateral system and support
         for a broader multilateral approach to questions of international
         peace and security;

      4) believes that the appointment of Dr Pallo Jordan to the position of
         ambassador is a correct decision, and trusts that he will discharge
         his responsibilities with humility, dedication and utmost
         commitment; and

      5) wishes Dr Pallo Jordan a successful term in the United Nations.

Agreed to.

                           VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
                             (Draft Resolution)

Mrs C N Z ZIKALALA: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the IFP I move without notice:

   That the House –

     1) notes that 8 March 2010  marks  International  Women’s  Day,  which
        celebrates the economic, political and social development of  women
        worldwide;


     2) further notes that violence against women is rife around the  world
        and is not only restricted to underprivileged households;

     3) recognises that violence against women is also linked to the spread
        of HIV/Aids and that in some countries as  many  as  one  in  three
        women will be beaten, coerced into sex or otherwise abused in their
        lifetime;
     4) acknowledges that South Africans have become  active  in  combating
        violence against women, but that more needs to be done to eradicate
        this unsocial behaviour; and


     5) calls upon all South Africans  to  stand  together  and  speak  out
        against  women  abuse  that  takes  place   in   their   respective
        communities, to help the police identify the perpetrators of  women
        abuse and to offer support to victims of abuse.

Agreed to.

              FIRST IMAGES PRODUCED BY SA SATELLITE, SUMBANDILA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House –


     1) welcomes with great pride the success of the South African space
        satellite, Sumbandila, which produced its first images of the
        earth’s surface on Monday, 22 February 2010;


     2) recalls that the R26 million satellite was launched in Kazakhstan
        in September last year and was expected to orbit about 500 km to
        600 km above the earth, carrying high-resolution cameras to produce
        images of the earth’s surface;


     3) further recalls that the data collected will be used in the
        management of natural disasters such as floods, fires and oil
        spills in Southern Africa and is also expected to monitor sea and
        land temperatures, clouds and rainfall, winds, sea levels, ice
        cover, vegetation cover and gases; and


     4) feels that the success story of Sumbandila reinforces South
        Africa’s role in national, regional and international space
        initiatives and enhances its efforts to develop space science and
        technology in the country.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I now wish to invite the hon Kohler-Barnard to
address the House.

                      APOLOGY FOR UNACCEPTABLE LANGUAGE

                           (Personal Explanation)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to unconditionally
apologise to the House for the use of totally unacceptable language in the
National Assembly on Tuesday, 16 February 2010. I withdraw the words I said
unconditionally. Thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Noted. Hon member, thank you very much for that unconditional
apology to the House.

  CONSIDERATION OF FISCAL FRAMEWORK AND REVENUE PROPOSALS AND OF REPORT OF
                        STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE

The SPEAKER: Hon members, I think it is important to highlight that this is
the first time that Parliament is required to adopt the fiscal framework
and revenue proposals. This is, of course, in line with the Money Bills
Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act.

Mr T A MUFAMADI: Hon Speaker, the first thing that I noticed is that there
is no water for me here, and my speech is going to be very long.

Mr Speaker, it is my honour and great pleasure to participate in this
historic budget debate of the fourth democratic Parliament. It is indeed a
special occasion for us as hon members, because the fiscal framework under
consideration and the budget proposals contained in the Division of Revenue
Bill and the Appropriation Bill to be deliberated upon are the first to be
processed under the new Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters
Act.

This Act is a consequence of years of deliberation by the public on how
budgetary processes should reflect the concerns of broader society. The ANC
as an organisation of the people, through its structures, finally resolved
in Polokwane that Parliament should pass legislation to effect this
aspiration of our people. This piece of legislation seeks to deepen public
participation and therefore there is indeed an expectation from the public
that their voices will be heard through this process more than ever before.
After the Budget was presented, the Speaker referred the fiscal framework
to the Standing Committee on Finance. Between 18 February 2010 and 1 March
2010 we interacted with different stakeholders representing the views of
various constituencies on the fiscal framework, and all parties in
Parliament, with the exception of the IFP, supported the framework.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank, express appreciation to and
congratulate President Jacob Zuma on giving the nation and the world at
large an opportunity to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the release of
our torchbearer and true liberator, Tata Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela ...
[Applause.] ... who epitomises the dignity and pride of the heroic and
relentless struggles of our people in the fight for political and economic
liberation, because, in reality, political freedom will remain meaningless
and incomplete without economic power.

This celebration is but a recognition and reaffirmation of the correctness
of our history, and that Mandela is not just an icon of our people but the
heritage and a living symbol of human dignity.
Given the current economic challenges, what we need is a growth path
underpinned by a coherent industrial strategy, with clear sector programmes
aimed at the creation and retention of quality jobs and employment
opportunities via a process of retooling the skills of economically active
people.

The proposed fiscal framework and revenue proposals are a base and
foundation on which the Appropriation and the Division of Revenue Bills
will be considered by this honourable House at a later stage. The new Money
Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act, Act 9 of 2009, provides
the ideal opportunity for the broader public and Parliament to engage with
long-term trends in fiscal and economic policies.

When we compare this budget to the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement
presented in October 2009, the first observation we make is that it is
premised against the backdrop of a slightly positive economic outlook,
which remains fragile in terms of the projected recovery of the global
financial markets, and it addresses two main policy challenges. The first
is the transformation of the South African economy to realise sustainable
growth accompanied by employment creation. The second is the need to have a
responsive public sector to meet the expectations of our population and the
broad objectives of a developmental state.

These proposals are borne out of our experience of the last decade, which
justifies a new way of doing things, because we can safely say, without
fear of contradicting ourselves, that we now know what has worked and what
needs to be adjusted.

What was of critical importance in this Budget Speech was an admission by
the Minister of Finance that the current economic growth path has not
adequately responded to the challenges of the growing statistics on
joblessness, income inequalities and wealth redistribution.

In the same spirit, the Minister used this public platform to invite all
stakeholders to a national dialogue, particularly between government,
business and labour, to chart a common developmental economic growth path
with practical solutions to the challenges that confront ordinary people on
a daily basis.

The fiscal framework recognises that the majority of the potentially
economically active population who are unemployed are young people. This
must be viewed in a very serious light. In fact, we must treat this as an
emergency. Young people need to be exposed to an environment that will
assist them in realising their goals. The proposed subsidy by the Minister
will play a big role in responding to the negative impact that no
education, no skills and no entrepreneurial skills have on young people.

The onus is on us to act in a responsible manner, cognisant of the fact
that there are capable men and women who, in the past decade, lost hope of
any job prospects. As leaders, irrespective of our political affiliations,
we have a responsibility to engender entrepreneurship and skills
development in young people who, in turn, will be capacitated to restore
hope to uBaba Madikane in the Eastern Cape who last saw the inside of a
factory 10 years ago before he was retrenched. This will create the type of
economy which, simultaneously, changes the hopeless situation of Joyce
Tshikukununu in Thothololo, a graduate who has not had a job for the past
eight years.

The proposed measures to promote youth employment through employer
subsidies should be carefully considered. Just like any other new
initiative, there will always be serious challenges in the implementation
of the proposed employer subsidy. Our response to these challenges will
determine the success or failure of this noble idea.

All the parties should view this as the beginning of a potentially fruitful
process; let us come forward with more enriching ideas. Together we can do
more. The need to encourage the private sector to give young people
experience and meaningful employment should be commended and supported
vigorously. [Applause.]

For this initiative to succeed, maximum co-ordination between the economic
cluster of Ministries and their departments is paramount. And, most
importantly, the matter should be thoroughly canvassed with the labour
representatives.

Taking experience as our best teacher, we must guard against employers
turning this into a scab labour scheme, in which real jobs are conveniently
replaced by this state intervention or by temporary jobs. We need to be
careful of employers who may seek to turn the good intentions of government
into a get-rich-quick scheme to boost their profit margins.

The question to ask is: What then is the trajectory of a new growth path?
This brings me to my next point and observation with regard to the national
response to the economic crisis. It is my considered view that, to a very
large extent, what held our economy together during these trying times was
largely the government’s countercyclical fiscal policy, particularly on
public and economic infrastructure spending. It is also evident from the
budget presentation that our economy is on a recovery path, and this can be
attributed to the partnerships among the private sector, labour and
government.

Notwithstanding the successes of this state intervention, there are
indications that not all sectors of the economy have responded positively
to government’s offer, particularly when we assess the training lay-off
programmes in the clothing and textile industries, and in the transport and
metal-fabrication industries.

We must commend government spending particularly on public and economic
infrastructure and in the automotive industries, and we particularly
commend BMW and Renault for taking full advantage of the lay-off programme
incentives. This has thus far succeeded in mitigating the retrenchments.

Given that not every opportunity provided to the private sector has been
maximally utilised, the impact of the economic recession has been more
severe, hence we have lost almost one million jobs in the economy in a
period of less than a year. We urge the private sector to participate fully
in the lay-off programmes. In fact, there is a need to examine whether the
economic recession wasn’t used to a certain extent as an excuse to lay off
workers in some instances. This matter requires the attention of Nedlac and
other relevant stakeholders.

Although a deficit is bad, it can also be good, depending on the reason for
borrowing and when properly managed. From the budget presentation it is
clear that in order to meet our expenditure priorities, we will have to
increase our debt levels over the next three years.

What is comforting, though, is that this borrowing is not meant to sponsor
the current account, and there is a clear indication of fiscal stability
around 2014. Our role as Parliament is to ensure that there is value for
money. For us to achieve this, we will have to ensure that our Public
Service is properly geared up to deliver on the mandates of a developmental
state. We must further strengthen the efforts by the executive in the fight
against corruption by mobilising all our communities to reject any corrupt
tendencies wherever they occur.

In conclusion, we acknowledge that the fiscal framework, as stated before
us, is presented under different economic conditions, which indicate
positive signs of a slow recovery - and yet it has also taken into
consideration the five priorities reflected in the ANC manifesto and is
indicative of steps to strengthen the three arms of government. It is
therefore a good basis and foundation for the Division of Revenue Bill and
the Appropriation Bill.

I therefore urge the honourable House to support the fiscal framework, as
presented by the Minister, and would like to say officially that the ANC
supports the framework. I thank you. [Applause.]

Dr D T GEORGE: Speaker, the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related
Matters Act has initiated a process that will enable an active parliament
to ensure that the people’s voice is heard in the budget process and that
the people’s money is applied in the most appropriate way. Whether it
actually makes any difference to the people is in our hands.

The heartbeat of the Act lies in the fiscal framework. This reflects how
much revenue government expects to collect, how much it plans to spend and
how big the gap between the two numbers is expected to be. If revenue
exceeds expenditure, we have a surplus; if expenditure exceeds revenue, we
have a deficit. A deficit needs to be funded, usually with borrowed money,
and must eventually be repaid. Parliament can amend the fiscal framework,
but it needs to do this within specific parameters, as set out in the Act.

Parliament must ensure that there is an appropriate balance between
revenue, expenditure and borrowing; that debt levels and debt interest
costs are reasonable; that the cost of recurring spending is not deferred
to future generations; and that there is adequate provision on
infrastructure development, overall capital spending and maintenance.

In October last year the Minister of Finance presented the Medium-Term
Budget Policy Statement, MTBPS, detailing the estimated fiscal framework
for 2009-10 and the next three years until 2012-13. The estimated revenue
for 2010-11 was R743 billion and expenditure R905 billion, leaving a
deficit of R162 billion – not unusual, given prevailing economic
conditions.
In our response in Parliament on 11 November 2009 the DA stated that
“assumptions underlying the fiscal framework may well prove to be
optimistic”. In February the Minister tabled an amended fiscal framework
for 2011, which reflected revenue at R738 billion – a R5 billion reduction
on the October forecast, although the gross domestic product, GDP, growth
estimate was revised upward from 1,5% to 2,3%.

At face value this would mean that we have rising economic activity with
falling revenue, thus a phenomenon of tax-less growth – not possible, given
the tax to GDP multiplier. In its response to the DA’s enquiry on this,
National Treasury responded that:


  Corporate tax revenue since October 2009 points towards a deeper decline
  than expected at the time of the MTBPS and the short-term outlook for
  both value-added tax and corporate income tax points to a stabilisation
  at more modest levels.


In simple English this really means that Treasury’s forecast in October was
optimistic and that tax collection is expected to be lower than
anticipated.

A forecast is a prediction based on assumption. If the assumption is wrong,
so is the prediction. The DA has concerns arising from the fiscal
framework, because it is possible for forecasts to go wrong, as
demonstrated in this instance. The fiscal framework before us today looks
three years ahead to 2012-13 – a difficult task, even for the experts. By
then our gross national loan debt, excluding that owed by municipalities,
will be R1,4 trillion or 43,1% of projected GDP. In that year we will pay
R104 billion to service our debt. Last year we paid R57 billion.

Comparing our debt level to that of the USA and the UK is not meaningful
because our economy is very different to these developed economies. Those
economies can withstand much higher debt levels for much longer than ours
can. Highly indebted countries in the Euro zone can take comfort in the
knowledge that others in the zone are unlikely to permit them to default on
their debt because of the currency fallout that will ensue.

We do not have a bank of last resort other than our own hardworking
taxpayers. The suggestion by the Financial and Fiscal Commission that
government may want to adopt a fiscal stability pact to clearly establish
the level of debt and what it can and cannot be used to finance has been
included in our recommendations, given that government departments cannot
maintain even the most basic principles of financial discipline.

The DA is not opposed to government borrowing money for appropriate reasons
such as infrastructure development and stimulating our economy as it
emerges from recession. We are, however, opposed to borrowing that yields
questionable returns. The nonfinancial public enterprises will borrow
R287 billion over the next three years. We have no certainty on whether
this money will be appropriately spent as these institutions lurch from one
financial crisis to another, secure in the knowledge that the people of
South Africa will rescue them and their overpaid executives over and over
again while the people wait for basic services to be delivered.

Eskom has vividly demonstrated the reality that government cannot deliver
on its own and that the concept of a developmental state with parastatals
as key drivers for economic growth cannot work. Without an incentive to
become efficient, these entities never will and can only survive until
their lifeline to the people’s money is eventually unplugged. Not a murmur
emerges from government when its parastatals, overflowing with
underperforming and overpaid cadres, fund executive bonuses with bailouts
and don’t change their behaviour.

The DA’s approach to public finance shows that it is possible to restrain
public debt by attracting private investment into the parastatals. A modest
private sector investment of R20 billion would reduce the need for debt
escalation and help stem the bailout haemorrhage that drains the public
purse. Increasing debt to prop up the failed parastatals is neither
appropriate nor compatible with our mandate to ensure that the people
receive maximum value for their money. The DA’s alternative budget has
demonstrated how a new financial model for the parastatals can change the
debt trajectory. Our debt does not have to increase as forecast if we
exercise the right choices.

The Minister has made it clear that government can raise taxes in future to
fund spending commitments, given the possibility of delayed economic
recovery. The DA’s model is grounded in a different principle, based on the
knowledge that sufficient investment capital exists in South Africa and
that business will invest if the environment is attractive enough. The
Minister has mentioned that government, business and labour should work
together – so the sentiment is there, we just need some action. Government
should not rest assured that it can just increase taxes to fund its often
wasteful and extravagant spending. That is merely adding insult to the
already injured taxpayer who waits in pain as their hard-earned tax
contribution is thrown down yet another drain filled with empty promises.
The social contract will only stretch so far and it is already strained.

A different message is needed and the DA would suggest that it should be
that government will not increase your already heavy tax burden; we will
become more efficient, less wasteful and build partnerships with business
that does have money available for investment. The DA is not opposed to
government spending, but we are opposed to government spending that fails
to benefit the people.

Since October, the 2010-11 expenditure forecast has increased from
R905 billion to R906 billion. This is not a large increase, but it does beg
the question of why the Minister’s promise to cut wasteful expenditure and
restrain the spiralling public sector wage Bill is not reflected on the
fiscal framework. The Minister is saying that steps will be taken to root
out corruption and tighten up on wasteful spending, yet the number
increases. Does the Minister not have any faith in his ability to actually
cut the expenditure to the point that we see it in the numbers on the
fiscal framework, because that is where, after all, it really matters? The
Minister was so afraid of my question that he never came here today,
neither did the Deputy Minister.

The DA’s alternative budget has demonstrated how real expenditure cuts of
R4 billion can impact on the fiscal framework, while ensuring that the
people’s money is more efficiently spent. Given that the revenue projection
has been revised downwards, an increase in expenditure, however small, is
not the right direction.

The DA supports the counter cyclical fiscal stance and therefore does not
think it possible to balance the budget deficit to zero within the next
three years. Our alternative budget delivered a 5,2% deficit off a growth
of 1,5%. There does not seem to be consensus on growth expectations for
2011, with the Reserve Bank forecasting 2%; National Treasury 2,3%; the
Reuters consensus 2,6%; the Economist Intelligence Unit 2,8%; and Nedlac,
according to Fedusa, 3%. We hope that the higher forecasts will be
achieved, but government must manage our money with its eye on the lower
forecast, because if GDP growth dips or does not accelerate in line with
National Treasury forecasts, our public financial model must be robust
enough to withstand the shock.

National Treasury, in its explanation on how it calculated expected
revenue, predicted that the tax to GDP multiplier at 0,95 in 2010-11 will
gather pace in 2011-12 to 1,3. Therefore, if GDP growth exceeds Treasury
expectations, government revenue should increase at an accelerating pace
over the next three years. This will provide additional fiscal space for a
reduction in the currently high levels of taxation to which South African
individuals and corporates are subjected.

In October the DA stated that we would not support an increase in taxation
unless it was offset by a tax reduction elsewhere. The 2010-11 budget
proposes to reduce taxes on individuals and companies by R6,75 billion and
increase indirect taxes by R6,3 billion – a net reduction of R450 million.
We therefore support the general impact of this on the fiscal framework,
although we believe that the Minister could have more fully compensated
individuals for fiscal drag that erodes their disposable income. The
increase in the general fuel levy is excessive and will contribute to
inflation. The National Treasury’s view during deliberations that the
increase would not be inflationary has been contradicted by economists and
the Reserve Bank.

The DA welcomes the proposed wage subsidy and made provision for a revenue
reduction in our alternative budget to accommodate this. We look forward to
its implementation next year. We also made provision for VAT zero-rating to
be extended to books to improve access to this basic ingredient of quality
education. In its report, the Standing Committee on Finance notes that the
parliamentary budget office, as soon as it is established, will investigate
the VAT treatment of books and other basic essentials with a view to zero-
rating.

During parliamentary hearings, all submissions specific to the revenue
proposals suggested that the introduction of a tax ombudsman should be
investigated. This office would ensure that a balance exists between the
need of the SA Revenue Service, Sars, to increase tax compliance and the
right of individual taxpayers to fair treatment. Sars cannot be a player
and a referee in a tax-collection game. Sars also needs to consider how
cash business can more fully be captured into the revenue net and work more
closely with the business community to achieve this objective. Rather than
putting a vice grip on relatively compliant taxpayers, Sars should focus on
those who blatantly ignore our tax laws by remaining outside of the net.
Lifestyle audits are needed, with a focus on those who are inappropriately
politically connected and feast at the expense of the poorest members of
our community.

South Africa’s development continues and it is time for us to reflect on
the tax regime applicable to South Africa. Over the past few years, tax
practitioners have consistently submitted that our tax laws are overly
complex and complicated and do not do justice to our emerging economy. As
we emerge from the depths of the recent recession, and with Sars of the
view that tax compliance has deteriorated during the recession period, now
would be an appropriate time to convene a tax commission to consider our
tax laws and the central question of tax incidence and its suitability to
the South African context.

We have entered a new era in South Africa where the budget is no longer the
exclusive domain of the executive; it belongs to all of us. Although we
have chosen not to amend the fiscal framework or revenue proposals, the
committee has made recommendations and commitments that, when implemented,
will have important consequences to ensure that debt levels do not spiral
out of control; that we have a clear understanding of how the Reserve Bank
will maintain price stability, given the variables it needs to consider in
its decision-making process; and that the VAT treatment of essential items
such as books is reconsidered.

Although the parliamentary budget office is not yet in place, the committee
was able to consider properly the fiscal framework and revenue proposals.
It is simply not true that the committee was not capable of understanding
the implications and complexities around the forecasts. We know exactly
what the numbers are saying and the context of the message. That is why the
proposals were not amended - not this time, anyway.

The DA will support the fiscal framework and the revenue proposals and will
monitor very closely the direction of the numbers and the policies that
influence them. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N J J KOORNHOF: Mr Speaker, sound macroeconomic policies of the past 12
years have helped South Africa cushion the impact of the current recession.

It will all be about goals for 2010, not only for Bafana Bafana, but also
for the economy and especially the public sector. A critical factor in
cementing this recovery will be the behaviour of the public sector and our
ability to do something about the glaring inequalities of our society. We
are going to experience larger deficits and higher levels of debt.

South Africa will need to cover the dent in its finances and to ensure that
we have adequate fiscal space to deal with future negative shocks. A clear
exit strategy out of debt and a disciplined spending programme shall be
vital for survival.

The year 2010 was the time to keep the economy anchored and to embrace the
consistency of the past. The hon Minister has succeeded in doing this and,
therefore, Cope shall support this framework.

If we compare South Africa’s position to emerging markets, only our
interest rate bracket is “above average”. At all other levels, we are in
the “worst” or “unattractive” brackets of the score sheet - something we
cannot ignore.

The International Monetary Fund, IMF, has warned emerging markets not to
test the 50% of gross domestic product, GDP, debt levels. South Africa will
start to stabilise its debt levels only in 2015, peaking at close to 48% of
GDP, if there are no further shocks in the system.

There will be no room for mistakes in this arena. We almost made a mistake
in 2008, when we argued whether or not this recession would hit us, and if
so, how hard. To illustrate this, the former Minister of Finance was wrong
in his projections for growth in 2009-10. He projected growth of 1,4% and
we ended up at -1,5%. Gross tax revenue was down R70 billion and the
deficit almost double what was projected.

There will be no room for mistakes again. All indications are that we shall
experience a continued deficit for the next six years, making them very
different from the previous six years.

The real tax trend shows that there is very little prospect for recovery in
company taxes and VAT revenues in the immediate future. Since 1994, we saw
the rising of debt levels, hitting close to 50% of GDP in 1998. During that
time, there was a debate about the direction of policy in the alliance.

However, under the guidance of the former Minister of Finance and President
Mbeki, we returned to sound macroeconomic policies. We realised that the
market would shape the economy, and the correct decisions were taken. Debt
levels dropped to 22% of GDP.

Again in 2010 we have a debate about the economic direction. Wisely, it was
the Minister of Finance, his deputy, Minister Manuel and Minister Chabane,
who won the contest - and may I add that it was with the blessing of the
President and, hopefully, the Cabinet. Owing to the recession, however,
debt will rise again in the next five years to levels similar to those of
1998.

In the next three years, we might see the clash of the titans in the credit-
borrowing arena. When the domestic spending levels pick up, domestic people
will go to the market for credit. State-Owned Enterprises, SOEs, will start
borrowing, and the state will follow. We have seen this in the background
of the global credit crisis where countries struggled to pay their state
debts. We might see high interest rates in 2015 increasing high debt
levels, and maybe slight downturns in the economic cycle. We all know that
debt creates friction, as it does in a household, for example.

In 2014, or even before, because of tight spending, we might again see
friction among the alliance partners around economic policies. This does
not augur well for the future and for consistency. You cannot change
economic policies every five years. We must strive for discipline and
stability.

To get out of this debt trap, the easiest way is to raise taxes, but then
it becomes a horror story. What we would like to see is value for our rand
and tax, and an earlier exit strategy out of debt. If we grow more than
projected, we must start paying back sooner.

Cope would like to see a zero-tolerance approach to ineffective spending by
Ministries and departments. We all know spending patterns are down in the
next three years. That is why we cannot tolerate any wasting of money. Why
can’t Ministries set the example now and cut 15% of their budgets? How is
the Treasury or the hon Minister Chabane’s performance agreement going to
ensure that inefficient programmes in departments are cut? We need to know
how. How are we going to ensure value for our rand if we struggle to
maintain a professional Public Service at some levels?
If performance agreements are linked to outcomes, for instance the number
of houses built, and not linked to how much was saved by shredding bad
programmes, then all the speeches remain a wish list and we are heading for
troubled years.

Hon Deputy Minister, I have commended the Minister of Finance on his Budget
Speech by quoting the famous American boxer Gentleman Jim. I said to him,
“If you want to become a champion, you fight one more round; if it is
tight, you fight one more round”. He has fought two good rounds and he has
kept the economy anchored. What we need now is another round - a knockout
round to get rid of undisciplined departments and bad spending behaviour.
Deputy Minister, you’ve got a weight advantage. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr Speaker, Minister Pravin Gordhan is an
extraordinary man. I came to know him during the negotiation process. He
has a strong personality that could have been intimidating and threatening,
were it not for his intensely benign and reassuring attitude and the
confidence that emanates from his leadership.

This may account for the fact that he has charmed so many into applauding
his fiscal framework. Even the DA, notwithstanding them telling us how
terrible it all is, seem to be supporting him.

In the next three years Minister Gordhan will borrow not only as much debt
as was accumulated during the last days of colonialism, the apartheid
period and the new democratic South Africa, including the money used for
the greatly increased social spending of the past 16 years, but one and
half times more than that. The present national debt is R513 billion, which
will be raised to R1,3 trillion by 2013, and this is not the end of it.

According to his projection, the debt will stabilise only in 2015. If it
grows at the same rate, the debt will be R1,7 trillion by that time. He
clarified in the committee that, in 2015, we will have stabilised the
Budget, by which he means the Budget will run on a deficit of only 4% of
the GDP. By projecting the growth of the size of the Budget and the growth
of the GDP, this means that by 2015 the deficit will grow by a few more
hundred billion rands per year.

Let’s place this in context: In 2015, every child will be born with a debt
at birth of about R340 000 at present rand value, steadily growing each
year thereafter. The principle of “no taxation without representation” will
not apply in respect of such newborns, who will have to pay off money they
had no part in borrowing.

With his charm, Minister Gordhan told us not to worry because he had it all
figured out. He told us that the economy will grow this year by 2,3%, next
year by 3,2% and the following year by 3,6%. Thereafter, it will all be
hunky-dory. He is relying on the same advice of those who, over the past 15
years, got projected growth wrong time and again, starting from the 6%
projected growth on Gear, the Growth, Employment and Redistribution
strategy, which turned out to be a mere 3%, to finish with the grand
prediction ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, your voices are drowning out the speaker. Please
allow the speaker to be heard. If you have to speak, please do it quietly
or, preferably, don’t speak at all until we have finished the session.

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: ... that the recession would bypass South Africa.

The Reserve Bank appeared before our committee and frankly told us that the
Minister’s growth projections are inflated and they themselves worked on
something more realistic: around 2% growth in the foreseeable future.

This is not the end of it. Having decided to borrow us into major problems
on the basis of such an optimistic outlook, Minister Gordhan candidly told
us nobody knew if the recession was really over, and it may very well be
much longer and deeper before it’s over. Therefore, we are borrowing
ourselves against the untested best-case scenario that the Minister himself
warned us not to give much credence to. To me, this sounds like a
daredevil’s fiscal policy.

It gets worse. In order to reduce the borrowing, which would otherwise go
to R3,6 trillion by 2015, Minister Gordhan took out of the Budget
R846 billion’s worth of public expenditure for infrastructure and placed
this cost directly on the consumers’ shoulders at the time of their most
dire and greatest indebtedness.

There is no answer to the fundamental question of how this enormous debt
will be paid off. The only thing we know is that perhaps we will stabilise
at a constant rate over balanced growth. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, your time has expired.

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: We have difficulty in supporting a leap of faith
in the dark simply on account of how good and charming Minister Gordhan is.
Thank you.

Mr L W GREYLING: Speaker, the ID recognises the enormous challenges that
the South African economy currently faces and the difficult task of
presenting a fiscal framework that funds our ever-increasing priorities
while still ensuring that our debt levels do not become unsustainable.
Ultimately, the only way for us to achieve this difficult balancing act is
to move our economy on to a higher growth path; one that will ensure that
the majority of our population is able to take up gainful employment.

The ID, therefore, welcomes the tentative steps that are being taken to
restructure our economy and create new sectors that can spur on future
economic growth. Unfortunately, however, most of the budgetary resources to
do this have been directed towards the automotive and textile sectors, each
of them receiving R1,6 billion in this year’s budget.

Despite the commitment to build up green industries there has not been
adequate budgetary allocation to do that. We have also heard in repeated
budget speeches for the last three years that different environmental taxes
have been explored, but now is the time to start implementing them. The
emissions tax is a good start but there are many others in which
environmentally destructive practices can be effectively taxed. This will
bring in much-needed revenue for the state and help to put us on a more
sustainable development path.

The ID is also concerned with the projections put forward by the Treasury
concerning the anticipated economic recovery. The global economy is in a
precarious state and we are concerned about whether this recent upturn is
sustainable. Questions can certainly be asked about whether this recent
upturn is simply a product of the enormous stimulus packages of developed
countries and whether this recovery will continue once these stimuli are
removed. If the global economy slumps into another recession and South
Africa becomes a victim, our budget deficit will balloon. This is something
we have to watch very closely.

In this regard, the ID supports the Minister’s concerted efforts to rein in
government expenditure and ensure that failing public enterprises are not
funded into perpetuity. We also support his commitment to root out
corruption, particularly as it pertains to the tendering process. We wish
him the best of luck in this endeavour, though, because he is no doubt
going to make enemies along the way. The ID implores him to investigate all
conflicts of interest in the tendering process without fear or favour,
including those of government Ministers and even the ruling party itself
through its Chancellor House front company.

Let’s work together to ensure that the tendering process is free from any
conflicts of interest and that service delivery is no longer sacrificed on
the altar of naked greed. It is possible to turn this economy around and
root out corruption but only if we remain committed to the task. I thank
you.

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Mr Speaker and hon members, we remain aware that
budgeting, and the overall fiscal framework that drives it, is a balancing
act. Competing, sometimes even contradictory policy and institutional
demands must be met within the constraints of a finite budget. These
constraints weigh even heavier upon the process when the economy is in
recession and revenue is in decline.

Thus, now - more than ever before – we need to be very clear about our
priorities. At this moment, various communities throughout the country are
in turmoil due to the service delivery protests. The burning tyres and
rubber bullets provide a stark reminder that the fiscal framework and
everything that the government does should reflect the needs of the people,
otherwise we will be heading for a violent crisis of legitimacy for this
government.

The UDM welcomes the acknowledgement by the hon Minister of Finance that we
require a national, long-term consensus on the economy. This is the reason
that the UDM has been calling for a national indaba on the economy. It is
regrettable that the Minister, in his delivery of the national budget,
talked about “starting today” on job creation. The ANC government should
have started on job creation 15 years ago.

We are concerned about the projected public debt rising to 40% of the gross
domestic product, GDP, by the year 2013, especially since lower-than-
expected revenues might become a trend. We broadly agree with the
priorities of education, health, crime fighting, rural development, job
creation, and municipal and housing investment.

We believe that it is necessary to heed the concerns raised by the
Financial and Fiscal Commission regarding the apparent lack of
intergovernmental structures for the co-ordination of the priority areas of
employment creation and rural development. The continued pursuit of the
national health insurance is troubling since current independent
calculations indicate that it would be vastly unaffordable. Where will our
economy source additional hundreds of billions?

We believe that the government should not claim victory on projected large
infrastructure spending when much of it will not be funded through the
budget but by the public through tariffs, such as electricity tariffs.
Tariffs constitute a secondary tax that increases the burden on household
budgets, escalates inflation and is poured into parastatals, such as Eskom,
with poor track records and severe leadership vacuums. I thank you.

Mr D D VAN ROOYEN: Mr Speaker, hon members, stable and mature democracies
are indeed characterised by the resilience of their institutions, and their
economic foundations are characterised by stability of income distribution.

The philosophy underlying leading democracies, the political aspects of
their economics and the economic aspects of their politics ensures the
stability of income distribution. We, in our beloved country South Africa,
face the challenge of a stable democracy, but one that presides over
worsening income distribution.

Combined with expansionary fiscal measures, cutting the interest rate
always comes to the fore in any policy debate. It is true that this would
go a long way towards assisting the economy. However, because of delays in
the stabilisation measures having an impact on the economy - particularly
in the case of the monetary policy, which usually takes 12 to 18 months to
have a full impact - social protection measures are also critical in
minimising the negative social impact on particularly the workers and the
poor. Hence the current fiscal framework provides for more spending in this
regard.

The macroeconomic policy context in which the 2010 Budget is tabled is
characterised by a shift in emphasis away from inflation control to growth
and employment creation. The pressures on inflation are significantly
reduced, although with the recent electricity tariff increases we shall
have to monitor the real effect of this increase. The demand for goods and
services was in decline for most of 2009, but research has shown that a
positive turnaround was achieved in the last quarter of 2009.

Major international economies are still in recession, and the main leading
indicators of economic activity are pointing in a downward direction.
Monetary policy is in an interest-rate-cutting phase of the cycle. Some
central banks, especially the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan, are
already reaching zero-bound interest rates. Options to use monetary policy
as a policy stimulus are increasingly running out globally. This leaves
fiscal policy as a potent tool to arrest the current decline.

However, issues of financial fiscal policy have come to the fore. Raising
taxes appears not to be an option in the current phase of economic
contraction, but the continued worsening of income distribution in South
Africa during the past years of robust economic growth should not rule out
this option.

Another financing option is to issue more debt. The capacity of South
Africa’s financial market to absorb the required amount of debt to finance
fiscal expansion may not be sufficient, as has been realised recently. In
this case, of course, we have no option but to look into foreign sources of
finance. However, I must also indicate that the strained global liquidity
conditions weaken the viability of sustained external finance.

The fiscal framework that we are debating today positions itself in terms
of the Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement of October 2009. The budget
deficit as a percentage of GDP has been increased significantly so as to
have resources to cover the programmes the ANC-led government has to
execute. All these programmes obviously mean an increase in the budget
deficit. While some conservative economists have been critical of the ANC-
led government’s approach, what they have failed to appreciate is the need
to continue to invest and spend in times of economic recession, even if the
deficit as a percentage of GDP rises.

In this way, we are pushing the economy towards recovery. As has been
outlined in the Budget Speech, the management of this deficit will be
catered for in the outer years of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework,
especially as the situation provides little scope for any real increase in
taxes. As the ANC-led government, we have raised the minimum wage level of
tax over a number of years. This has given the lower-income earners much-
deserved tax relief, which, in turn, has helped in increasing demand in the
economy.

Despite the sustained – but, of course, moderate – growth we have realised,
the gains from economic growth have benefited only a small section of our
society. In particular, this is evidenced in the inability of our economy
to create employment at rates that would meet the target of halving
unemployment by 2014.

Moreover, economic concentration in the economy has not only resulted in
price collusion in several industries but constituted a fundamental
obstacle to the entry of new players into industries. In addition, the
recent economic meltdown has further exacerbated the challenges that face
poor households, while its pace has worked to limit the chances of
adjusting to these challenges for the poor.

The impact in 2009 was obvious. The weakening demand for products has
already seen job cuts, for example in the motor industry. Retrenchments
were higher in more significantly smaller companies and across various
vulnerable sectors. A number of companies responded by not hiring more
workers, and pressure on economic growth has resulted in a slowdown in tax
revenue, thus affecting the ability of our government to fund a more
expansionary programme.

However, the creativity that underpins the 2010 Budget is remarkable. With
reduced income and the shifts in policy, the ANC-led government, through
the National Treasury, has been able to sustain expenditure and increase it
whilst ensuring that the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework commitments are
not abandoned.

The state has intervened to support existing jobs and create new jobs.
Potentially, there is room for further economic stimulus packages that
could provide a cushion for firms to adjust to new conditions.
International conditions have not led the ANC-led government into
retreating and withdrawing, as has been the case in so many other
countries. Rather, they have potentially provided the space for moving
towards a significantly more labour-intensive growth trajectory. This
trajectory is possible, provided that social partners, as cited earlier,
begin emphasising the importance of employment creation for our economy. We
believe that a significant opportunity is available for increased social
dialogue aimed, of course, at moving the South African economy forward on a
new growth path.

To ensure the creation of decent jobs, our manifesto committed us to making
available more resources, which will be used for the implementation of
industrial policy and special programmes that will strengthen
manufacturing, mining and other vulnerable sectors. The undertaking,
through the vulnerable sectors programme, is a promise to increase savings
and expand jobs in the clothing and textile sectors, to strengthen the
automobile and components sectors, as well as to expand the food industry
while making massive investments in public infrastructure.

As the ANC we are unambiguous about the argument that good-quality
employment remains the first best option for our country. We will continue
the major public job opportunities programme through the Expanded Public
Works Programme as a key intervention. Our focus on employment is based on
our understanding that whilst grants are important to stabilise society and
support educational and job-search outcomes, a sustainable transition out
of poverty, particularly for the young, will lie in widening opportunities
for employment, including self-employment and study.

I think it is important that all of us in this House, as leaders, call on
all intended beneficiaries to also reciprocate, because this is not a one-
man show. We need their support, and we need them to reciprocate with
regard to these interventions with the required vigour and commitment,
because it takes all of us to make these interventions work for our country
and, of course, for future generations.

Ours is a developmental state charged with driving social and economic
development, a more efficient and co-ordinated public sector and an
effective industrial policy.

In order to further entrench our developmental mandate, our government has
committed substantial resources to developing sustainable economic
activities that can also generate employment on a large scale. The
commitment to upgrade the economic infrastructure represents only an
initial step. It will be supplemented by establishing a clearer strategy
for economic transformation, and of course for there to be better alignment
of investment in infrastructure with the development strategy.

While we acknowledge land reform as a necessary condition for sustainable
rural development in South Africa, it is equally important to stress that
it is by no means a sufficient condition. Rural development entails more
than the redistribution of land and ensuring that people make productive
use of land. In other words, rural development is not only about
agricultural development. Hence our approach recognises the following as
some of the other elements of rural development that need to be taken into
account when budgets are determined. These elements are: the promotion of
agriculture-related enterprises in rural areas for those who are not
interested in agricultural production; the development of rural
infrastructure, particularly the provision of water and improved roads;
ensuring that the curriculum in schools is revised and made to respond to
the needs of rural areas; and the provision of health services.

From the above, I think we all concur that it becomes clear that for there
to be sustainable rural development, a number of government departments
will have to work together - a point set out clearly by the chairperson of
our committee. This is something that poses serious challenges, not only
for budgetary purposes but for co-ordination too.

With regard to issues of revenue and deficit spending, expenditure, as
correctly captured, is matched by the sum of revenue and deficit spending,
normally known as borrowing, with most of the expenditure funded through
tax revenue in our situation. Raising the level of revenue is thus
important in order to fund higher levels of much-needed spending.

According to the 2009 Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement, which gives the
terms for this fiscal framework, we are moving towards a much more
expansionary fiscal policy. In particular, with the economic downturn,
expansionary spending to stimulate the economy is needed. This has led to a
significantly higher deficit-to-GDP ratio.
Given the current economic conditions and the developmental challenges
facing the country, it makes sense to run a budget deficit in the medium
term, as long as it is sustainable. Opposition to a deficit is usually
based on the false neoliberal assertion that a government that finances
spending through borrowing is “living beyond its means” and is deferring
the cost of borrowing to future generations. This means that government can
borrow from future generations. With accelerated growth, future generations
will be rewarded with higher standards of living than would have been
possible without deficit spending.

Expenditure needs to be efficient and productive. Productive and reasonably
efficient deficit spending is crucial for building the economy and human
capital for the future. It would be problematic to fund wasteful or
fruitless expenditure through deficits. The ANC-led government has
recognised the need for significant increases in the deficit-to-GDP ratio
and the coupling thereof with strict monitoring and evaluation capacity. I
must reiterate: “... with strict monitoring and evaluation capacity”.

It is our take that this fiscal framework and these revenue proposals must
be accepted as a tool that provides the much-needed scope for all role-
players to shape our country’s development in a way that will benefit
future generations. We are all welcome. Kea leboga. [Thank you.]
[Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Madam Deputy Speaker, the ACDP shares the concerns expressed
in the parliamentary report about deficit levels and the increasing public
debt levels, forecast to rise to R1,3 trillion by 2013. Debt service costs
are set to escalate dramatically, reaching R104 billion by 2013. We
appreciate, however, that the increased borrowing requirement is a response
to exceptional circumstances and that government has done relatively well,
given the global recession.

May I, however, remind members that God in His Word promises that if we
obey His commands, we as a nation will be blessed and that we will be a
lender to nations, not a borrower. There is no mention about global
recovery or global economic crises. Why are we not experiencing this
blessing?

I submit, Madam Deputy Speaker, that it is not insignificant that the
number of job losses last year was in the region of 900 000, and that this
is almost the same number as the number of babies that have been aborted
since abortion on demand was allowed. Can this be a coincidence? I don’t
think so.

The Budget Review states in no uncertain terms that high deficits lead to
rising debt service costs that compete with productive expenditure. We are
given the assurance by the government that steps will be taken to ensure
that the growing debt burden does not crowd out spending on development
priorities and that government will also stabilise growth in interest costs
through a careful, controlled reduction in the deficit, taking into account
the health of the economy. There is, however, no guarantee of this, given
that the global recovery is risky and fragile.

Our trading partners in Britain and the Euro zone are facing a bleak time
in the next few months. The Governor of the Bank of England has stated that
this nascent recovery is fragile. According to him, the tensions that
underlie the building up of large world imbalances have not been resolved.

Should there be - God forbid - a double-dip recession or even stalled
economic growth, South Africa would be in an extremely precarious position
– given investor sentiment with regard to emerging market economies.

For this reason the ACDP and other members, as well as the report, indicate
our concerns about escalating public debt. This is also the reason that the
report has recommended that National Treasury develop a clear strategy on
how it plans to manage these new levels, both in a scenario of a growing
economy and in a scenario of an economy not growing as forecast, given the
possibility of a second wave of global recession.

At the very least, we should have a fiscal stability pact, as proposed by
the Financial and Fiscal Commission.
The ACDP will, however, remain positive and trust that growth forecasts
will be far higher than estimated, leading to increased revenues, and that
we will speedily reduce public debt and debt service costs, leading to a
better future for all. I thank you.

Me P E ADAMS: Agb Adjunkspeaker, agb lede, die fiskale raamwerk gaan nie
net om syfers nie, maar wel ook om mense met begeertes, behoeftes en
verwagtinge. Dit is ’n monetêre uitdrukking van die ANC se politieke
voorkeure en hoe daardie voorkeure op ’n fiskaal volhoubare wyse nagekom
kan word. Dit is beide ’n politieke en finansiële instrument wat aangewend
word om te verseker dat die beleidsprogramme deur die toekenning van
finansiële bronne aan die onderskeie regeringsvlakke uitgevoer kan word.

Die Polokwane-resolusies is die grondslag van die ANC se mediumtermyn-
prioriteite en is sy mandaat om die wense van die mense ten uitvoer te
bring. Die fiskale raamwerk vloei voort uit die ANC se resolusies, asook
uit die mediumtermyn-begrotingbeleidsverklaring en die mediumtermyn-
bestedingsraamwerk. Die prioriteite is die vertrekpunt by die bepaling van
die 2010 Begrotingstoekennings.

Die politieke voorkeure ten opsigte van insameling en besteding van
inkomste word bepaal deur die aanwending daarvan in die rekonstruksie en
ontwikkeling van die samelewing. Die sukses van enige fiskale raamwerk moet
dus gemeet word aan die mate waarvolgens Suid-Afrika uit onderontwikkeling
beweeg na die punt waar sosio-ekonomiese ontwikkeling en die stryd teen
armoede begin vrugte afwerp.

Deurdagte besluite moet geneem word en die fiskale raamwerk moet aangewend
word om ekonomiese deelname en patrone van eienaarskap in die samelewing te
lei. In dié proses moet die staat ’n sentrale en strategiese rol speel by
die direkte investering in onderontwikkelde gebiede en die staat moet
rigting gee aan beleggings uit die privaatsektor.

Een van die onmiddellike uitdagings wat Suid-Afrika in die gesig staar, is
die inwerkingstelling van belangrike infrastruktuurprogramme wat ons
organisatoriese, tegniese en strategiese vermoëns sal toets. Ons vermoëns
om te verseker dat sulke programme en projekte as katalisator sal dien vir
die breër ontwikkeling van die ekonomie en ons ekonomiese
transformasiedoelwitte, sal ’n kritiese aanduider wees van die vordering
wat ons maak in die bou van ’n ontwikkelingsstaat wat as ’n instrument van
ekonomiese bevryding sal dien.

Sleutelelemente van die beleggingsprogramme sluit onder meer in: die
opgradering van ’n infrastruktuur vir massa waterlewering; die opgradering
van die kapasiteit van elektrisiteitsvoorsiening; groot projekte vir die
opgradering van ons vervoer infrastruktuur; en die verbreding van die
omvang van behuisingsprogramme.

Sodanige programme, asook deurlopende infrastruktuuronderhoud, is nie
eenmalige gebeurtenisse nie. Na die suksesvolle voltooiing van die 2010
Sokker-Wêreldbeker se infrastruktuurprojekte wag daar weer nuwe programme
wat tussen nou en die einde van die tweede dekade van vryheid ontwikkel
moet word.

Die hoofdoel is om te verseker dat infrastruktuurprojekte geïntegreer is en
dat ’n onderlinge ondersteunende verhouding tussen projekte en ander
beleidsdoelwitte, soos die ontwikkeling van vaardighede,
nywerheidsstrategie en makro—ekonomiese bestuur, bestaan.

Die hooftake wat in die fiskale raamwerk in oënskou geneem moet word, word
gereflekteer in die vyf prioriteitsgebiede vir die volgende vyf jaar, soos
vervat in die ANC se 2009 verkiesingsmanifes, naamlik: die skepping van
goeie werk en volhoubare lewensbestaan; opvoeding; gesondheid; landelike
ontwikkeling; voedselsekerheid en grondhervorming; en die stryd teen
misdaad en korrupsie.

Hierdie prioriteite sal met alle middele tot ons beskikking, soos
staatsbronne, die visie van die Vryheidsmanifes en die energie en
verbintenis van ons mense, aangepak word. Op hierdie wyse sal die behoeftes
van die jeug, vroue, die landelikes, armes, bejaardes en mense met
gestremdhede, aangespreek word.

Dit is duidelik dat ons die aandag sal moet toespits op die direkte en
indirekte bydrae wat infrastruktuurontwikkeling kan maak ter bereiking van
ons doelwitte om goeie werk en ’n volhoubare lewensbestaan te skep.
Werkgeleenthede wat geskep word, vereis weer op hul beurt die ontwikkeling
van ons vermoë om die nodige ambagslui, ingenieurs- en projekbestuurders op
te lei. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[Ms P E ADAMS: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon members, the fiscal framework is not
only about figures, but also about people with aspirations, needs and
expectations. It is a monetary expression of the ANC’s political
preferences and how those preferences can be fulfilled in a fiscally
sustainable manner. It is both a political and financial instrument that
can be applied so as to ensure the execution of the policy programmes by
way of the allocation of financial resources to the respective levels of
government.

The Polokwane resolutions form the basis of the ANC’s medium-term
priorities and are its mandate to execute the will of the people. The
fiscal framework arises from the ANC’s resolutions as well as from the
Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement and the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework. These priorities form the point of departure when determining
the 2010 Budget allocations.

Political preferences regarding the collection and expenditure of revenue
are determined by the utilisation thereof in the reconstruction and
development of society. The success of any fiscal framework should
therefore be measured according to the rate at which South Africa is moving
from underdevelopment to the point where socioeconomic development and the
fight against poverty start to bear fruit.

Well-considered decisions must be taken and the fiscal framework must be
utilised to guide economic participation and patterns of ownership in
society. In this process the state must play a central and strategic role
in direct investment in underdeveloped areas and the state must give
direction to the investments from the private sector.

One of the immediate challenges facing South Africa is the putting into
operation of important infrastructure programmes that will test our
organisational, technical and strategic abilities. Our ability to ensure
that such programmes and projects will serve as a catalyst for the broader
development of the economy and our economic transformation targets will be
a critical indicator of the progress we are making in establishing a
developmental state that will serve as an instrument of economic
liberation.

Key elements of the investment programmes include, among others: the
upgrading of infrastructure for mass water supply; the upgrading of the
capacity to supply electricity; large projects for the upgrading of our
transport infrastructure; and the expansion of the scope of housing
programmes.

Such programmes, as well as continuous infrastructure maintenance, are not
one-off events. After the successful completion of the infrastructure
projects of the 2010 Soccer World Cup new projects now await, which have to
be developed between now and the end of the second decade of freedom.

The main aim is to ensure that infrastructure projects are integrated and
that a mutually supportive relationship exists between projects and other
policy objectives, such as skills development, industrial strategy and
macroeconomic management.

The main tasks to be considered in the fiscal framework are reflected in
the five priority areas for the next five years, as contained in the ANC’s
2009 election manifesto, namely: the creation of proper jobs and a
sustainable livelihood; education; health; rural development; food security
and land reform; and the fight against crime and corruption.

These priorities will be tackled with every means at our disposal such as
state resources, the vision of the Freedom Charter and the energy and
commitment of our people. In this way the needs of the youth, women, the
rural people, the poor, the aged and people with disabilities will be
addressed.
It is clear that we will have to focus on the direct and indirect
contributions that infrastructure development can make in the attainment of
our objectives to create proper jobs and a sustainable livelihood. The job
opportunities that we create will, in turn, require the development of our
ability to train the requisite artisans, engineers and project managers.]

Referring to the priority of education, it is noted that this sector
remains the largest item of spending in the 2010 Budget, giving meaning to
the commitment that it is the ANC’s number-one priority.

The ANC’s election manifesto stated that education is a means of promoting
good citizenship as well as preparing our people for the needs of a modern
economy and a democratic society, and it called for an increase in output
in areas of skills shortages. A framework for the development of skills in
the workplace was identified as a key requirement for economic growth in
South Africa and for the economic empowerment of our previously
disadvantaged majority.

There was also a renewed call for the revival of further education and
training colleges to promote skills development in the economy. Making
education one of the five priorities reaffirms the commitment of the ANC to
the improvement of the quality of education and access thereto. The 2009
curriculum review addresses the content and impact of an education mainly
on young people, their progression to higher education and their
preparation for entry into the labour market.
Decent work, which embraces both the need for more and better-quality jobs,
is a foundation of the fight against poverty and inequality. This is
central to the ANC-led government’s agenda and is a primary focus of its
economic policies. It intends to make maximum use of all the means at the
disposal of government to achieve this.

The 2010 Budget acknowledges that people want action on jobs, growth and
poverty and that a new common purpose must be built so that all the talent,
skills and resources to tackle our socioeconomic challenges can be used to
improve their own lives and communities. It also acknowledges that South
Africa needs a new growth plan, so that the key challenges are job
creation, poverty reduction and faster economic growth. The capacity of the
economy needs to be expanded to grow sustainably and to ensure that growth
must be more labour-absorbing.

The Budget’s approach to employment creation includes measures to encourage
industries and services that have significant job potential, stepped-up
implementation of the Expanded Public Works Programme, investment in
further education and skills development, encouragement of small business
development and entrepreneurship, and a new focus on promoting youth
employment.

Over the 2009-14 period, the second phase of the Expanded Public Works
Programme aims to create 4,5 million short-term job opportunities.

In October 2009, additional spending on the HIV and Aids programme was
announced, while further allocations mean that the number of people who are
on antiretroviral treatment will rise from 920 000 to 2,1 million in 2012-
13. Our total national and provincial health spending is projected to be
R105 billion next year.

A new grant to support on-site water and sanitation infrastructure as part
of the rural housing programme over three years is provided. Provision has
been made for the phased extension of the child support grant up to a
child’s 18th birthday while the state old-age pension and the disability
grant also increase.

As far as the fight against crime and corruption is concerned, additional
funds have been allocated to bolster the efforts to strengthen supply chain
management, while the relevant government departments have intensified
efforts to bring perpetrators of tender fraud to book. Data matching will
become a regular feature of a systematic approach to minimise abuse.

The Budget reflects the choices to be prioritised in spending. In its drive
towards the progressive realisation of socioeconomic rights through the
provision of social security for the poor, universal access to basic
services, and ongoing programmes to defeat poverty, the Budget remains
informed by the ANC policy and resolutions.

Strong growth in expenditure has resulted in a significant increase in
government’s share of the economy. In the past two years, government’s
share of GDP increased from 28,5 to 34,1 percent. Slowing economic growth
over the past 18 months, in an environment of a global economic crisis
affecting every region of the world, has resulted in a marked decline in
budget revenue. This left a deficit of 7,3%, which must be financed through
borrowing. It also had a dampening effect on economic growth in our own
country, with negative implications for investment, employment, incomes and
government revenue.

Since more needs to be achieved with smaller financial resources, diligence
in the management of public finance and savings within all spheres of
government has become more important than ever before. Wastage will not be
tolerated, and neither will corruption and mismanagement.

To succeed in combating corruption, it is not enough that people should
fear the law and punishment. They must also be ethical and possess the
ethos that makes corruption fail to thrive. Only through broad and
sustained efforts to create a shared future, based upon our common humanity
in all its diversity, can we succeed in defeating and eradicating the value
system that justifies naked selfishness represented by acts of corruption.

We welcome the robust and open debate occurring in the public domain
regarding corruption. We unapologetically encourage exposure of tender
manipulation as shown in the announcement by the Minister of Finance that
Treasury is to set up a unit to monitor and investigate corruption in
public procurement processes.

Building on the economic achievement of the last 15 years, the ANC will
continue to accelerate a sustainable, equitable and inclusive economic
growth path to address its stated priorities. The 2010 fiscal framework
reflects the choices to be prioritised in spending. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Gqr Z LUYENGE: Sekela-Somlomo, egameni lombutho wesizwe endingumbhobho wawo
emva kwemini nje mandikhahlele kuwe nakuzo zonke izinxibamxhaka ezikhoyo
kule Ndlu ibaluleke kangaka. Ndiza kugawula ndiwarhuqa kwaye ukwenza oko
mandithathe esi sixhobo sabantu abafundileyo ndenjenje. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[Dr Z LUYENGE: Deputy Speaker, let me greet you and all the dignitaries who
are in this very important House this afternoon on behalf of the ANC for
which I am the spokesperson. I will be brief and in so doing let me use
English to articulate my position.]

The debate on the transformation of the economy is within the budget fiscal
policy. The ANC recognises the necessity to transform the economy in order
to ensure that the Budget is not unevenly distributed. Budgets must serve
the needs and interests of the people as an instrument for change for a
better life for all.

The key task in building and transforming the economy is to ensure a strong
and responsive economic system that serves all South Africans. However,
this recognises that since 1994 the new government inherited an economy
that was designed to meet the needs of a minority. It was an economy in
deep structural crisis, and consequently required fundamental
reconstruction. This economic problem emanates from the discriminatory
policies of the apartheid era. Above all, the international economic
balance of forces contributed immensely to unequal patterns of distribution
adversely affecting the local economy. Similarly, at present, the South
African economy is affected by the international economic crisis as part of
the global economy.

During the years of transition in the 1990s, it was noticeable that the
South African economy was characterised by the excessive concentration of
economic power in the hands of a tiny minority of the population. In the
mid 1990s, four corporations controlled 81% of share capital. Twenty
families held shares worth R10,7 billion. Eighty-seven percent of the land
was owned by whites. Comrade Prof Turok, a fundi amongst us here, argues
that 80% of the country’s wealth was owned by 5% of the population.

On the one hand, the international climate demanded free-market
liberalisation and tended to constrain radical transformation of the
economy. As a consequence, the ANC has had to reach a compromise on
transition and economic reform from what had been envisaged over the years.
This was done with a view to future struggles rather than as an end in
itself. The impetus during the 1990s was the Freedom Charter’s clarion call
that the “people shall share in the country’s wealth”.

As a result of the vision based on the Freedom Charter since 1994, the ANC
government has made substantial achievements in transforming the economy in
the interests of the poor. In the same vein, the ANC recognises the huge
challenges of unemployment, poverty, and inequality.

This Budget must address the socioeconomic challenges. It could do so
probably through an economic policy that promotes an expansionist budget.
That requires economic growth which translates into the creation of decent
jobs. In this regard, fiscal policy must support economic growth, creation
of decent jobs and development. This could happen through ensuring that
government expenditure continues to grow in a sustainable manner.

It is noticeable that government expenditure growth has continued, reaching
34,1% of GDP during the 2009-10 financial year, particularly in some key
priorities. The current Budget has shifted from a surplus of 1% of GDP in
2007-08 to a deficit of 7,3% in two years. This is despite a global
economic crisis. However, the public debt is expected to rise from 23% of
GDP at present to about 40% in 2013 and will probably stabilise in 2015.

The ANC is committed to a mixed economy where the state, private sector
capital, co-operatives and other forms of social ownership complement one
another in order to fight poverty. This should be done in an integrated
manner to eradicate poverty and ensure economic growth. This economy should
be part of the evolving world economy which benefits from equal trade - or
the fight for equality - with the rest of the world.

Transforming the economy should mean integration into the Southern African
region and the continent as a whole. This is in line with the advancement
of the goals of development and African renewal indeed the advocate for a
sustainable economy for a better life for all.

The transformation of the economy should increase social equality and the
growing economy in a dialectical manner that changes the lives of the poor
people. This includes the creation of decent jobs. It also calls for
increasing productivity, labour-absorbing industrial growth, competitive
markets, small business, and the co-operative sector.

Part of the goal behind the transformation of the economy is to fulfil
economic rights through fair labour practices, social security for the
poor, access to basic needs, and the eradication of poverty.

The hon members of the ANC need to mobilise people and build a popular
hegemony in order to drive the transformation of the economy in their
interest. Transforming the economy requires a state-led process. It calls
for the building of a developmental state with the capacity to intervene in
economic direction for the purposes of service delivery. This state must
play a central and strategic role by directly investing in underdeveloped
areas and directing private sector investment. This calls for industrial
policy at the centre of developmental strategies.

The ANC is committed to ensuring the diversification of the economy, but
this is not a narrow economist notion simply to promote the accumulation of
wealth by the few. In this regard, the character of a diverse economy
should be informed by class, race, gender and the youth factor. This is to
avoid the exclusion of certain sections of society in the economy of South
Africa. It is further to transform the skewed patterns of ownership and
production, which reflect the legacy of apartheid, inequalities, dualism
and marginalisation.
The diversification of the economy has to ensure popular economic
participation for all people. This seeks to accommodate the historically
excluded groups. Part of this is to strengthen and ensure access to the key
sectors of the economy, involving minerals, mining, agriculture, forestry
and timber, Eskom and so on. There is a need for a state-driven industrial
policy to ensure effective and productive use of the Budget. This involves
the use of the Public Sector and the harnessing of private sector resources
that are essential.

There is a need to break away from the simplistic calls for the state
merely to create an investor-friendly climate. This has failed before and
it is not going to work now. A clear and coherent industrial policy needs
to inform budget, fiscal and other policy-making processes, including the
state’s planning capacity. Comrade Minister Rob Davies revealed a promising
and detailed Industrial Policy Action Plan, Ipap, which represents a step
forward along the new developmental growth path. This approach could
accelerate state-led development and economic transformation.

Uqoqosho nophuhliso lwamaphandle kunye namaphondo ngokubanzi luyinxalenye
yoxanduva lwenkqubo yokuvuselela uqhagamshelwano phakathi kwemo yocwangciso
nophuhliso lwabantu bakuthi. Uphuhliso lwamaphandle lufuna uhlaziyo
olukhawulezileyo, oko kukuthi ukusekwa kweSebe lezoPhuhliso lwaMaphandle
noBuyekezo lwezeMihlaba yindlela elungileyo eya phambili.
Uphuhliso noqoqosho lwamaphandle lwalusoloko lungahoyekanga kwiminyaka
yoorhulumente bengcinezelo. Yiyo le nto uxanduva lungamandla kubantu
bakuthi ezilalini nasezifama.

Inkqubo yezoqoqosho yasemaphandleni iza kuphuhla ixhamle kwinyathelo
elisungulwe ngurhulumente. Ucwangciso nokwakha ukhanyo kujongwe ukuba
iinkonzo ziyaya na ebantwini kulinyathelo elikhulu elo. Kunyembelekile ke,
masibhinqele phezulu siphakamise izinga lokwenza izinto phaya emaphandleni
ukwenzela kubekho imiphumela yophuhliso.

Kuyafuneka siqinisekise ekwakheni imisebenzi enesidima phaya ezifama
nakwiilali zakuthi. Oku kuquka uphuhliso loomama, abasebenzi nabantu
abatsha.

Zombini iimeko zophuhliso lwemihlaba kwakunye nezoqoqosho maziqiniswe
zisekelwe kwiimfuno zabantu phaya ekuhlaleni. Loo nto yenza uphuhliso
lomhlaba lube yinxalelenye yemo yezoqoqosho. Kuyafuneka ukuba ibe
ngabahlali abayinxalenye yokuthatha izigqibo ngemo yophuhliso lwabantu
nentlalontle.

UMongameli weli lizwe nongumongameli wombutho wesizwe kwintetho yakhe
yovulo lwale Ndlu inkulu kangakanana uyikhankanyile ngokumandla imfuneko
yokuthatha inxaxheba kwabantu bonke kuphuhliso lwemihlaba namaphandle. Olu
luxanduva olufanelekileyo ukwenzela ukuba uphuhliso noqoqqosho
lwasemaphandleni lube sezandleni zabantu, lungabi kwizandla zegcuntswana.
Kwinkomfa yombutho wesizwe i-ANC, eMorogoro ngo-1969, esinye sezindululo
sasilumkisa ngolu hlobo:

   Xa sisedabini kufuneka sazi ukuba sizabalazela abantu bonke. Singaba
   libali abanye sisuke sityebise iziqu zethu, sishiya ngasemva isininzi.

Lo yaba ngumgca onolwamvila nefuthe lokusikhuthaza singurhulumente we-ANC
emaphondweni najikelele. Eneneni sibe nemiphumela enje ngoku; siphuhlise
indlela, sakha izikolo neekliniki. Urhulumente uthathe unyawo evuselela
imithetho yokuhlala ukuze abantu bakwazi ukuzikhusela balwe ubundlobongela
bencedisana namapolisa, baze kwakhona badulise imikhwa yokurhwaphilizwa
kweenkonzo zikarhulumente yimigewu.

Ngokubhekiselele kwimfundo sithi abazali nabantu bokuhlala ngokubanzi
mabadlale indima eqaqambileyo kwikamva labantwana babo. Kuwo onke amaphondo
lisatyelwe eli khwelo. Ndithetha nje amawaka ngamawaka abafundi afumana
imfundo engahlawulelwayo ukuncedana nabazali abangathathi ntweni.

Senze ngakumbi ukubethelela amalungelo abo baphila nogawulayo. Ukongeza
apho, siqinisekisile ukuba bayaxhaswa ngumphakathi uwonke. Konke oku kuza
kufumana isandla esiqinileyo sikarhulumente ngokuthi ajonge aze adibanise
imali yokudiliza intlupheko kubantu bakuthi. (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraphs follows.)
[Rural and economic development in the provinces in general are part and
parcel of the programme to revive communication between development and
planning and our people. Rural development needs a speedy transformation
and that is the reason it was fitting to establish the progressive
Department of Rural Development and Land Reform.

Rural and economic development had always been marginalised by the previous
apartheid regime. That is why it is an immense responsibility for our
people in the rural areas and on the farms.

The rural economic development programme will grow and benefit from the
government’s initiative. It is a great step to have planning and oversight
to monitor service delivery to the people.

It is becoming extremely difficult, so let us pull up our socks in the
rural areas so that there is excellent development. This includes the
development of women, the proletariat and the youth.

Both economic and land development must be intensified and be centred on
the people’s needs within their communities. That makes land development
part of the economy. It must be the communities who take part in the
decisions about the development and welfare of the people.

The President of the Republic, who is also the President of the ANC, in his
state of the nation address emphasised the need for all the people to take
part in the development of the land and the rural areas. This noble
responsibility of rural economic development must not be in the hands of
the few, but must be owned by the people.

In the ANC’s Morogoro Conference in 1969, one of the resolutions warned us
that:

   In the struggle we must know that we are fighting for everyone. We must
   not forget others and enrich ourselves, leaving the masses behind.

This resolution was a mark that encouraged and influenced us as the ANC
government in the provinces and nationally. Honestly, we have now achieved
excellence; we have built roads, schools and clinics.

The government has gone the extra mile and came up with the idea of
establishing community police forums which assist with security and
fighting lawlessness together with the police. They also report corrupt
tendencies within government departments.

In respect of education, we asked parents and communities at large to play
an active role in the future of their children. All the provinces responded
to this call. Thousands of learners are receiving free education to assist
the struggling parents.
We have even endorsed the rights of those living with HIV and Aids. To add
to this, we have assured them of our support as the whole community. All
this will be done through substantial funding from the government by
organising funding in order to break barriers of poverty affecting our
people.]

The fight against corruption should be located within the national
democratic revolution. The objective of the national democratic revolution
is to promote economic and political transformation. This articulation has
become the ANC’s moral vision to restore ubuntu - the values of humanity.
The ANC’s understanding of moral values is rooted within the struggle. This
implies that corruption should not be viewed as a moral matter. It means
meeting the needs of the people and treating them with respect. It also
refers to the building of a society based on democratic values, social
justice, and the rule of law. It is noticeable that privatisation,
procurement, outsourcing, entrepreneurs, and tenders result in corruption,
and affect the economy. However, the election manifesto of the ANC and the
state of the nation address by the President call for measures to ensure
the transparency of the tendering system so as to ensure the accountability
of the public servants.

Corruption has a more devastating economic effect than the inflicted pain
of common crime, and it affects poor people indirectly. It is mostly the
crime of the rich and powerful. The ANC-led government notes that
corruption erodes the economic base for effective service delivery and
mostly affects poor people. It has the potential to reverse the gains of
the people and of the country as well.

The purpose of broad-based black economic empowerment, BBBEE, is to
deracialise the ownership and control of the economy. It has to encourage
productive opportunities by black people who have been excluded from the
economy over decades. BBBEE should not be narrowly responding to the
minority of blacks, but rather broadly target women, youth, poor people,
workers and rural communities to promote new enterprises to build skills
and the production needed by the economy.

It has to broaden ownership and participation by the majority of the people
and to ensure a competitive market in rural areas and the townships, not
just in the big cities. This requires the continued acceleration of
economic transformation, with fiscal policy talking to industrial strategy.

BBBEE has had successes and has weaknesses. It has taken strides to redress
past economic imbalances; broaden the economic base of the country in the
last 16 years; stimulate economic growth; create jobs while eradicating
poverty; and ensure the increasing participation of black people in the
productive capacity of the economy.

The shortcomings of BBBEE relate to the fact that sometimes its
implementation tends to be narrow, which might lead to unintended
consequences. It sometimes tends to be concentrated amongst a few males. It
tends not to be visible in rural communities, resulting in fewer women
entrepreneurs. Nevertheless, a lot has been said today, but the record of
the transformation of the economy is evident on the ground. There is no
turning back to a fragmented and skewed economy, and our fiscal policy
should assist this new economic path to a better life for all.

Nditsho ndisithi umbutho wesizwe uyayibethelela into yokuba le Ndlu imele
iwuphehlelele kwaye iwuthathe lo mgaqo-nkqubo usikhokelela phambili nomhle
kangaka. Ndiyabulela. [Kwaqhwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraph
follows.)

[The ANC mandates this House to endorse and welcome this policy which is
progressive and well articulated. [Applause.]]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Deputy Speaker and hon members, it is
indeed a fulfilling and very rewarding moment for me to see the
democratisation of our budget process, which has evolved over the past
decade. I wish to thank all those who have made it possible for us to be at
this phase of our constitutional democratic order. A number of Members of
Parliament played a huge role in actually seeing this legislation reach the
stage where we are now. In keeping with the provisions and tenets of this
legislation, it’s also encouraging to note that Parliament has risen to the
occasion and given full meaning to its oversight role.
Speaker after speaker has come to the podium and spoken about this fiscal
framework. It is encouraging to see how many of the speakers spoke in
support of the fiscal framework in general. I, therefore, would not want to
bore this House by going through each of the speakers’ comments and trying
to respond, as most of the members have supported it. I do, however, want
to focus on four general issues with regard to the points that have been
raised by some members.

If some of us believe that revenue needs to be higher than what we have
estimated, this needs to be the result of three potential factors: Firstly,
higher economic growth; secondly, faster recovery in corporate income tax;
and thirdly, higher tax rates. Dr George, the Treasury’s economic focus is
based on the latest economic data, mainly the SA Reserve Bank’s December
quarterly bulletin. They have been interrogated, discussed and ultimately
approved by the Ministers’ Committee on the Budget and have also been
presented to Cabinet for adoption.

As the Minister indicated, the budget we tabled on the 17th was a
collective statement of government. I want to assure you that the Minister
did not run away from the DA’s shadow minister of finance. The acting
Minister of Finance is Minister Pandor, because we act as a collective, and
Minister Pandor is here to represent the Ministry and I’m delegated here by
the very capable Minister. [Applause.] With those words I also want to
indicate that we take this process quite seriously, since the Minister is
abroad with the President on a state visit.

The focus is in line with consensus expectations and most commentators have
noted that they effectively take account of the fragile nature of global
recovery and associated risks. The recovery in corporate income tax is
based, firstly, on the corporate income tax data up until January 2010 and,
secondly, on our experience of the lags in corporate income tax over the
past 15 years, as well as the analysis of the expected recovery in
corporate profitability.

The corporate income tax data suggests a deeper decline in corporate income
tax than we originally estimated in the Medium-Term Budget Policy
Statement, MTBPS. While corporate profitability will recover somewhat, the
pace of recovery is expected to remain muted as economic activity continues
to remain subdued over the next two to three years. Even where corporates
successfully return to profitable positions, assessed losses built up
during the economic slump will mean that it may still be a few years until
we start seeing income tax revenue from many corporates.

These factors are considered by the Revenue Analysis Working Committee,
comprising Sars, the SA Reserve Bank and the National Treasury, and the
revenue focus is debated and approved by the Ministers’ Committee on the
Budget. This is meant to just indicate what processes we follow in order to
arrive at these figures. The October MTBPS contained a much more aggressive
increase in tax revenue as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product, GDP, and
this was partly based on the likelihood of a tax rate increase or
introduction of new tax instruments to raise revenue to close the gap
between expenditure and revenue.

Since October, higher nominal GDP has allowed us to close the financing gap
at a similar rate to what was proposed in our MTBPS, but without such an
aggressive increase in tax revenue as a percentage of GDP. This is an
extremely positive development and should be welcomed as it allows the
fiscus to continue to operate in a strongly countercyclical fashion,
supporting development and contributing to demand in the economy whilst not
compromising long-term sustainability. Higher tax rates too soon would have
the likelihood of threatening the sustainability of the economic recovery
and by implication would strongly undermine the long-term sustainability of
the fiscus.

The next point is on the fiscus sustainability pact that members and the
committee have raised as a recommendation. We welcome the idea of a fiscus
sustainability pact and look forward to engaging with Parliament as to the
likely purpose and form of such a pact. Any fiscal rule or pact must be
countercyclical in nature and this is notoriously difficult to achieve, as
illustrated by some of the bigger economies like the UK which, despite a
cyclically adjusted sustainability rule, finds itself facing severe fiscal
constraints and the likely burden of higher tax interest costs, lower
expenditure and higher taxes in the future.

The Chilean experience also, however, points to what can be achieved if a
fiscal policy can be disciplined and countercyclical. Successful fiscal
management has enabled Chile to respond to the economic crisis with higher
expenditure, which has placed them on an excellent path to economic
recovery and has played an extremely important role in limiting volatility
in the Chilean currency.

It is also important to note that the flip side of significant deficits,
when the economy is underperforming, is substantially lower deficits and
perhaps even surpluses when the economy is overperforming.

The third point is on the impact of the Eskom tariff increase – some people
have even referred to it as double taxation. Let me say that in the 2010
Budget our economic outlook assumed a 35% increase in the electricity
price. The impact of the awarded increase being closer to 25% is that real
GDP growth will be marginally higher and inflation will be lower in the
next three years. As a result, the impact of higher GDP growth would be
offset by the lower inflation and nominal GDP is not expected to change
very much as a result of the decision of the regulator. Therefore, the
impact on tax revenue and the budget framework is expected to be broadly
neutral.

The last point I want to refer to is the issue of how the fiscus will
respond if the growth remains low and the deficit high, as some of the
members raised this as a possible risk. The 2010 Budget clearly and boldly
states that the objective of a sustainable fiscal framework remains the
primary goal of fiscal planning. This is to be achieved through a
stabilisation of growth in expenditure combined with rising budget revenue,
thereby returning the fiscus to primary surplus, which allows us to
sustainably finance expenditure in the long run.

The committee report correctly identifies the economic risks to this
recovery. Should the economy fail to grow at the rates expected, it is
likely that the fiscal position and the trajectories of revenue and
expenditure will have to be re-evaluated. In this scenario we will be able
to choose from a combination of three options: firstly, we can further
reduce spending; secondly, we can meet our revenue targets through
additional taxation; and thirdly, we will be able to consider borrowing
additional resources.

While all three of these options entail both current and future costs, our
first instinct would be to extract further savings and efficiency gains to
government spending, as most members have alluded to, while attempting to
continue to support the economy through continued borrowing. We would also
seek to defer tax increases until the economy recovers, but we’ll obviously
have to balance this against the rising interest burden on the fiscus on
future generations.

The level and extent to which we wish to provide this support will be a
result of the outlook for the economy and the extent to which we expect the
economy to recover. Clearly, the longer we continue to borrow, the greater
the interest burden. With interest already the fastest-growing expenditure
item on the budget, any decision to continue borrowing would not be taken
lightly. It must also be recognised that while the economic outlook poses a
risk in the fiscal trajectory, any additional expenditure requirements on
the fiscus would also serve to undermine the sustainability and raise debt
costs.

For anyone interested in how we are dealing with the debt sustainability
and economic scenarios, let me refer you to the box in chapter four of our
Budget Review, which shows the results of Treasury’s modelling of various
economic and fiscal paths over the five years.

With these few remarks I want to take this opportunity to thank the
committees for having dealt with the fiscal framework in the manner that
they have, did for the time that they have put into it, this being the
first of these fiscal frameworks that we’ve tabled before you. We hope that
we will be able to engage with the budget process going forward in a much
more meaningful way as we have done, starting today. Thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I move:

   That the House adopts the Fiscal Framework and Revenue Proposals, and the
   Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on the Fiscal Framework and
   Revenue Proposals.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is that the Fiscal Framework and Revenue
Proposals as well as the Report of the Standing Committee on Finance be
adopted. Are there any objections? No objections.
Motion agreed to.

Fiscal Framework and Revenue Proposals and the Report of the Standing
Committee on Finance accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 15:50.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 19 FEBRUARY 2010
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson


   (a)      Report of the South African delegation to the 121st Inter-
      Parliamentary Union (IPU) Assembly in Geneva from 18-21 October 2009.


      Referred to the Parliamentary Group on International Relations for
        consideration.

                REPORT OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN DELEGATION TO THE
   121st INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION (IPU) ASSEMBLY IN GENEVA, 18-21 OCTOBER
                                    2009

1. Introduction

Established  in  1889,  the  Inter   Parliamentary   Union   (IPU)   is   an
international organisation of Parliaments of sovereign states.  The  IPU  is
one of the leading organisations in the promotion and strengthening  of  the
institutions of parliamentary democracy.  The organs  of  the  IPU  are  the
Assembly,  the  Governing  Council,  the   Executive   Committee   and   the
Secretariat.

The IPU supports the efforts of the United Nations, whose objectives it
shares, and works in close co-operation with.  It also co-operates with
regional inter-parliamentary organizations as well as with international
inter-governmental and civil society organzations that are motivated by the
same ideals.



The IPU’s membership currently comprises of 152  member  parliaments  and  8
international parliamentary assemblies who are associate members.

2. Agenda

The agenda for the 121st IPU Assembly was as follows:

 i. Election of the President and Vice-Presidents of the 121st  Assembly
ii. Consideration of possible requests for the inclusion  of  an  emergency
    item in the Assembly agenda
iii. Panel discussions on the subject items chosen  for  debate  during  the
    122nd  Assembly (Bangkok, Thailand, 27 March – 1 April 2010):

         • Cooperation  and  shared  responsibility  in  the  global  fight
           against organized crime, in particular drug trafficking, illegal
           arms sales, human trafficking and cross-border terrorism  (First
           Standing Committee on Peace and International Security).
         • The role of parliaments in developing South-South and Triangular
           Cooperation with a  view  to  accelerating  achievement  of  the
           Millennium  Development  Goals  (Second  Standing  Committee  on
           Sustainable Development, Finance and Trade).
         • Youth participation in the democratic  process  (Third  Standing
           Committee on Democracy and Human Rights).

iv. Report of the IPU Committee on United Nations Affairs


3. Delegation

The delegation to the 121st IPU Assembly consisted of: Mr  M  V  Sisulu,  MP
(Speaker and Leader of Delegation), Mrs N D Ntwanambi, MP, Mr  Z  L  Madasa,
MP, Mr J Selfe, MP and Mr M A Nhanha, MP. Mr G D Schneeman, MP and Ms S C  N
Sithole, MP were advisers to the delegation. The delegation was assisted  by
Mrs L Mokate, Head: International Relations, Ms T Lyons  from  the  National
Assembly Table and Ms Z Jardine of the International  Relations  Section  of
Parliament.  Ms N Sonjica of the International Relations  Section  supported
the Speaker during the conference.


4. Coordinating Committee of Women Parliamentarians


The Coordinating Committee of Women Parliamentarians met on Sunday, 18
October in closed session.  Mrs Ntwanambi attended the meeting.



5. Meeting of Southern Africa Group


The meeting was held on Sunday, 18 October.  At the beginning of the
meeting delegates from only four countries, namely, South Africa, Namibia,
Zambia and Lesotho were present.  The meeting was chaired by Speaker
Sisulu.  He indicated that as a result of a quorum not being present the
meeting would be informal and aimed at assisting to take matters of
importance forward to the Africa Geopolitical Group meeting later that day.



The meeting proceeded to a briefing by Mrs Margaret Mensah-Williams a
member of parliament from Namibia and a member of the Executive Committee
of the IPU.  Mrs Mensah-Williams briefed the group on matters that had been
raised within the Executive Committee and would now serve before the
Governing Council.



Suspension of membership of the IPU



The Executive Committee would recommend to the Governing Council that Niger
(which had ceased to function as a parliament) and Somalia (which was three
years in arrears in the payment of its contributions) be suspended in terms
of Article 4 of the Statutes of the IPU.  In addition, Liberia which was
also in arrears with its contributions, but for less than three years,
would only be allowed to send to two delegates to the Assembly and would
have no voting rights.

Request from Palestine



In respect of the request from Palestine that the Palestinian National
Council should be recognised by the IPU and not the Palestinian Legislative
Assembly as agreed to by the IPU in Geneva in October 2008, the Executive
Committee agreed that it would recommend that the IPU recognise only
“Palestine” in accordance with its rules and that the matter of which body
would be an internal matter for the Palestinians to resolve.



Observer status



The Executive Committee noted its concern that certain organisations which
had requested observer status of the IPU did not attend meetings of the
Union.  The Executive Committee was proposing that should an observer
member not attend for two consecutive years they should forfeit their
observer status.  It was further agreed that the Secretary-General would
write to observer bodies and remind them of the expectations of the Union
in respect of observers.



Financial results of the IPU



It was noted that the IPU would have a surplus of SFr. 400 000.  The
Governing Council would be requested to approve the use of an amount of
SFr. 150 000 for the following projects:



    • A human rights mission to Madagascar.
    • A seminar in Colombia on human rights.
    • The publishing of the survey results on women’s access to Parliament.
    • A seminar on CEDAW to be held in Rwanda.
    • Funds to be utilised by  the  Special  Adviser  on  Violence  Against
      Children to look at the functions of this office within the IPU.


The group agreed to propose Mr Selfe as the rapporteur for the Africa
Geopolitical Group on the financial results of the IPU.



Cooperation with the United Nations (UN) system



It was indicated that countries should give consideration to the manner in
which they would like cooperation with the UN to take place.  In principle,
the meeting agreed that the IPU should carve itself a meaningful role
within the United Nations system, but that it should nevertheless retain
its independence.



2012 IPU Assembly



The meeting was informed that Uganda had offered to host the 2012 IPU
Assembly and that negotiations around this were at an advanced stage.  In
addition, Uganda hosting the IPU in 2012 would coincide with its 60th year
of independence.  Canada which had previously requested to host the 2011
Assembly (which would now be hosted by Panama), but had been unsuccessful
as it could not guarantee that all countries would be granted visas to
enter Canada, had subsequently written to request that it host the 2012
Assembly.  Although it was indicated by Canada that the issue of visas
would be resolved, no written guarantee had yet been given.  It was the
position of the meeting that the candidature of Uganda, which was at an
advanced stage, should be supported by the Africa Geopolitical Group.



Supplementary Item on the Agenda of the Assembly



A supplementary item on the H1N1 virus was proposed for inclusion on the
Agenda of the Assembly.  It was, however, agreed that the rules did not
provide for the inclusion of a supplementary item and that a statement
should rather be heard on the matter, similar to what had been done during
the 118th IPU Assembly in Cape Town on the situation in Zimbabwe.



Emergency Item

On the proposal of South Africa it was agreed that the region would support
the proposal of an emergency item by Uganda, namely “Parliamentary
cooperation with the United Nations to promote investment in research and
scientific advancements to boost agricultural productivity and combat
drought-induced famine, floods and other natural disasters”.  It was also
proposed that Uganda be requested to give consideration to combining its
proposal with the proposal of Australia which also dealt with the food
security.



Composition of delegations



It was brought to the attention of the meeting that the Executive Committee
had noted that certain countries continued to send delegations
representative of only one gender.  Of the 12 single gender delegations to
the Assembly 11 comprised only men.



Term of office of the Secretary-General



The meeting agreed to support the proposal by the Executive Committee for a
four year renewal of the contract of the Secretary General, Mr Anders
Johnston, in line with the decision taken during the 120th Assembly in
Ethiopia.  This could lead to a vote within the Governing Council on the
position of the Secretary General.  Furthermore, both the Southern Africa
Group and Africa Geopolitical Group should look at proposing a candidate
from Africa to take over the position of Secretary-General in future.  A
discussion around how this transition would take place should be held at
the Africa Geopolitical Group meeting.



Draft Rules of Procedure of the Africa Geopolitical Group



The meeting also briefly considered the rules of procedure of the Africa
Geopolitical Group.   Neither Namibia nor Zambia, as members of the task
team that was appointed to look at the draft rules of procedure for the
Africa Geopolitical Group, were in a position to give a report on the work
of the task team.



It was agreed that the Southern Africa Group should be proactive in
resolving the matter of the Pan African Parliament (PAP) becoming an
associate member of the IPU.  The PAP had still not applied for associate
membership status.  In light of this it would be difficult for the PAP to
take over the organisation and financing of the meetings of the Africa
Geopolitical Group from the African Parliamentary Union.



Support for the President of the IPU



Ms Mensah-Williams requested that the group support the work of the
President of the IPU, Dr Theo-Ben Gurirab, by volunteering members from the
region to be rapporteurs for standing committees and ensuring that the
African agenda was furthered within the IPU.



6. Meeting of the Africa Geopolitical Group


The meeting was also held on Sunday, 18 October 2009.



Emergency Item



After deliberations on the proposals for emergency items, the group agreed
that it would support the proposal of Uganda on “Parliamentary cooperation
with the United Nations to promote investment in research and scientific
advancements to boost agricultural productivity and combat drought induced
famine, floods and other natural disasters.”  It was further agreed that
Uganda would meet with the 12+ Group to combine the proposal of Uganda with
that of Australia on global food security.



In regard to the proposed emergency items on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories and particularly Gaza, it was agreed that the
President Gurirarb should be requested to consider a presidential statement
on the matter, particularly in light of his recent visits to the region.



Report from representatives to the Executive Committee



The representative from Benin briefed the group on matters that had been
raised within the Executive Committee and that would now serve before the
Governing Council.  The meeting was informed that it should prepare for a
vote on the position of the Secretary-General to the IPU and the possible
appointment of an Assistant Secretary-General.



The representative from Kenya made a plea for Somalia to be assisted to pay
its arrears from the IPU’s surplus funds.  Ms Mensah-Williams indicated
that Somalia would need to be dealt with in terms of the statutes of the
IPU, but that Somalia should apply, with the assistance of the group, for
assistance from the IPU to settle its arrears.

Evaluation of cooperation with the United Nations system



After brief deliberation it was agreed that each sub regional group would
select one representative to serve on a task team to look at closer
interaction between the United Nations and the IPU.  It was also noted that
these inputs would be of importance to the World Conference of Speakers in
2010 as this matter would be deliberated during this conference.



Consideration of Draft Rules of Procedure of the Africa Geopolitical Group



South Africa raised its objection to the adoption of the draft rules of
procedure as it was unclear from the draft rules presented how the position
of the Secretary-General of the African Parliamentary Union (APU) would be
appointed.  Furthermore, matters relating to financing of the group were
not clear and the two thirds majority required to effect amendments to the
rules was considered very high.  It was also noted that not all countries
were members of the APU and therefore the suitability of this organisation
to convene the Africa Geopolitical Group was brought into question.  The
representative from Kenya also raised a concern that no provision was made
for interpretation to and from Swahili.



After deliberation the rules were adopted by acclamation (see Annexure A).



Financial results of the IPU



South Africa proposed that Mr James Selfe should represent the views of the
Africa Geopolitical Group on the financial results of the IPU.  The
proposal was forwarded to the secretariat of the group.

7. Meeting of the Governing Council


The Governing Council met on Monday, 19 October and Wednesday, 21 October.
South Africa was represented in the Governing Council by Mr Sisulu, Mrs
Ntwanambi and Mr Selfe.



The meeting noted that the United Arab Emirates had requested that a
supplementary item entitled “The role of parliamentarians and regional
parliamentary organisations in combating the H1N1 virus and containing its
economic and social risks” should be included on the agenda.  It was agreed
that this request would be dealt with by way of a statement on the matter.



The Governing Council adopted the recommendation of the Executive Committee
to suspend the affiliation of Niger to the IPU as the Parliament of Niger
had ceased to function following its unconstitutional dissolution on 26 May
2009.



It was also noted that discussions were ongoing with the parliaments of
Somalia and Papua New Guinea in respect of the payment of arrears to the
IPU.  These parliaments would be given until April 2010 to put their
financial affairs in order with the IPU.



The meeting received a report from the President of the IPU on his
activities since the 184th session of the Council, held in Ethiopia, and
also on the activities of the Executive Committee.  The salient points of
the presentation were:



    • The efforts to raise awareness on climate change ahead of the  Climate
      Change Conference that would take  place  in  Copenhagen  in  December
      2009.
    • The action in defence of peace and democracy especially with regard to
      the political situation in Honduras where the  military  expelled  the
      President, the continued house arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi  in  Myanmar
      and the continued appeal by the IPU for  a  negotiated  settlement  in
      Cyprus.
    • The completion of the mission to the Middle East by way of a visit  to
      Israel.
    • The undertaking of a goodwill mission to Zimbabwe which  was  followed
      by a visit by the Secretary  General.   During  the  latter  visit  an
      initial agreement was reached that the  IPU  would  provide  capacity-
      building support to the parliament.
    • The convening of a preparatory committee to lay the foundation for the
      World Conference of Speakers to be held in 2010.
    • The close monitoring of negotiations towards the reaffiliation of  the
      United States Congress to the IPU.
    • The strengthening of the IPU’s cooperation with regional parliamentary
      assemblies and bodies.


The meeting also looked at an interim report by the Secretary General on
the activities of the IPU since the 184th session of the Council, held in
Ethiopia.  It was noted that during this period a number of activities to
follow up on the results of the 120th IPU meeting had been held, the
regular programmes of the IPU had been implemented and preparations for the
121st Assembly had taken place.  In its work to promote democracy the IPU
undertook activities that would assist parliaments, promote human rights,
advance the role of women in politics, address development issues and
protect the rights of children.  In addition the IPU also worked closely
with the United Nations to ensure that the voice of parliamentarians was
heard and that parliamentary oversight of the work of the United Nations
took place.

The Secretary General also presented an interim report on activities of IPU
members in terms of action their parliaments had taken on the
recommendations contained in the resolutions of recent Assemblies, namely:



    • The role  of  parliaments  in  striking  a  balance  between  national
      security, human security and individual freedoms and in  averting  the
      threat to democracy.
    • Parliamentary oversight of state policies on foreign aid.
    • Promoting  diversity  and  equal  rights  for  all  through  universal
      democratic and electoral standards.


Only 36 members (23%) had responded to this request.  The South African
delegation noted that its response was amongst the 36.



The Secretary General presented a report on how parliaments had marked the
International Day of Democracy on 15 September.



The meeting proceeded to a presentation on the financial situation of the
IPU.  The Governing Council, by acclamation, approved the request from the
Executive Committee for the use of an amount of SFr. 150 000 from surplus
funds for the following unforeseen activities which were considered
important, but had not been budgeted for at the beginning of the financial
year:



    • A human rights mission to Madagascar.
    • A seminar in Colombia on human rights.
    • The publishing of the survey results on women’s access to Parliament.
    • A seminar on CEDAW to be held in Rwanda.
    • Funds to be utilised by the Special Adviser to the Secretary  General
      on Violence Against Children to convene an expert group meeting which
      will look at the work of this office.
    • The payment of the subsistence and travel costs of a senior  Canadian
      judge to assist the work of the gender equality programme.


The Secretary General made a presentation on the financial situation of  the
IPU as on 30 June 2009.  He also presented the 2010 consolidated budget  and
planned activities and requirements for  the  period  2010  –  2012  to  the
meeting. The full debate on this matter took place on  Tuesday,  20  October
with each geopolitical group presenting its comments and views.

Mr Selfe made a presentation on behalf of  the  Africa  geopolitical  group.
In  his  presentation  he  noted,  with  thanks,  the  scale  of  activities
undertaken by the President and the Secretariat of the IPU on behalf of  its
member  parliaments  in  respect  of  issues  that  vitally   affected   the
international  community.  In  particular,  he   noted   that   the   Africa
geopolitical group welcomed the  President’s  initiatives  to  intercede  in
trouble-spots and to heighten awareness of the role the  IPU  fulfilled.  It
was noted that the  wider  the  scale  of  these  activities  and  the  more
complicated the issues confronting the IPU, the more money  it  required  to
provide it with the ability to make a meaningful contribution. It  was  thus
commendable that the IPU had fulfilled most of its  obligations  within  its
budget and shown a slight surplus.

It was nevertheless of concern that in comparing the actual expenditure  for
2008 with what was budgeted  for  the  year,  more  was  budgeted  than  was
actually spent. The view as expressed that budgeting should be  as  accurate
as possible, so that it was clear what resources were being matched  against
specified priorities.  It was further noted that the report of the  Internal
Auditors had contained some worrying aspects  relating  to  the  absence  of
tendering procedures  for  services,  high  travel  costs  and  the  airline
benefit  programmes,  challenges   in   budget   preparation   and   project
implementation, as well as management challenges during the absence  of  the
Secretary General. These  aspects  were  only  partially  addressed  in  the
forthcoming budget and would  require  that  further  progress  be  made  to
address them.

Mr Selfe pointed out that that the Secretary General  had  remarked  earlier
that the budget was the most important document relating to  the  policy  of
the IPU and that the consolidated  budget  gave  not  only  the  figures  of
expected revenue  and  expenditure,  but  also  spelt  out  the  issues  and
challenges for each of the IPU’s major activities for the forthcoming  year.
It was therefore disappointing to note that in the consolidated  budget  for
2010, the issues and challenges for 2010 were, in most cases,  identical  to
the issues and challenges for 2009.   The  view  was  expressed  that  there
should surely be new issues and new  challenges  that  were  different  from
last year’s.

In conclusion it was noted  that  there  were  also  issues  and  challenges
facing the members of  the  Africa  group.  The  Africa  geopolitical  group
consisted of some relatively rich countries and some  very  poor  countries.
Some countries  were  confronted  with  civil  wars,  climate  change,  food
insecurity and mass migration. In some  states  in  Africa  there  was  even
difficulty in financing the  operations  of  their  parliaments.   Therefore
while it was recognized that  changes  had  been  made  to  the  assessments
formula, the Africa geopolitical group appealed to the IPU to find  ways  to
assist African parliaments  to  pay  their  contributions  and  remain  full
members of the IPU.


The meeting noted the reports on recent IPU specialised conferences and
meetings as well as the reports on the activities of committees and other
bodies.  The meeting also considered a proposal for further cooperation
with the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations which aimed to improve
cooperation and understanding between nations and peoples across cultures
and religions as well as to counter the forces that could fuel polarization
and extremism.  It was agreed that the IPU would consider the conclusion of
an agreement of cooperation with the Alliance of Civilizations.

The Governing Council received a report of the first meeting of the
Preparatory Committee established by the President of the IPU to assist
with organizing the 3rd World Conference of Speakers of Parliament.  The
South African delegation noted that Mr Sisulu formed part of this
preparatory committee.  The 3rd World Conference of Speakers was scheduled
to take place in Geneva from 19 to 21 July 2010.  The main theme of the
conference was “Parliaments in a world in crisis: securing global
democratic accountability for the common good.”  The theme would permit the
Speakers’ conference to address a large number of issues relating to peace,
democracy, development and cooperation.  This included gender equality and
action to stem violence against women, as proposed during the 2009 meeting
of Women Speakers.  The conference would also give Speakers an opportunity
to focus on the role of parliaments in furthering the objectives of the
conference at national level and in relation to multilateral processes and
institutions.  The conference would formulate recommendations relating to
the relationship between parliament, the IPU and the United Nations.
Speakers of all national parliaments of sovereign states (including both
Speakers in bicameral parliaments) would be invited to participate in the
conference.  The next meeting of the Preparatory Committee would take place
in New York on 16 and 17 November.



The Governing Council proceeded to a vote on the appointment of the
Secretary General.  At the conclusion of the vote Mr Anders Johnston was
appointed to a further term as Secretary-General of the IPU.



8. Meetings of the Assembly


The 121st Assembly was opened on Monday, 19 October by the President of the
IPU, Mr Theo-Ben Gurirarb.


The meeting proceeded to the consideration of requests for the inclusion  of
an emergency item in  the  agenda  of  the  Assembly.   Five  requests  were
initially received.  Uganda (on behalf of the Africa  group)  and  Australia
combined  their   proposals   to   form   the   following   proposed   item:
“Parliamentary action to ensure global food security”.  Oman (on  behalf  of
the Arab Group) and  the  Islamic  Republic  of  Iran  also  combined  their
proposals to form the following proposed item:  “The critical  situation  in
the occupied Palestinian territories and particularly Gaza”.  Cuba  withdrew
its proposal which dealt with the case of Honduras.

The Assembly proceeded to vote on the  two  proposals  before  it.   At  the
conclusion of voting the combined proposal of Uganda and Australia  received
the requisite majority of positive votes and  was  accordingly  included  in
the agenda of the Assembly.  The  meeting  proceeded  to  a  debate  on  the
emergency item that afternoon.

The Assembly also looked at the launch of the joint International  Committee
of Red Cross  (ICRC)  and  IPU  Handbook  for  Parliamentarians  on  Missing
Persons.  The Vice-President of the ICRC,  Ms  Christine  Beerli,  addressed
the Assembly.

The Assembly resumed  its  work  on  Wednesday,  21  October.   During  this
session  it  adopted  a  resolution   on   the   emergency   item   entitled
“Parliamentary Action to ensure Global  Food  Security”  (the  text  of  the
resolution is attached as Annexure B to this report).


9. Meeting of the Committee on United Nations Affairs


The Committee on United Nations Affairs met on Monday, 19 October.  Mr
Sisulu, Mr Madasa and Mrs Sithole, attended the meetings.



The committee discussed the results of the IPU survey on how parliaments
organise their with respect to the United Nations.  The aim of the survey
was to determine the manner in which parliaments related to the United
Nations system, special meetings and negotiating processes within the
United Nations and also in its country offices.  To date, 65 responses to
the survey, including that of South Africa, had been received.  The
preliminary results had highlighted a number of good practices.
Parliaments were urged to forward their responses to the IPU as the survey
would form part of the preparatory work for the Third World Conference of
Speakers of Parliament.



The meeting then proceeded to a debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional parliamentary associations and organisations.  It was
recalled that the 2005 Declaration of Speakers of Parliaments had requested
that the IPU cooperate more closely with regional parliamentary
associations and organizations in order to enhance coherence and efficiency
in global and interregional parliamentary cooperation.



The committee received a progress briefing on the reform of the United
Nations.  The committee was briefed by Mr M Traore, former Speaker of the
National Assembly of Burkina Faso, and Deputy Chair of the Inter-
Parliamentary Committee of the West African Economic and Monetary Union as
well as Mr N Seth, Director, Office for ECOSOC Support and Coordination,
United Nations Department for Economic and Social Affairs.   A report from
the Advisory Group visit to Viet Nam to assess the One UN reform process in
that country was also received.  The report of the Advisory Group called on
all parliaments to play a more dynamic role in the design, implementation
and oversight of national development plans, as well as the upstream
planning of the national budget.  The need for a coherent approach to aid
delivery at the national level was underscored as a tool to ensure greater
effectiveness, transparency and accountability of United Nations
operations.



The committee also received an update on negotiations on climate change
aimed at ensuring a strong international commitment during the United
Nations Climate Change Conference (COP15), scheduled to take place in
Copenhagen in December 2009, from Mr R Kinley, Deputy Executive Secretary
of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).  It
was noted that members of parliament should endeavour to join their
national delegations to the COP15 conference in December.  The IPU,
together with the Danish Folketing in Copenhagen, would convene a
parliamentary meeting on 16 December to provide members of parliament with
an opportunity to obtain first hand information on the main issues and
orientations of COP15.



The committee met again on Tuesday, 21 October.   During this meeting a
keynote address was received from Mr Jacque Diouf, Director General of the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO).  The committee
heard about the current food crisis and preparations for the World Summit
on Food Security scheduled to take place in Rome in November.  In his input
Mr Madasa indicated that there was a need to remove supply constraints
which impact on food security.



The committee proceeded to a briefing and discussion on the implementation
of the IPU resolution on “parliamentary oversight of state policies on
foreign aid” adopted at the 118th IPU Assembly in Cape Town.  The committee
also looked at the IPU’s involvement with the Development Cooperation Forum
established by the United Nations Economic and Social Council. The guest
speakers were Mr F de Donnea, MP (Belgium), Mr N Seth, Director, Office for
ECOSOC Support and Coordination, United Nations Department for Economic and
Social Affairs and Mr W Krafchik, Director, International Budget
Partnership Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (United States of
America).



During the presentation by Mr Krafchik it was noted that the Open Budget
Index, which looked at the role of parliaments in ensuring budget
transparency and accountability, ranked South Africa amongst the top five
countries in the world in respect of having sufficient information
available for their citizens on the budget and who had sufficient budgetary
oversight.  The other countries in the top five were France, New Zealand,
the United Kingdom and the United States.  It was noted that the more
dependent a country was on overseas development aid the less budgetary
transparency was available.  It was encouraging to note that several
developing countries were however moving towards greater budgetary
transparency and accountability.  It was noted that parliaments should
ensure that national budgetary accounts were made public, follow up on
annual audit reports, develop strategic partnerships between their
parliament, civil society and audit institutions, develop codes of practice
for greater budget transparency and contribute to a change in donor
practices in order that international aid was properly reflected during the
budgetary exercise.



10. Panel discussion:  Cooperation and shared responsibility in  the  global
   fight against organized crime, in particular  drug  trafficking,  illegal
   arms sales, human trafficking and cross-border terrorism (First  Standing
   Committee on Peace and International Security)


A panel discussion was held on the subject to be  considered  by  the  First
Standing Committee on Peace and International Security during the 122nd  IPU
Assembly in 2010.  Mr Schneeman and Mr Selfe attended the meeting.  A  draft
report entitled “Cooperation and shared responsibility in the  global  fight
against organized  crime,  in  particular  drug  trafficking,  illegal  arms
sales, human trafficking and cross border terrorism” was  submitted  by  the
co-rapporteurs Ms. Maria Teresa Ortuño (Mexico) and  Mr.  Apiwan  Wiriyachai
(Thailand) (the text of the draft report is attached as Annexure C  to  this
report).

The panel discussion was introduced by  Mr  P  Lapaque,  the  chief  of  law
enforcement of the Organised Crime and Money Laundering Unit of  the  United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.  He gave an indication of the extent  and
scope of transnational crime including  drug  trafficking,  arms  sales  and
human  trafficking  as  well  as  the  illicit  trade  in  oil,  counterfeit
medicines, toxic waste and human organs.

The profits from the  trade  are  huge,  with  counterfeit  medicines  trade
accounts being in the region of $60 – 70 billion.  Cumulatively the  profits
from transnational crime are equivalent to the GDP of  the  20th  wealthiest
nation.  Mr Lapaque urged delegates to push their governments to ratify  and
sign treaties and conventions relating to transnational crime, but  also  to
pass and implement legislation that  would  criminalize  and  penalize  such
crime.  He urged member states to develop a strategic vision  about  how  to
counteract crime and anticipate new forms of transnational crime.

Anthony Steen, Chair of the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Trafficking  of
Woman and Children for the Parliament of  the  United  Kingdom  argued  that
while there was enormous  interest  in  human  trafficking  few  people  had
actually met  a  trafficked  person.   There  were  too  many  international
conferences on the subject, but insufficient concerted action  to  interdict
it.  He said that it was estimated that 2 million people are  trafficked  at
any time, but only 22 000 victims have been identified.  He  too  criticized
the ineffectiveness of merely passing laws.  Laws needed to  be  effectively
implemented and his group used parliamentary questions to  prompt  the  Home
Secretary  and  other  cabinet  members  into  more  effective  action.   He
concluded with a thought provoking statement that there are now more  people
in bondage than were enslaved in the 300 years of  the  transatlantic  slave
trade.

During his input Mr Schneeman highlighted that the South African  government
had identified the  fight  against  crime  and  corruption  as  one  of  its
priority areas of focus for its five years  of  office.   South  Africa  had
become an important area in terms of drug trafficking  both  for  end  users
and as a transit hub to other countries.  As South Africa  moved  closer  to
the 2010 FIFA World Cup these activities were  likely  to  increase.   South
Africa had recognized these challenges and as such was a  signatory  to  all
relevant protocols, including the ratification and  implementation  thereof.
Steps had also been taken to ensure  greater  coordination  and  cooperation
between police forces at regional and international level.  In  this  regard
he cited instances of joint operations between South Africa and  the  United
Kingdom and also Mozambique.  Cooperation at the level of Interpol was  also
on the increase as South Africa moved towards 2010.  He also indicated  that
the government would increase  border  security  by  deploying  the  Defence
Force to take over from the South African Police Services.   Legislation  to
deal with  the  problems  of  human  trafficking,  drug  trafficking,  money
laundering and also the illegal possession of arms and ammunition  had  been
passed  by  parliament.   He  concluded  by  requesting   the   sharing   of
information of best practice between  parliaments  and  the  IPU,  increased
regional and international cooperation in the fight against crime  and  that
parliaments should play a greater oversight role in  the  implementation  of
legislation and policies  which  dealt  with  the  fight  against  organized
crime.

During the debate it became clear that  a  renewed  form  of  terrorism  was
piracy and that concerted international  action  was  needed  to  counteract
this menace.

11. Panel Discussion: The role of parliaments in developing South-South  and
   Triangular Cooperation with a view to  accelerating  achievement  of  the
   Millennium Development Goals (Second Standing  Committee  on  Sustainable
   Development, Finance and Trade)


A panel discussion was held on the subject to be considered  by  the  Second
Standing Committee on Sustainable Development, Finance and Trade during  the
122nd IPU Assembly in 2010. Mr Sisulu, Mr  Madasa,  Mrs  Ntwanambi  and  Mrs
Sithole attended  the  meeting.   A  draft  report  entitled  “The  role  of
parliaments in developing South-South  and  Triangular  Cooperation  with  a
view to accelerating achievement of the  Millennium  Development  Goals  was
submitted by the co-Rapporteurs Mr. François-Xavier de Donnea (Belgium)  and
Mr. Given Lubinda (Zambia) (the text of the  draft  report  is  attached  as
Annexure D to this report).

The  panelists  were  Mr  P  Pardeshi,  Senior  Coordinator   for   Regional
Operations, United Nations International Strategy  for  Disaster  Reduction,
Mr V Yu, Coordinator of the Global Governance for Development Programme  and
Mr Y Zhou, Director of the Special Unit for South-South Cooperation,  United
Nations Development Programme.

In his input Mr Sisulu noted that Parliament’s role in terms  of  conducting
oversight and ensuring accountability  as  well  as  being  a  platform  for
facilitating public participation in matters of national  and  international
importance should not be underestimated.  In the arena of global  governance
the line between the domestic and the international was often  blurred.   In
future, matters relating to international trade, the global economy,  peace,
security and climate change would continue to be areas  of  focus  not  only
for government, but also for parliaments as they engaged  fully  with  their
mandates.

South Africa viewed its relationship with countries of the South as  central
to its international relations policy  and  national  development  strategy.
In this regard it was centrally involved in activities of the  organisations
such as the India, Brazil, South Africa  Dialogue  Forum,  the  Non  Aligned
Movement, the Group of 77 and China.

Leaders in these fora had reiterated their support for  the  achievement  of
the Millennium Development Goals and this was evident  from  instances  such
as the establishment of the  IBSA  Facility  Fund  for  the  Alleviation  of
Poverty and Hunger. The Non  Aligned  Movement  had  also  called  for  full
implementation of the  Millennium  Development  Goals  and  a  comprehensive
evaluation of progress towards achieving  these  goals.  The  G77  sponsored
projects related to South-South Cooperation through funding from  the  Perez
Guerrero Trust Fund  and  promoted  South-South  trade  through  the  Global
System of Trade Preferences. To date the G77 and China had adopted  numerous
Ministerial  Declarations  which  reiterated   their   commitment   to   the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.

The earlier contribution made by Canada  in  which  they  highlighted  their
assistance to South Africa for the  work  it  had  undertaken  in   Burundi,
Rwanda and South Sudan was noted.  This was seen as a  concrete  example  of
triangular cooperation.

It was stated  that  parliamentarians  should  familiarise  themselves  with
their country’s progress reports on the  Millennium  Development  Goals  and
Poverty Reduction Strategy  Papers  which  were  a  key  mechanism  for  the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.

In conclusion it  was  stated  that  parliaments  had  a  role  to  play  in
overseeing the implementation of  internationally  adopted  declarations  by
the Executive.  Parliaments (through the IPU) had adopted a  declaration  in
2006 which clearly set  out  the  role  of  parliaments  in  overseeing  the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.  Parliaments should  remain
true to their commitment to ensure that  the  voice  and  interests  of  the
people  were  represented  all  aspects  of  governance.   In  this   regard
parliamentary international relations may be viewed  as  a  continuation  of
political  processes  and  discussions  which  take  cognisance  of   global
developments and a changing world order.  Parliament as the  representatives
of the people should therefore focus wider than on  national  policy  alone.
It is the duty of Parliaments to ensure that government follows  through  on
its international role and  implements  its  international  commitments  and
obligations.  Parliaments should actively participate in  various  regional,
continental and international forums  and  ensure  that  there  was  ongoing
engagement on important international relations issues.

12. Panel discussion: Youth participation in the democratic  process  (Third
   Standing Committee on Democracy and Human Rights)


A panel discussion was held on the subject to be  considered  by  the  Third
Standing Committee on Democracy  and  Human  Rights  during  the  122nd  IPU
Assembly in 2010.  Mr Nhanha and  Mr  Schneeman  attended  the  meeting.   A
draft report entitled “Youth participation in the  democratic  process”  was
submitted by the co-Rapporteur Ms Marija Lugarić (Croatia) (the text of  the
draft report is attached as Annexure E to this report).

The panelists were  Mr  A  Guerrero,  Partnerships  Manager,  Civil  Society
Partnerships, UNICEF, Ms N Shepherd, Head of  the  UN  Programme  on  Youth,
Division for Social Policy  and  Development,  Department  of  Economic  and
Social Affairs (UN-DESA) and Mr R Amalvy, Director, External  Relations  and
Marketing, World Scout Bureau.

In his input Mr Nhanha noted that  young  people  throughout  all  countries
were the future.  In most, if  not  all  the  struggles  for  democracy  and
justice, young people had put their lives on the line.  He noted that  South
Africa would never forget the young heroes and  heroines  of  1976  who  had
taken to the streets to protest Bantu education.  He said that  most  people
would agree that this had been  a  turning  point  in  the  history  of  the
struggle.

Youth in almost all countries were in the majority yet it was  a  disturbing
trend that youth apathy and low turn out for elections was  now  a  worrying
trend.  He stated that it was important to ask ourselves how best  we  could
draw young people into institutions of  democracy  and  develop  and  retain
them within the system.  In the South African parliament,  across  political
parties, 6,5% of  members  were  youth.   Mr  Nhanha  submitted  that  youth
parliaments should be compulsory for member states and that  in  forthcoming
IPU meetings one member of each delegation  should  be  a  member  from  the
youth in much the same way that the IPU expects women representation in  all
delegations to its meetings.  He concluded by indicating that if  we  invest
in our youth we would instill in them a sense of  patriotism,  we  would  be
encouraging them to take charge of their own destiny and allow young  people
to build their countries, provide solutions, give leadership and  be  better
citizens.


17.   Conclusion and Recommendations



The 122nd IPU Assembly and related meetings will take place  from  27  March
to 1 April 2010 in Bangkok, Thailand.

The delegation recommends  that  the  National  Assembly  and  the  National
Council of Provinces give  consideration  to  referring  the  subject  items
chosen for debate during  the  122nd  Assembly  in  2010  to  the  following
committees:
         • The Portfolio Committee  on  Police,  the  Select  Committee  on
           Security and Constitutional Development and the  Joint  Standing
           Committee on Defence to consider and report on the subject  item
           “Cooperation and  shared  responsibility  in  the  global  fight
           against organized crime, in particular drug trafficking, illegal
           arms sales, human trafficking and cross-border terrorism”.
         • The Portfolio Committee on Trade and  Industry  and  the  Select
           Committee on Trade and International Relations to  consider  and
           report  on  the  subject  item  “The  role  of  parliaments   in
           developing South-South and Triangular Cooperation with a view to
           accelerating achievement of the Millennium Development Goals”.
         • The Portfollio Committee on Women, Youth,  Children  and  People
           with Disabilities and the Select Committee  on  Women,  Children
           and People with Disabilities  to  consider  and  report  on  the
           subject item “Youth participation in the democratic process”.

The committees should be requested to engage with  the  subject  items  from
the perspective of South Africa with a view to influencing  the  resolutions
which will be adopted on these subject items during the 122nd IPU  Assembly.


The delegation further recommends that the National Assembly and National
Council of Provinces consider referring the resolution on the emergency
item, adopted by the 121st Assembly, entitled “Parliamentary Action to
ensure Global Food Security” to the Portfolio Committee on Agriculture,
Forestry and Fisheries, the Portfolio Committee on Environmental Affairs
and the Select Committee on Land  and Environmental Affairs with a view to
informing the next IPU Assembly of action taken by our Parliament to give
effect to the recommendations contained in the resolution.


CREDA INSERT – INSERT 2 – PAGES 171-174
CREDA INSERT – INSERT 3 – PAGES 175-178

CREDA INSERT – INSERT 4 – PAGES 179-189

CREDA INSERT - -INSERT 5 – PAGES 189-204

CREDA INSERT – INSERT 6 – PAGES 205-213


                          MONDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

   1. Withdrawal of Committee Report

    Please note: The Report of the Portfolio Committee on Social
    Development on the oversight visit to the Mpumalanga Department of
    Social Development, Nkomazi District Municipality, Mbombela Local
    Municipality, Mbombela and Nkomazi Municipalities’ Projects, South
    African Social Security Agency (SASSA) Office, paypoints and service
    areas, and National Development Agency (NDA) Projects, dated 3 February
    2010, published in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports of
    15 February 2010, is withdrawn.

TABLINGS

National Assembly

1.    The Speaker


    (a)     Report of the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) on the
        National and Provincial Elections for April 2009 [RP 167-2009].


                         THURSDAY, 25 FEBRUARY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1     Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 75 Bill:

          a) South African Post Office Bill [B 2 – 2010] (National Assembly
             – sec 75).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly
CREDA INSERT 1 – PAGES 221-227

CREDA INSERT 2 – PAGES 228-234.


                          FRIDAY, 26 FEBRUARY 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1     Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a money Bill:

          b) Appropriation Bill [B 3 - 2010] (National Assembly – sec 77).

    (2)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bill as a section 76 Bill:

          a) Division of Revenue Bill [B 4 - 2010] (National Assembly – sec
             76).

National Assembly

The Speaker
1.    Questions not replied to
      (a)   A letter dated 18 February 2010 has been received from the
          Leader of Government Business, informing members of the House
          that in response to a letter from the Speaker on the matter of
          questions that had not been replied to in 2009, he had written to
          all Ministers who had not replied to questions in the National
          Assembly and National Council of Provinces, requesting an
          explanation for each question that had not been replied to and
          information on how the Ministers intend ensuring that all
          questions are answered within the timeframes set by Parliament in
          the current parliamentary session.


   2. Replacement of memorandum on private member’s legislative proposal

      (a)   At the request of Mr P J C Pretorius, MP, the memorandum dated
          23  September 2009 to his private member’s legislative proposal,
          currently before the Committee on Private Members’ Legislative
          Proposals and Special Petitions for consideration and report, was
          replaced by a memorandum submitted to the Speaker on 12 October
          2009 and transmitted to the committee on 14 October 2009.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    SECOND REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE REPORT OF
THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON A PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF THE HANDLING OF CONFISCATED
ABALONE AT THE DEPARTMNENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS AND TOURISM, dated 16
February 2010
Background

On March 2008, the Auditor-General (A-G) engaged with the Accounting
Officer of the Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism (DEAT) to
perform a performance audit of the handling of confiscated abalone. The
audit was requested by the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA).
Various factors such as a lack of formal policy and or guidelines
regulating the receiving, storage and disposal of confiscated abalone were
identified.

The Auditor-General report demonstrated that measures were not in place to
ensure the timely awarding of tenders for the processing of confiscated
abalone; that uniform tariffs were not applied for the processing,
marketing, selling and exporting of abalone; and that the non-rotation of
the processing of abalone between the service providers resulted in the use
of an additional monitoring team.

Report of the Committee

The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) heard and considered
evidence from the Directors General and Heads of Departments of the
following Departments & Entities:
    • Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
    • Department of Police
    • Department of Justice
    • National Prosecuting Authority of South Africa
    • The South African Revenue Services (SARS)

Subsequent to the hearing, the Committee undertook a site visit to Paarden
Island abalone storage on the 6 October 2009 to investigate the handling of
confiscated abalone.
The Auditor- General raised specific concerns on the following and reported
as follows:

   1. Formal policy and guidelines regarding the handling of confiscated
   abalone

A formal policy and or guidelines relating to receiving, storage,
processing and disposal of confiscated abalone did not exist. A draft
policy was compiled during June 2007, but as at June 2008 it had not been
approved or communicated to all role players involved in the handling of
confiscated abalone: furthermore, the draft policy was not comprehensive
and specific in addressing various aspects relating to handling of
confiscated abalone.

With regard to the above, the Committee recommends as follows:

   a) A specific and comprehensive policy for the handling, storage,
      processing and disposal of confiscated abalone should be speedily
      approved and implemented.
   b) The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism should develop
      norms and standards relating to the handling of confiscated abalone.

   2. Status of court cases relating to confiscated abalone

The Auditor -General raised specific concerns and reported as follows:

     a) The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism did not monitor
        progress of court cases relating to abalone that had been
        confiscated. The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
        therefore did not know which court cases had been finalised and
        whether the samples kept for court purposes could be released for
        processing.
     b) The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism  records of
        samples of confiscated abalone kept for court purposes (as at 31
        July 2007) were incomplete and details of police investigations
        were not maintained for some of the samples of confiscated abalone
        which failure could complicate the monitoring and follow up of
        court cases.

With regard to the above, the Committee recommends as follows:

   a) The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism must put measures
      in place to ensure that the reported cases of confiscated abalone are
      timeously followed up and reported.
   b) The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism  must improve the
      record keeping of samples retained for court purposes; this will
      enable follow up on the progress of court cases
   c) For purposes of ensuring an improved conviction rate of cases relating
      to confiscated abalone, the Department of Environmental Affairs and
      Tourism must put measures in place that will ensure a structured co-
      ordination between Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism and
      other government departments.

   3. Awarding of tenders

The Auditor-General raised specific concerns and reported as follows:

    • There was a delay in the awarding of the tenders for the processing of
      confiscated abalone (MLRF 050) and monitoring of the processing
      function (MLRF 049) as well as the signing of memorandum of agreement
      (MoAs) with the successful service providers after the previous
      processing contract ended on 30 November 2005, therefore confiscated
      abalone could not be processed and was stockpiled.
With regard to the above, the Committee recommends as follows:

    • The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism must ensure that
      tender contracts are timeously renewed or awarded to prevent
      unnecessary delays in the processing of confiscated abalone and the
      resultant loss of potential income to the Department.

   4. Tariff structures for the processing, marketing, selling and exporting
   of abalone

The Auditor-General raised a specific concern and reported as follows:

    • The Marine and Coastal Management (MCM) awarded tenders for the
      processing, marketing, selling and exporting of abalone to three
      service providers at different tariffs. During the period October 2006
      to August 2007, the total actual costs (as invoiced by the three
      service providers) for processing, marketing, selling and exporting of
      173 794 kg of wet abalone amounted to R 7.1 million. If all the costs
      and invoices were based on the cost structure as per the MoA with the
      service provider who had the lowest tariff structure, the total would
      have been R 5.3 million.

With regard to the above, the Committee recommends as follows:

    • The Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism must develop a
      proper costing system that will address issues related to the
      standardisation of prices of service providers in accordance with the
      adopted costing methodology.

   5. Payment to the Project Monitoring Team (PMT)
The Auditor- General raised specific concerns and reported as follows:

     a) Invoices received from the PMT for services rendered during the 11-
        month period from October 2006 to August 2007 amounted to R 6.5
        million (Inclusive of VAT and disbursements), which is R 23 426
        more than the budget allocated for the 24-month period and R 1.2
        million more than the approved ceiling price.
     b) The MoA states that, the processing of abalone should have taken
        place on a rotational basis between the three service providers. No
        records existed that rotation occurred during the tenure of the
        existing service contracts up to August 2007. It is also estimated
        that the additional costs owing to the non-rotation of the
        processing of abalone between service providers during the
        corresponding period amounted to R 1.4 million.
     c) In respect of seven of the eleven invoices (63 per cent) analysed
        for the period October 2006 to August 2007, the PMT made use of
        additional staff or staff were used for more hours than indicated
        in the tender document. The total cost paid by the Department of
        Environmental Affairs and Tourism  for additional PMT staff
        amounted to R 1.8 million for the period October 2006 to August
        2007

With regard to the above, the Committee recommends as follows:

   a) The MCM must take effective and appropriate steps to prevent irregular
      expenditure.


   b) The MCM must in line with its procurement policy appoint one service
      provider, in order to ensure maximum economic benefits from its
      processing, marketing, selling and exporting of confiscated abalone.

        6. Further Recommendation

The Committee further recommends that the Accounting Officer should submit
a progress report on all the above recommendations to the National Assembly
within 60 days after the adoption of this report by the House.


2.    Third Report of the Committee on Public Accounts on the Report of  the
Auditor General on the Special Audit  of  the  N2  Gateway  Project  at  the
National Department of Housing, dated 16 February 2010

Background

The Auditor–General  (AG)  was  requested  by  the  National  Department  of
Housing (NDoH) to conduct a special audit of the N2 Gateway Project  (N2GP).
The  audit  focused  on  the  N2GP  from  its  inception,  as  well  as  the
achievements of  goals  regarding  sustainable  human  settlements  and  the
collaboration of the three spheres of  government  to  achieve  successfully
the common objective. The report highlighted challenges  encountered  during
the audit and management comments received from the  accounting  officer  on
the 3rd of March 2008 and 5th of June 2008.

Report of the Committee

The Standing Committee on  Public  Accounts  (SCOPA)  heard  and  considered
evidence from the  Director  General,  Head  of  Department  and  Accounting
Officers of the following Departments & Entities:
    • National Department of Human Settlements
    • Western Cape Department of Local Government and Housing
    • City of Cape Town

The Auditor-General made the following findings:

   1. Enabling Legislation and Policies


a)    The specific roles and functions allocated to  the  different  spheres
       of government in terms of the Housing Act (Act No. 107 of 1997)  and
       the Social Housing Policy were not adhered to.
b)     The  roles  and  responsibilities  set  out  in  the  Memorandum   of
      Understanding ( MoU) were not clearly defined  and  were  inconsistent
      within the terms of the MoU  resulting  in  uncertainties  as  to  who
      needed to take responsibility for, and  ownership  of  which  specific
      functions.
c)    The Steering Committee established  in  terms  of  the  memorandum  of
      understanding (MoU) stopped functioning properly after 10 May 2006

The Committee recommends that:

i)    The completion of the  project  must  conform  to  the  prescripts  of
       national legislation on housing and that the National Department  of
       Human Settlements should monitor compliance by all stakeholders.
ii)   The current Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) should  be  reviewed  to
       clarify the roles and responsibilities of all stakeholders

The Committee noting that the N2 Gateway Steering Committee is now  meeting,
recommendations that the Department of Human Settlements  must  monitor  the
proper functioning of the Steering Committee.

2.    Planning

The Auditor-General made the following findings:

a)    The business plan for the construction of the N2 Gateway  Project  had
      not been finalised and approved before the actual construction of  the
      N2 Gateway Project and no final approved business plan  was  submitted
      to the audit team.
b)    The  selection  of  beneficiaries  was  not  finalised  prior  to  the
      commencement of construction, resulting in the non-compliance with the
      prescribed requirement of  listing  the  beneficiaries  in  the  final
      business plan and  loading  these  details  on  the  National  Housing
      Subsidy database prior to the project implementation.
c)    The National Housing Code, The Breaking New Ground Plan and the  draft
      business plans were not consistent with regard to qualifying  criteria
      for proposed beneficiaries,  especially  in  respect  of  the  monthly
      household income requirement. It was  also  noted  that  the  criteria
      communicated to the different communities were not consistent.
 d)   The identification and securing of sufficient land was  not  finalised
      prior to the construction of the  N2  Gateway  Project  and  that  the
      geotechnical surveys indicating  the  true  seriousness  of  the  soil
      problems were not compiled prior to the commencement of the project

The Committee recommends that the Accounting Officer ensures:

i)    The final business plan be aligned to applicable policies such as  the
    National Housing Code and the Breaking New Ground Plan.
ii)   The selection of beneficiaries  should  be  in  line  with  applicable
    policies and  that  National  Department  of  Human  Settlement  should
    monitor compliance to applicable policies
iii)  Proper planning relating to the investigation of the availability  and
    suitability of land must be undertaken within realistic timeframes
iv)   The professional advice from dully  appointed  housing  official  with
    regard to the risks associated with  the  project  proposed  timeframes
    must not be compromised.
v)    Funding should be secured prior to the project implementation and  the
    three spheres of government should ensure that the funding required  in
    terms of business plan is realistic.

The Committee notes that since the hearing  with  the  Department  of  Human
Settlements, the business  plan  of  the  project  has  been  finalised  and
adopted by the Department.


           3. Appointment of previous Project Manager

The Auditor-General made the following findings:


That  the  previous  project  managers  were  appointed  in  spite  of   the
following:

a)    The company failed to prepare  its  costing  in  compliance  with  the
   terms and conditions of the request for proposal (RFP), thereby rendering
   its bid non-responsive
b)    The supply chain management committee  awarded  the  contract  to  the
   company based on  the  Goods,  Services  and  Property  Advisory  Board’s
   recommendation, notwithstanding the fact  that  the  company  was  ranked
   number 6 in the evaluation Committee’s assessment.
c)    The National Department of Human Settlements was  not  represented  in
   the evaluation committee even though the RFP stipulated it would comprise
   officials from all spheres of government.
d)    No formal contract was entered into with the company.
e)    The company  lacked  in-house  and  specialist  expertise  to  perform
   various project management functions, with the result  that  the  company
   obtained a third-party specialist and the company raised a  10%  mark-up,
   on these services.
f)    The project management fees paid to the company exceeded the  industry
   norm by 4% and were not performance based, as the company was  paid  254%
   of the original tender amount (R12  080  653)  although  the  N2  Gateway
   Project had not yet been completed.

The Committee recommends that:

i)    The Accounting Officers ensure that there  is  proper  monitoring  and
   compliance  with   applicable   legislation   and   policies   to   avoid
   mismanagement and abuse of processes.
ii)   The Accounting Officers  of  National  and  Provincial  Department  of
   Human Settlements and the City of Cape Town should take  disciplinary  or
   legal action against implicated individuals  and  initiate  processes  to
   recover lost funds where appropriate

           4. Quality of Units at Joe Slovo Phase 1

Various  physical  shortcomings  were  identified  by  the  Social   Housing
Foundation as well as the A-G which included, amongst others:

a)    The certificate of completion for the building contract issued by  the
      principal agent was erroneously issued.
b)    Compliance with registration and inspection procedures ranging from
      the National Building Regulations to the National Home Builders
      Registration Council (NHBRC), construction regulations, inspection by
      local authorities and professionals and occupation certificate could
      not be verified.
c)    Site inspections revealed numerous cracks in the  walls  and  floors,
      peeling paint, doors that were not fitted  properly,  loose  fittings
      and uncovered drain pipes and blocked drains.

The Committee recommends that:

i)    The Accounting Officers ensure that all physical defects be  rectified
      in line with building regulations.
ii)   Disciplinary actions or sanctions be instituted against officials  or
      entities that did not comply with building regulations and inspection
      procedures

        5. Conclusion

Subsequent to the hearing, the Committee undertook a site visit  to  the  N2
Gateway and  established  that  whilst  the  Department  contends  that  the
repairs were done to the units, there are serious deficiencies in the  units
and this matter requires urgent attention.

Report to be considered


3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water and  Environmental  Affairs
on the 2008/09 Annual Report of the Department of Environmental Affairs  and
Tourism, dated 2 February 2010

The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Water  and  Environmental   Affairs,   having
considered the 2008/09 Annual Report on 11 November 2010 of  the  Department
of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, reports as follows:

Summary

In terms of the financial component of the annual report of  the  Department
of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, there  had  been  no  unauthorised  or
irregular expenditure.  They had also received an unqualified  audit  report
from the Office of the Auditor-General.  The rating, (as the top  department
of  their  audit  list),  by  the   Department   of   Public   Service   and
Administration was considered a major accomplishment of the  functioning  of
the  department.   The  department’s  internal  audit  committee  was  fully
functional.

Members raised a number of issues and questions, which focused primarily  on
the following achievements and challenges:

 • The department was firstly commended on being selected top of  the  audit
   list by the Department of Public Service and Administration.
 • The functioning capacity of Environmental Impact Assessments.
 • The carbon footprint of government departments.
 • Abalone protection.
 • The establishment of environmental courts.
 • Municipalities’ readiness to integrate waste management plans.
 • Greening 2010.
 • Green grading of hotels.
 • Reduction of un-permitted waste sites.
 • The proclamation of Vredefort Dome as a world heritage site.
 • Hazardous medical waste.
 • Learnerships, bursaries and vacancies.

1.    Overview of the performance of the six programmes

The following programmes underpin the work of the department:

Programme 1:  Administration
Programme 2:  Environmental Quality and Protection (EQP)
Programme 3:  Marine and Coastal Management (MCM)
Programme 4:  Tourism
Programme 5:  Biodiversity and Conservation (B & C)
Programme 6:  Sector Services and International Relations (SSIR)

Input was provided on the transfers to each of  the  department’s  agencies:
iSimangaliso Wetland Park; South African  Weather  Services  (SAWS);  Marine
Living Resources Fund (MLRF); South African National Biodiversity  Institute
(SANBI);  South  African  Tourism;  and   South   African   National   Parks
(SanParks). Table 1 below reflects the transfers to each of the agencies:

|iSimangaliso Wetland|         |Financial assistance and infrastructure |
|Park                |48,701   |as provided for in funding legislation  |
|South African       |         |Financing assistance and infrastructure |
|Weather Services    |159,916  |as provided for in funding legislation  |
|Marine Living       |         |Financing assistance and infrastructure |
|Resources Fund      |195,351  |as provided for in funding legislation  |
|South African       |         |Financial assistance and infrastructure |
|National            |138,831  |as provided for in funding legislation  |
|Biodiversity        |         |                                        |
|Institute           |         |                                        |
|South African       |         |Financial assistance and infrastructure |
|National Parks      |434,869  |as provided for in funding legislation  |
|South African       |         |Financial assistance and International  |
|Tourism             |588,135  |Tourism Marketing contribution          |
|Total               |       1 |                                        |
|                    |565 803  |                                        |


Note:  The spending trends and performance of the agencies are reflected  in
their respective reports.

In addition to the information on transfers,  the  presentation  also  noted
the achievements and challenges of the overall  functioning  (financial  and
non-financial performance) of the department.  This included:

    • No unauthorised or irregular expenditure.
    • Compliance with all disclosures.
    • An unqualified audit report from the Office of the Auditor-General.
    • An acknowledgement for being on the top  of  the  audit  list  of  the
      Department of Public Service and Administration.
    • A fully-functional internal audit committee.
    • An under-spending of R7,  6  million.   This  was  allocated  for  air
      quality testing equipment but had not yet been put in place.

In detailing the budget and expenditure review for 2008/09 of  each  of  the
programmes,  Table  2  below  reflects  the  allocations  for  each  of  the
programmes:

|Programme            |Budget:    |Expenditure:  |Expenditure as % of|
|                     |2008/09    |2008/09       |final appropriation|
|                     |R’000      |R’000         |                   |
|Administration       |   204,357 |  204,357     |  100%             |
|Environmental Quality|   261,153 |  253,509     |97,07%             |
|and Protection       |           |              |                   |
|Marine and Coastal   |   434,325 |  434,325     |    100%           |
|Management           |           |              |                   |
|Tourism              |   693,229 |  693,229     |    100%           |
|Biodiversity and     |   399,344 |  399,309     |    99.9%          |
|Conservation         |           |              |                   |
|Sector Services and  |1,214,149  |1,214,149     |     100%          |
|International        |           |              |                   |
|Relations            |           |              |                   |
|Total                |3,206,557  |3,198,878     |    99.8%          |

1. Achievements and challenges – non-financial performance

In highlighting the achievements, challenges  and  corrective  measures  for
each of the programmes, emphasis was placed on the following aspects:

Programme 1:  Administration

Achievements
    • A 95% implementation of Performance Management Development System  was
      achieved.
    • A 100% of planned and funded training facilitated as part of workplace
      skills plan.
    • 100% employee related cases processed within prescribed timeframes.
    • In terms of staff demographics representivity, that of : gender,  race
      and people with disabilities, the following was highlighted:
         o 54% women; 90% blacks and 1.4% people  with  disabilities.   For
           2009/10, the department will approach the associations of people
           with disabilities to market opportunities.
    • 2 quarterly reports published and  the  draft  annual  tourism  report
      developed.

Challenges

    • The target of reducing the vacancy rate was not achieved due to delays
      in filling posts.  The department decided  to  coordinate  filling  of
      same groups posts as a single process to address delays in filling  of
      posts.

Programme 2: Environmental Quality and Protection

Achievements

    •  85%  of  Environmental  Impact   Management   (EIM)   of   provincial
      applications completed.
    • Three hundred and fifty two (352) provincial officials trained in  EIM
      review and decision-making related matters.
    • 100% of reported emergency incidents received timely response.
    • The number  of  investigations  into  reported  and  prioritised  non-
      compliance transgressions exceeded the target of 35.  Fifty  one  (51)
      administrative  investigations  were  conducted.    Approximately   59
      criminal investigations – top ten prioritised  for  investigation  and
      enforcement.
    •  Thirty  (30)  envisaged  authorisations  monitored  compared  to  the
      envisaged target of  15  environmental  authorisations  monitored  for
      compliance.
    • Nine hundred and seventy five (975) EMIs trained compared to  the  950
      envisaged targets.
    • Practical training  for  waste  management  capacity  development  was
      completed for 9 provinces.
    • The Draft Hazardous Waste Classification system is in place,  and  the
      departmental   adjudicating   committee   approved   appointment    of
      international service provider.
    • Asbestos phase out plans have been developed.
    • The final  draft  of  the  incineration  policy  completed  and  under
      consideration for promulgation for public comment.
    • The national policy on  co-processing  of  alternative  raw  fuels  in
      cement kilns was gazetted and will be finalised in 2009.
    • The Waste Management Act was promulgated in March 2009.
    • The envisaged target of 18 ambient  air  quality  monitoring  stations
      providing information to South Africa’s air quality information system
      was met.
    • There was a reduction of 27 metros and  district  municipalities  with
      air quality that did not meet  ambient  air  quality  standards.   The
      target set was achieved.
    • Climate Change  Policy:  The  Long-Term  Mitigation  Scenarios  (LTMS)
      process was formally concluded with decisions and directions from  the
      2008 July Cabinet Lekgotla and scenarios were published.

Challenges
    • The Environmental  Management  Frameworks  (EMFs)  completed  but  not
      gazetted.  Targets to be adjusted for the 2009/10 financial year.
    •  The  envisaged  target  of  conviction  rate  against   environmental
      transgressors for all cases that have been to court was calculated  at
      between 75 to 80%.  The cases have  not  gone  through  courts,  hence
      there were no convictions.  20 cases are with the National Prosecution
      Authority (NPA).
    •  The  envisaged  target  percentage  reduction  of  unpermitted  waste
      disposal sites was set at 30%.   There  was  a  2.5%  reduction.   The
      department depends on  municipalities  submitting  applications.   All
      municipalities  owning  116  sites  have  been  visited   to   compile
      applications.

Programme 3:  Marine and Coastal Management (MCM)

Achievements

    • Marine aquaculture scientific base and  management  regime  in  place:
      The target was set to initiate 5 marine aquaculture pilot projects.  A
      feasibility study was conducted for potential sites.  In terms of this
      sector, the policy and implementation plan finalised; feed experiments
      completed for kob; scientific publication  completed  on  reproductive
      cycle of scallops; a student has begun working on sea urchin  research
      and final report for joint  aquaculture  research  frontier  programme
      with the Department of Science and Technology completed.
    • South African strategic research presence  in  Antarctica  and  Marion
      Island:  The user needs for the new  vessel  was  compiled,  the  ship
      building contract advertised  and  four  companies  shortlisted.   The
      envisaged target for the demolition of the old base site will be reset
      to allow the Department of Public Works  and  South  African  National
      Antarctic Expeditions planned and carried out.
    • The 80% target managed capacity in place for declared Marine Protected
      Areas (MPAs) was reached.
    • The Integrated Coastal Management Bill was  signed  into  law  by  the
      President, now Act No 24 of 2008.

Programme 4: Tourism

Achievements

    • Skills availability in the tourism sector:  The National Tourism Human
      Resource Development (HRD) Strategy has been finalised and launched at
      National Tourism Conference in October 2008.
    • A total of 128 tourist guides have been trained on SA  Host.   Limpopo
      Province did not have a budget for accommodation and its training will
      take place during the 2009/10 financial year.
    • 135 training opportunities created.
    • 4 163  Small  Micro  and  Medium  Enterprises  (SMMEs)  trained.   The
      envisaged target of 1 000 was exceeded.
    • 135.6% of the approved 2008/09 sector skills plan targets implemented.
       The target was set at 50%.
    • 8 053 accommodation establishments graded in comparison to the  target
      of 6 365.
    • 40% of Tourism 2010 plan implemented.
    • The Final National Framework for 2010 Greening is in place.

Challenges

    • Levels of  tourism:  Black  Economic  Empowerment  (BEE)  Charter  and
      Scorecard Implementation:  50% if targets are met.  The tourism sector
      was unable to report since the sector  code  had  not  been  gazetted.
      This has since been gazetted in May 2009.
    • The target of organs of state procuring from empowered  establishments
      was set at 30%.  The tourism sector was unable  to  report  since  the
      sector code had not been gazetted

Programme 5:  Biodiversity and Conservation

Achievements

    • Systems to standardise trade and utilisation of threatened,  protected
      or commercial species established:  Regulations are developed for  the
      Draft Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Fauna
      and Flora (CITES).  The final draft document  for  Hunting  Norms  and
      Standards  developed.  A  database/register  was  developed  and   the
      register of bio-prospecting applications received.
    • Measures to manage threats to biodiversity developed:  A draft  status
      quo  report  on   National   Biodiversity   Framework   implementation
      completed.  The Draft Cycad Biodiversity Management Plan developed and
      the  final  draft  of  the  Alien  Invasive  Species  Regulations  was
      recommended for publication.
    • Conservation estate expansion to ensure ecosystem  representivity  and
      viability:  The national expansion plan approved and funds transferred
      to South African National Parks (SANParks).  Three suitable  grassland
      areas were identified.
    • Three (3) additional World Heritage Sites (WHS) proclaimed.  The  Cape
      Flora Region Protected  Areas  and  Mapungubwe  World  Heritage  Sites
      proclaimed.  The Draft Gazette Notice for Vredefort initiated.
    • The final Vhembe Biosphere Reserve nomination  proposal  submitted  to
      United Nations Education and Scientific Commission (UNESCO).
    •  Protected  Areas  Performance  Management:    National   process   on
      performance management system was presented with  recommendations  and
      approved.  Request extended to Robben Island management  authority  to
      submit Integrated Management Plan (IMP) through Department of Arts and
      Culture.  Workshops were held with stakeholders  to  review  Vredefort
      Dome to draft IMPs.  A meeting was held with iSimangaliso Wetland Park
      Authority to review and provide comments  on  the  draft  iSimangaliso
      Wetland Park IMP.
    • Research to support conservation and sustainable use  of  biodiversity
      facilitated:  The Biosafety Research programme is  not  yet  complete.
      However, the biosafety research strategy has been  prepared.   Ongoing
      consultations took place with the National Research  Foundation  (NRF)
      to assist with the development of the Biosafety Research  Strategy  to
      form part of the Biodiversity Research Strategy being developed by the
      Department of Science and Technology.  A  draft  guide  to  funding  a
      Centre of Excellence for Biosafety has been developed.
    • The draft work plan for elephant management submitted by South African
      National   Biodiversity   Institute   (SANBI)   was   submitted    for
      consideration.
    •  Levels  of   professional   regulation   and/or   co-regulation   for
      practitioners in the environmental  sector:   A  strategy  toward  co-
      regulation of recreational off- road driving and a business  plan  for
      implementation  has  been  completed.   The  draft  qualification  for
      Environmental Authorisation Professional Standards (EAPS) gazetted for
      public comment.  The task team had  a  final  meeting  to  incorporate
      comments received for  final  submission  for  registration  by  South
      African Qualifications Authority  (SAQA)  in  terms  of  the  National
      Qualifications Framework.
    •  Environmental  sector  skills  development  for  non-DEAT  officials:
      Adverts to recruit 50  learners  and  call  for  proposals  placed  in
      national papers.  All 7  host  employers  completed  the  shortlisting
      process to identify potential learners.
    • 4 364 learners have visited parks as part  of  programmes  to  enhance
      biodiversity appreciation.
    • Programmes to advance  vulnerable  communities  developed:  The  draft
      national co-management framework for protected  areas  was  finalised.
      This was presented to the DEAT/Department of Land Affairs  task  team,
      provinces and People  and  Parks  Steering  Committee.   The  proposed
      calculation for lease option was completed.
    • The draft post- land settlement support framework has been  developed:
       The cabinet memorandum on  the  settlement  of  land  claims  against
      national protected areas has been completed.  The  cabinet  memorandum
      has been approved for settlement of claims of Kruger National Park.
    • The Community Based Natural Resources Management (CBNRM),  Access  and
      Benefit Sharing (ABS)  implementation  plan  finalised.   There  is  a
      provision for provinces to report on progress  against  implementation
      of the plan.
    • Sector transformation  framework  developed  for  the  Black  Economic
      Enterprise Charter for the hunting sector:   The  transformation  task
      team was established under the Wildlife Forum and it met  and  drafted
      the Terms of Reference.

Challenges

    •  Systems  to  standards  to  standardise  trade  and  utilisation   of
      threatened, protected  or  commercial  species  established:   20%  of
      management plans submitted, pending review and approval by the issuing
      authority.  There was a delayed response  by  most  organs  of  state.
      Reminders, have however, been sent to the relevant organs of state.
    • The bioregion plan is  not  yet  completed.  However,  guidelines  for
      determination of bioregional boundaries have been published.

Programme 6:  Sector Services and International Relations (SSIR)

Achievements

    •   67%   of   international   multilateral   sustainable   development,
      environmental, biodiversity, marine and tourism agreements  negotiated
      and reported on.  65% of international governance, South-South, South-
      North,  bilateral  and  African  foreign  relations  and   cooperation
      agreements related to sustainable development, environment and tourism
      negotiated and reported on.
    •  The  TFCA  investment  catalogue  has  been  developed,  printed  and
      distributed.
    • The construction for Twee Rivieren Tourist Access facility completed.
    • Policy framework for 4x4 vehicles driving in TFCAs:  The  action  plan
      has been drafted and circulated to stakeholders for comments.
    • Implementation of poverty alleviation and job creation programmes  and
      infrastructure projects:  172 914 accredited training days created; 89
      196 non-accredited  training  days  created;  12  learners  linked  to
      projects.  The target was set at 30 but due to budgetary  constraints,
      the number of learners was reduced to 12.  433 permanent jobs created.
       14 214 temporary jobs created.  57% of overall  budget  allocated  to
      projects in presidential nodes and Project Consolidate municipalities.
       3 472 SMMEs used in project implementation to date.
    • All public entities complied  100%  with  governance  and  performance
      requirements.
    • 90% of graded establishments as per Tourism Grading Council  of  South
      Africa (TGCSA) have been geo-coded and mapped.
    • Databases for 7 nodal areas were targeted, but only 5 were  available.
      The migration to the new Geographical Information System (GIS)  server
      and software environment  took  much  longer  and  led  to  delays  in
      capturing of information.
    • Indicator report and update of State  of  Environment  Report  (SOER):
      South  African  Indicator  data  submitted  to  the  Southern  African
      Research and Documentation Centre’s Musokotwane  Environment  Resource
      Centre (SARDC-Imercsa) for inclusion  in  their  database.   The  SOER
      website has been redesigned to conform to DEAT branding and additional
      information was loaded.
    • Financial value of resources  raised  from  donors  to  support  South
      Africa and Africa’s  environmental  programmes:   Approximately  US$25
      million obtained and US$10 million in the  pipeline.   German  funding
      secured for 5 project proposals for  2008  (Euro  –  18  million)  and
      agreement on funding for 2009.  US$3 million from  Denmark  for  Basel
      Centre.
    •   Improving   intergovernmental    cooperation    and    coordination:
      Participated  in  100%  Integrated  Development  Plan  (IDP)  reviews.
      Cabinet Lekgotla report and report on  nodal  intervention  on  Social
      Responsibility Programmes and Projects (SRPP) initiative developed and
      submitted to Department of Provincial and Local government (DPLG).  Bi-
      annual reports submitted to DPLG on implementation of environment  and
      tourism 5-year local government strategy.
    • Review of National Environmental Management Act (NEMA) as  it  relates
      to environmental planning:  The approval of the proposal and gazetting
      of  new  CEC  successor  were  dependent  on  promulgation   of   NEMA
      amendments.
    • Review of NEMA as it relates to institutional arrangements: Amendments
      submitted to the President for assent and signature.
    • 100% compliance with tabling requirements for 2008/09 financial year.
    • 100% of parliamentary requests received responses on time.

Challenges

    • Number of Trans Frontier Conservation Area (TFCA)  Wildlife  Corridors
      and migratory routes established:   The  target  was  to  establish  2
      wildlife corridors and migratory routes.  These  were  not  completed,
      but the final draft joint management plan is awaiting signatures  from
      relevant participating authorities.
    • Three hundred and ninety five (395) of the targeted 500 youth enrolled
      in DEAT National Youth Service (NYS).  The target was not achieved due
      to delays in the approval of one of the three  NYS  business  plans  –
      implementation is continuing in the  2009/2010  financial  year  where
      outstanding enrolments will be achieved.

2.    Issues/questions considered by the committee

Whilst the department was congratulated on achieving the top rating  on  the
audit list from DPSA, for spending 100% of their budget, as  well  as  their
excellent financial management, a number of issues were raised  in  relation
to the synergy between the financial and non-financial  performance.   These
included:

    • The challenges encountered by the Vredefort proceedings.
    • The position of environmental impact assessment  (EIA)  practitioners.
      Linked to this, questions were raised about the possible formation  of
      a   coordinating   body   (to   undertake   EIAs)   that   could    be
      institutionalised to perform a regulatory function; and the timeframes
      for achieving this, was needed.  Another related question  focused  on
      whether the gazetted  standards  and  quality  of  practitioners  were
      equally applied to both people in provincial and national departments.
       Concern was raised about  the  Free  State  and  Gauteng,  which  had
      massive vacancies.
    • It was also important for the department to  add,  as  part  of  their
      performance management, a carbon  footprint  performance  measurement.
      It was good to note that there was a decrease on paper and energy use,
      but  this  must  also  include  reporting  on  reducing  their  carbon
      footprint.
    • Is there a process in the department or marine coastal management that
      looks specifically at a solution to the abalone fishery problem?   Was
      the science up to date on the fishery? The decision of whether to open
      it up fully, partially or not at all was based on science and  it  was
      therefore important that an informed decision was made.
    • Clarity was sought on what constituted priority crimes and  what  were
      the  priority  crimes  mentioned  in  the  report.   When  would   the
      environment courts be in place?  On page 24 of the report, mention was
      made of a baseline of 75% conviction rate and currently it appeared as
      if the department was sitting with a 0% conviction rate.
    • Another critical issue raised was whether municipalities  reported  on
      waste management plans and if they did this, whether it  was  assessed
      and  whether  the  department  kept  tabs   on   the   municipalities’
      implementation on waste  management.   Medical  waste  posed  a  major
      problem in many municipalities.  How was  this  critical  issue  being
      addressed by the department?
    • Some municipalities implemented greening programmes for 2010 and asked
      if there was an overall management of the greening of the  2010  World
      Cup.
    • Programmes like street cleaning were spoken about, but this was not  a
      sustainable  means  of  waste  management.   The  committee  wanted  a
      response to this.
    • Whilst the  department’s  energy  and  paper  reductions  were  to  be
      commended, there were questions raised around the reason for water and
      general  waste   reduction,   besides   paper   not   been   included.
      Environmental foot printing and not  only  carbon  foot  printing  was
      critical and needed  an  intergovernmental  interaction  on  this.   A
      number of governmental departments were meant  to  have  environmental
      plans in place.  Clarity was needed on whether these were in place and
      if the departments monitored this initiative.  A further question  was
      asked on whether the department was involved in hotels receiving green
      grading as a star rating based on environmental factors.
    • The plastic bag levy was set at 4c and if 2 billion were  sold,  there
      should be R80 million in their budget, but according  to  the  report,
      there was only R20 million.  A question was raised about the matter of
      R60 million.  In relation to this, a question  was  raised  about  the
      financial environmental levy which was not utilised by the department.
    • Members asked if the department could provide  a  workshop  on  global
      warming and climate change. It was important for legislators to  fully
      understand this subject matter to  impart  the  information  to  their
      constituents.
    • What was being done about reducing unpermitted waste disposal sites as
      there were people squatting on the dumping sites?
    • A question was raised about the way in which  the  department  defined
      capacity constraints in relation to existent vacancies.   The  vacancy
      rate issue was a common one amongst  many  departments  and  director-
      generals should meet to discuss this.
    • If environmental learnerships were placed in national newspapers,  how
      did the department transfer information to deep rural  areas  with  no
      access to the print media?  How did the department monitor the use  of
      monies transferred to its agencies?
    • The department reflected a high figure on training  of  Small,  Medium
      and Micro-Enterprises (SMMEs), but clarity  was  required  on  whether
      this was dispersed or only concentrated in  one  province  or  region.
      Linked to this was a question on the extent  to  which  SMME  training
      reached rural areas.
    •  What  compliance  and  regulatory  measures  were  in  place  against
      industries emitting greenhouses gas?
    • With reference to the employment of people with disabilities,  clarity
      was sought on the marketing  mechanisms  used  by  the  department  to
      employ people in this category.
3.    Responses

    • The self-regulation initiative of the EIA  practitioners’  institution
      was in progress.  The department has a business  plan  that  committed
      funding for all the planning and work connected  to  interacting  with
      the sector, and  the  qualification  board.   Although  R500  000  was
      allocated to this project, the release of funding by National Treasury
      within the current financial context, slowed the pace of the  project.
      Although the department had approved a three-year plan with  industry,
      commitment thus far, was only for a year.  There  was  uncertainty  on
      whether they would conclude their work in the following year, as  this
      was subject to availability of resources.
    • The department acknowledged the challenge in terms of EIA  functioning
      in terms of delays.  In  some  instances,  there  were  problems  with
      consultations, and in some instances, inexperienced service  providers
      were  given  the  responsibility  for  complex  EIA  processes.    The
      department had, however, launched  an  independent  review  to  assess
      improving efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  EIAs.   With  regard  to
      qualifications of practitioners,  these  had  to  be  established  and
      retained, so that there was a proper benchmarking  system,  and  these
      had to be included in the self-regulation package.
    • In relation to the vacancies of EIA practitioners, very few people had
      the proper qualifications,  and  this  had  a  ripple  effect  on  EIA
      processing.  The department  was  working  on  a  monitoring  database
      system, which would migrate to  a  national  environmental  assessment
      investigation system, once fully  operational.   The  provinces  would
      transmit data and this would be provided to MECs.  The database  would
      contain the number of  vacancies,  and  the  impact  of  this  on  the
      processing of  EIA  applications.   The  problem  was  attributed  to:
      insufficient support to provinces;  the  appointment  of  consultants;
      lack of and limited funding.
    • The performance management of the  carbon  footprint  was  an  initial
      initiative by the department, and the aim was to expand to  an  entire
      environmental footprint.  This was done on a small scale so  that  the
      department would monitor and measure this to put in place  a  baseline
      and to analyse the status quo.  A number of options for the success of
      this initiative was considered:
         o Current employees would have to be seconded to  undertake  this,
           as they could not afford to employ people.
         o If undertaken properly, this could be used as a litmus test  for
           other departments.
         o The use of clusters of departments was another option.
         o Introducing an element that requested the private  sector  (more
           especially,  listed  companies)  to  report  and  monitor  their
           footprints,  such  as  it  happens  with  financial   statements
           (environmental statements).  Five years could be  voluntary  and
           thereafter mandatory.
    • Abalone poaching:  MCM was unable to sufficiently address this  issue.
      The department would be putting together an enforcement strategy.  The
      department had listed what they considered priority crimes,  and  this
      included land contamination, hazardous waste contamination and abalone
      poaching.  The Department of Justice has a dedicated  Priority  Crimes
      Unit, and collaboration was essential between the two departments.
    • Environmental courts: The Ministers of Water and Environmental Affairs
      and Justice had met to discuss the administrative processes needed  to
      set up environmental courts.  Some of the issues discussed comprised –
      whether to establish a regional court or provincial courts or a normal
      court  with  extended  courts  dealing  primarily  with  environmental
      crimes.  The  baseline  figures  on  convictions  were  based  on  the
      previous financial year.  These were used to improve the system.
    • Integrated waste management plan:  Municipalities were to  have  these
      in place, as the legislation was passed  in  July.   However,  it  was
      difficult to force municipalities  to  comply.   Environmental  issues
      were competing with budgets for the provision  of  basic  services  in
      some  municipalities.    With   provincial   funds   as   well,   many
      municipalities did not prioritise environmental issues as permanent or
      sustainable interventions.
    • Greening 2010:  Broad framework guidelines were issued  for  all  host
      cities, such as greening of areas and waste minimisation.  Many of the
      host cities had to fund interventions, and the department did not have
      control of the strategies implemented.  However, for those host cities
      that they were co-hosting with donor funds,  they  would  be  able  to
      monitor the implementation.  At the end of the World Cup, host  cities
      are required to report on strategies implemented, success rate, and to
      reflect if the national strategy or framework was successful or not.
    • Environmental plans for all departments:  In terms of NEMA, all organs
      of government were compelled to develop  environmental  implementation
      plans to  be  approved  by  DEAT,  whose  functions  impacted  on  the
      environment.  All departments that managed environmental issues had to
      draft environmental management plans. The department  had  produced  a
      four-year plan, which was published  for  comment,  and  is  not  been
      monitored.  Some departments had not complied, and warning letters had
      been forwarded by the minister.
    • Green grading:  Agreement was  reached  on  the  system  and  industry
      initiatives for green grading and standards for grading in hotels  had
      already run as an independent system.  What was  not  realised  though
      was a national system that could be used as  a  national  benchmarking
      framework.  The department was partnering with the  National  Heritage
      Council to develop a system.
    • Unpermitted waste sites:  The department had intervened and  appointed
      service providers to assist municipalities.  One hundred  and  sixteen
      sites (116) had been identified.  Eighty eight (88)  applications  had
      been received.  Eighteen (18) sites  were  considered  unsuitable  for
      landfill sites.  The department was working with municipalities.  They
      would provide a report-back on this issue.
    • Costing for waste permitting functions and proper  infrastructure  for
      landfills:  This would  cost  the  state  an  amount  of  R5  billion.
      National Treasury was aware of this.  The department had  participated
      in the process of  municipality  infrastructure  grant  review,  which
      showed only 4% was allocated  for  waste  management,  which  included
      street lighting.
    • Vredefort:  The department had tried to proclaim the site as  a  world
      heritage site, but objections were raised by landowners.  By  February
      2010, the department hoped to resolve the issue with the landowners.
    •  Communication  on  environmental  issues:   Capacity  and   financial
      constraints limited the department’s  impact  of  awareness  in  rural
      areas.
    • Employment of people with disabilities:  The department was engaging a
      number of organisations to assist them.
    • Hazardous medical waste:  A policy on incineration was finalised,  but
      in many hospitals, the problem  with  medical  waste  was  exacerbated
      because of incorrect temperatures on incinerators.

4.    Recommendations

The committee, in deliberating on the input by the  department  and  members
of the committee, recommends the following:

    • The department to undertake awareness  programmes  on  climate  change
      throughout the country as many citizens were unaware of  environmental
      issues. The environmental education should incorporate  diverse  media
      forms and be inclusive of languages spoken in different communities.
    •  The  department’s  energy  and  waste  reduction   initiatives   were
      commended, but  this  should  be  expanded  to  include  water  as  an
      important resource.
    • The department should begin the employment  process  in  the  previous
      financial year, so that there are no long  time-frames  before  people
      start working.
    • In light of the delays in the completion of  EIAs  causing  delays  in
      some construction development  projects,  especially  in  the  Eastern
      Cape, (due to lack of capacity in the Department), a special  briefing
      by the Department should be scheduled in 2010.

Report to be considered.


4.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WATER AND ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS
ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND ANNUAL REPORT TRANS CALEDON TUNNEL
AUTHORITY (TCTA) AND WATER RESEARCH COMMISSION (WRC) FOR 2008/9, DATED 2
FEBRUARY 2010

The Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs, having
considered the 2008/9 annual report, on 20 October 2009 of Trans Caledon
Tunnel Authority (TCTA) and Water Research Commission (WRC) reports as
follows:

1.    Introduction

The Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs received
briefings from Trans Caledon Tunnel Authority and Water Research Commission
on 20 October 2009.  According to the Public Finance Management Act (No.1
of 1999), the Trans Caledon Tunnel Authority (TCTA) is a Schedule 2 public
entity, which reports to Parliament through the Minister of Water Affairs.
The TCTA is governed by Chapter 6 of the Public Finance Management Act (No.
1 of 1999), and derives its mandate in terms of the National Water Act (No.
36 of 1998). Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority (TCTA) is a state-owned entity
mandated by the Minister of Water Affairs to implement and fund raw bulk
water infrastructure.

TCTA implements projects, from the development of economically sustainable
funding models; to the design and implementation of environmental
management and socio-economic strategies; through to the design of cost-
effective and environmentally-sound infrastructure. In the past year, the
Trans-Caledon Tunnel Authority has performed remarkably well - reaching
significant milestones with two of its flagship projects, the Berg Water
Project (BWP) and the Vaal River Eastern Subsystem Augmentation Project
(VRESAP).

TCTA has also been mandated to undertake four new projects; funding and
implementation of phase two of the Mooi-Mngeni Transfer Scheme (MMTS-2),
the Komati Water Scheme Augmentation Project (KWSAP), phase two of the
Olifants River Water Resource Development Project (ORWRDP-2) and the Mokolo
Crocodile Water Augmentation Project (MCWAP).

The functions of the TCTA are to:

    • Provide integrated treasury management and financial advisory
      services, which is provided to the Department of Water Affairs and
      Forestry, and water boards.
    • Construct of infrastructure: The two projects that the TCTA is
      responsible for are the implementation and funding of is the Berg
      Water Project (BWP) and the Vaal River Eastern Subsystem Augmentation
      Project (VRESAP). In terms of the National Water Act (No 36 of 1998),
      TCTA fulfills a function of being a body that oversees the
      international treaty between Lesotho and South Africa by managing the
      Lesotho Highlands Project.
    • Assist with debt management.

2.    Presentation of the overview of the Trans Caledon Tunnel Authority
      (TCTA) Annual Report and Financial Statements for 2008/09 by Dr S
      Khoza

The TCTA was established in 1986 by the Department of Water Affairs and
Forestry with the purpose of constructing and financing infrastructure of
the South African part of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project. In 2000,
there were amendments in the notice of establishment, which resulted in
TCTA undertaking additional projects other than the Lesotho Highlands Water
Project. These included: funding of projects, debt management and
construction of infrastructure. The responsibilities of the Department of
Water Affairs remained that of revenue management, asset management
(relating to operations and maintenance and asset register) and water
resource management.

The TCTA is a special purpose vehicle for the financing and construction of
national water resources infrastructure. It’s classified as a Schedule 2
entity in terms of the PFMA. As a non-profit making organisation, the
nature of the actual costs charged, has resulted in lowering tariffs for
raw water. The TCTA operates in a very sound ring-fenced financial
environment as required by the National Water Act (No. 36 of 1998) and in
full compliance with the Public Finance Management Act (No.1 of 1999)
(PFMA).

The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs mandated TCTA to undertake
additional directives.  This entailed restructuring of the Umgeni Water
balance sheet as well as the funding and implementation of the following
projects – Berg Water Project, Vaal River Eastern Subsystem Augmentations,
Mooi-Mgeni Transfer Scheme Phase 2, Olifants River Water Project and Komati
Water Scheme project to the amount of R30.2 billion. It was awaiting a
directive from the Department of Water Affairs to construct Mokolo
Crocodile Water Project. The authority’s funding requirements for the next
three years was R19.8 billion.

2.1.  Overview of organisational performance

With regards to organisational performance, the authority presented its
highlights on the performance of its goals and targets for 2008/09 period,
which included:

    • Strengthening of organisational structure to ensure separation of
      roles between operations, finance and assurance.
    • Transforming the organisation to align with government development
      agenda.
    • Implementing projects in line with the Minister’s directives.
    • Maintaining strong financial systems which would lead to the authority
      receiving a clean unqualified audit.


Achievements

The authority reported the following achievements:


    • With regards to job creation, 4 379-person years of jobs were created
      through the Berg project of which 2 460-person years were from local
      communities. On the Vaal River Eastern Augmentation project 1 694 jobs
      were created, of which 1 319 sourced from local people.
    • As of 31 March 2009, the authority’s overall BBBEE transformation
      balance scorecard was sitting at 68. 24.
    • In March 2009 the Berg Water Project was inaugurated by the then
      President K Montlante.
    • The Vaal River Eastern Augmentation project was given to SASOL and
      Eskom.
    • Tenders for construction of the Mooi-Mgeni transfer scheme, Olifants
      River Water Project, Komati Water Scheme and Mokolo Crocodile Water
      Project were being finalised.
    • Lastly, increases on water sales from R2.1 billion in 2008 to R 2.5
      billion in 2009.

2.2.  Overview of Financial Performance

The authority’s financial performance was sound. For the 2008/9 financial
year, it received an unqualified audit. Some of the financial highlights
presented included:

    • The financial statements indicated that the authority was solvent over
      the long-term with no risk of being unable to service or repay its
      debt.
    • Full cost recovery was obtained through water sold to consumers.
    • Constant tariffs were maintained in line with consumer price index.
    • The authority was in a position to repay its debt within the
      reasonable period of 20 years.
    • The authority complied fully with PFMA requirements and in accordance
      with international financial reporting standards.
    • It also reported a net project .deficit of R77 million that relates to
      a shortfall in covering interest costs.


The balance sheet as at 31 March 2009 was as follows:

|Balance Sheet      |LHWP     |BWP       |VRESAP     |Total     |Total  |
|Summary            |2009     |2009      |2009       |March 2009|March  |
|                   |         |          |           |          |2008   |
|ASSETS             |         |          |           |          |       |
|Non-current Assets |16 280   |1 128     |2 269      |21 169    |19 677 |
|Current Assets     |2 504    |195       |95         |2 796     |1 276  |
|Total Assets       |19 706   |1 411     |2 844      |23 965    |20 953 |
|EQUITY AND         |         |          |           |          |       |
|LIABILITIES        |         |          |           |          |       |
|Reserves and       |(3 490)  |(27)      |(66)       |(3 629)   |(3 551)|
|deficit            |         |          |           |          |       |
|Non Current        |20 023   |993       |2 621      |23 637    |21 966 |
|Liabilities        |         |          |           |          |       |
|Current Liabilities|3 173    |445       |289        |3 957     |2 538  |
|Total              |19 706   |1 411     |2 844      |23 965    |20 953 |

2.3   Overview of Operations

The TCTA highlighted that it was currently a highly skilled organisation
with registered engineers and accountants and would most likely utilise
these skills in support of government’s agenda. However, it faced
challenges in that it can only work outside of its mandate of the Lesotho
Highlands project on other projects on a directive from the Minister of
Water and Environmental Affairs. It continued with professional development
of its employees to keep up with latest management practices.

The status of various projects was presented. It mentioned that the Lesotho
Highlands Commission was responsible for the oversight of the project
whilst TCTA remained responsible for the South African portion of the
project and has a right to receive water from the project. To date, Cabinet
has approved the completion of Phase 2 of the project subject to the
amendment of the treaty between South Africa and Lesotho planned for 2019.
In order to generate revenue, water was sold to domestic and industrial
consumers in the Vaal River Catchment. In relation to the Berg Water
Project, water supply to the City of Cape Town in the Western Cape has
increased by 18%. The project has received numerous engineering and
environmental awards, for example, it was awarded as the first dam to be
constructed and operated according to guidelines issued by United National
World Commission on Dams at the cost of R1.6 billion.

VRESAP supplied mainly Sasol and Eskom in Mpumalanga and the tariff system
was implemented. The completion of the project was envisaged for 2010 at an
estimated cost of R 2.7 billion. In relation to Mooi-Mgeni Transfer Scheme
Phase 2, it was reported that the project was still in its design and
tender stage. Although the project was only scheduled for completion in
2012, it was necessary to have the next augmentation complete by 2014 at an
estimated capital cost of R1.7 billion.

In reporting on the progress on the Olifants River Water Resource
Development Project, it was stated that the project was supplying major
economic centres and rural areas in Limpopo. However, there was a need to
address operational issues on the Olifants –Sand Transfer Scheme to ensure
that Polokwane received its allocated water. The first phase of the project
is scheduled for completion by 2012 at an estimated capital cost of R8
billion.

On the Komati Water Scheme, the TCTA mentioned that the scheme was intended
to supply Duvha and Kusile power station. Due to acid mine drainage, the
previous line to Duvha from Witbank could no longer be used. In reporting
on the Mokolo Crocodile Water augmentation project, feasibility studies
were conducted and a service provider appointed. Phase 1 and Phase 2 were
scheduled for 2012 and 2015 respectively.
In conclusion, the chairperson assured the committee that the authority was
led by a competent board with capacity to raise funds for water projects.
It would continue to maintain top credit rating and ensure that sufficient
bulk raw water for the country to drive socio economic development and
growth.

3.    Discussions and responses

The committee thanked the TCTA for the presentation and noted that the
annual briefing was a key mechanism to monitor the performance on service
delivery as well as financial statements.

The committee, after receiving the presentation, raised the following
concerns:

    • The committee noted that there was no mention of climate change in the
      TCTA presentation, especially its impact on the future construction of
      dams and water supply
    • Clarity was sought on the progress on the tabling of South African
      National Water Resource Infrastructure Agency
    • There was a view by Members of Parliament in Lesotho that the Lesotho
      Highlands Project was an apartheid project. There was further concern
      that the Lesotho people were displaced as a result. The committee
      wanted to know if there was any compensation paid to local people that
      were displaced during the construction.
    • The question of savings (surplus) came up and a question was asked on
      whether they had established a suspense account.
    • There was concern over the empowerment of small and local companies.
      The trend over the years has been that the TCTA utilised the services
      of big companies only for the construction of dams.
    • There was a concern over the sustainability of jobs, and training of
      engineers.
    • How did the authority disseminate information?

In response to the above, the following information was provided:

    • Although the TCTA has not conducted any research about the future
      impact of climate change, it was utilising the department’s planning
      documents on climate change.
    • The TCTA commented that the South African National Infrastructure
      Agency Bill was withdrawn from the parliamentary process due to non-
      consultation with Nedlac. However, it envisaged its re- introduction
      in the forthcoming year.
    • Concerning savings, the TCTA funding model entailed ring fencing of
      all its projects and therefore there was no suspense account.
    • In addressing the displacement of communities because of the Lesotho
      Highlands Project displacement, a compensation package and
      resettlement policy was in place. The World Bank was responsible for
      oversight and an Ombudsman dealt with complaints. To date, Lesotho has
      received R3 million from the royalties and South Africa paid for the
      full transfer of water.
    • Transformation and empowerment of small contractors: TCTA had a
      strategy to maximise BEEE and training on enterprise development; and
      has encouraged black small companies especially those owned by women
      to form joint ventures. For the VRESPA project, it reported that 10
      companies were involved in the construction of the dam.
    • To sustain the employment created, the authority ran a skills and
      capacity programme and internships.
    • The TCTA used local newspapers to disseminate information to the
      people.

REPORT ON THE WATER RESEARCH COMMISSION (WRC) ANNUAL REPORT AND FINANCIAL
STATEMENTS FOR 2008/9
1.    Introduction

The mandate of the Water Research Commission is derived from the WRC Act of
1971, (last amended in 1996) and performs the following functions:

    • Promoting coordination, cooperation and communication in the area of
      water research and development.
    • Establishing water research needs and priorities.
    • Stimulating and funding water research according to priority.
    • Promoting effective transfer of information and technology.
    • Enhancing knowledge and capacity building within the water sector.

The vision of the Water Research Commission is:

    • To be a globally recognised leader in providing innovative solutions
      for sustainable water management to meet the changing needs of society
      and of the environment.

The mission of the Water Research Commission:

    • The WRC is a dynamic hub for water-centred knowledge, innovation and
      intellectual capital.
    • To provide leadership for research and development through the support
      of knowledge creation, transfer and application.
    • To engage stakeholders and partners in solving water-related problems,
      which are critical to South Africa’s sustainable development and
      economic growth, and are committed to promoting a better quality of
      life for all.
The 2008/9 achievements noted by the Water Research Commission incorporate
the following:

    • Managed its strategic and operational affairs within sound corporate
      governance framework.
    • It facilitated local government understanding of the link between
      energy and climate change through research as required by the country
      such as research topics on sanitation and assistance to emerging
      farmers.
    • A new board was appointed by the Minister of Water Affairs and
      Forestry.
    • The commission has adhered to board charter and code of ethics.
    • It complied with the Water Research Act, PFMA and Treasury
      regulations.
    • The Audit Committee operated within clearly defined charter and
      oversees both external and internal audit.

2.    Overview on organisational performance

The WRC achieved most of its set financial performance targets for 2008/9
financial year including;

    • Receiving an unqualified audit report with no major audit findings.
    • Maintaining a strong balance sheet with no unfunded liabilities.
    • Increasing revenue to a total of R 11.5 million as a result of
      increases of water research levies.
    • Employing of African employees increasing to 56 %; and 60 % were
      female.
    • Increasing operating expenses by 25% due to increase in research
      funding and human resources related costs.

Challenges

In respect to challenges, a deficit of R3.3 million was reported.,This was
due to increased payments  on over-due research projects and non-cash year
end accounting adjustments as well as the net loss of R1 million due to
servicing of Water Research Commission loans.

3.    Overview on key strategic areas

The following achievements under the key strategic areas of knowledge
generation, capacity development, knowledge dissemination and impact, were
presented:

3.1.  Knowledge Generation

During 2008/9, the WRC supported the relevant institutions and its partners
in the water sector, including the:

    • Providing of knowledge for decision making processes.
    • Addressing of the issue of climate change.
    • Funding of research on development of mitigation strategies to ensure
      future sustainability of the country’s water resources and services.
    • Providing of sanitation and hygiene education
    • Contributing towards poverty reduction initiatives and wealth
      creation.
    • Supporting the food and fibre production activities.
    • Allocating of research funds and supporting 294 research projects, of
      which 78% (230 projects) were active and 22 % (64 projects) were
      completed.
    • Supporting of 39 solicited projects which translated to about 17% of
      active projects.
    • Utilising R115.7 million towards knowledge creation, sharing and
      dissemination.
    • Six hundred and thirty three (633) historically disadvantaged students
      were supported.
    • In building the research capacity in Africa, for example, the
      following was achieved: NEPAD, Water Research Fund of Southern Africa
      and Inter Academy Programme for Water.

3.2.  Capacity Building

The Water Research Commission supported a number of capacity building
initiatives such as the:

    • Young Scientists Awards.
    • Joint venture in developing a framework for Education and Training in
      Water with UNESCO.
    • SA Youth Water Prize.
    • Development of manuals and training material.

4.    Distribution of research project funds among key strategic areas
(KSAs) – planned vs. utilised (cash paid out) funds (2008/09 date in
brackets)

|KSA                                  |Planned %         |% of funds     |
|                                     |allocation of     |utilised for   |
|                                     |funds             |research       |
|                                     |                  |projects       |
|Water resource management            |31 (33)           |30 (34)        |
|Water-linked ecosystems              |14 (14)           |14 (15)        |
|Water use and waste management       |31 (3)            |31 (25)        |
|Water utilisation in agriculture     |24 (23)           |25 (26)        |

4.1.  Number of projects and project distribution

|Financial year                          |2007/08            |2006/07            |
|Total number of projects                |286                |314                |
|Number of active projects               |216                |243                |
|Number of new projects                  |67                 |56                 |
|Number of finalized projects            |70                 |71                 |
|Number of active solicited projects     |75                 |67                 |

4.2.  Income indicators

|Indicator                              |Budget     |2007/08 Year End (actual   |
|                                       |           |received)                  |
|Levies as percentage of total income   |87%        |85%                        |
|Other sources of income as percentage  |13%        |15%                        |
|of total income                        |           |                           |
|Leveraged income as a percentage of    |71%        |67%                        |
|other income.*                         |           |                           |


    • Leveraged income includes all other income with the exception of
      interest received.

4.2.1.      Consolidated Annual Financial Statements

    • The WRC received an unqualified audit report with no emphasis of
      matter.
    • It was in full compliance with the PFMA and International Financial
      Reporting Standards.
    • The variance between actual and budgeted income and expenditure is
      within the set performance target of 10%.

4.2.2.      Statement of financial position (Balance Sheet)

    • The financial position in terms of the balance sheet was stronger in
      the 2008/9 financial period in comparison to 2006/07.
    • There was growth in investments amounting to R5.8 million due to
      buoyant equity market and higher interest rates.
    • Trade receivables were lower due to levy payment received before year-
      end.
    • There were increases in cash and cash equivalents as well as cash held
      at year-end are in respect of commitments to research projects that
      were awarded.
    • Increases in trade payables totalled R10.5 million due to accruals for
      research contractors.

4.2.3.      Statement of financial performance (Income statement)

    • Net surplus of R15.0 million was recorded.
    • There was an increase in revenue of R11.2 million, resulting from
      increases in the water research charges, which is the WRC’s main
      source of income (constitutes 89.8% of its total income).
    • The WRC leveraged additional income of R13.3 million and its operating
      expenses increased by 5.0%.

4.2.4.      Consolidated annual financial statement for ERF 706 (Pty) Ltd

    • The WRC owns a building, which is designated as ERF 706.
    • Although it obtained an unqualified audit report, it reflected a net
      loss of R7 million due to servicing the loans received from the WRC
      (for building improvements). Its main source of income is derived from
      rent.

5.    Non-financial aspects of the work of the WRC

Capacity building

    ▪ During 2008/09, the WRC supported 664 students, 65% of them are from
      historically disadvantaged communities.
    ▪ The WRC supported:

         o Excellence in water awards.
         o Young scientists’ awards.
         o Joint venture in developing a framework for education and
           training in water with UNESCO.
         o The women in water, sanitation and forestry awards initiative.
         o The South African youth water prize.
         o Education material focusing on water for school learners (Grades
           R-10).
         o The water information network (WIN-SA).
Supporting Africa

    ▪ The WRC continued to strengthen its role in Africa.  Examples are:
      New Partnership for Africa’s Development (Centres of Excellence for
      water research); water research fund of Southern Africa; streams of
      knowledge – Africa and the inter academy programme for water.
    ▪ The WRC continues to establish strategic relationships with the
      continent.

Knowledge dissemination

    ▪ Effective knowledge dissemination using innovative mechanisms and
      tools are an ongoing challenge.
    ▪ During the year under review, the WRC has:

         o Published 108 research reports.
         o Conducted action research.
         o Published a book titled Our Water our Culture:  a Glimpse into
           South Africa’s Water History.
         o Organised an open day focusing on its support to DWAF (for
           DWAF).
         o Published Water SA and the Water Wheel (special edition of Water
           SA, May 2007, was focused on Nutritional Value and Water Use of
           Indigenous Crops for Improved Livelihoods).
         o Held about 19 technical workshops (for example, climate change,
           citizen voice, and sludge guidelines – 9 provinces).
         o Organised a number of conferences (for example, Integrated Water
           Resource Management 2008, wastewater management conference) and
           participated and exhibited in many local and international
           conferences.

Innovation and knowledge application

    ▪ The WRC supports the development of new applied knowledge and water-
      related innovations.
    ▪ The WRC strives to transfer innovative methodologies and practices
      to end-users using different knowledge transfer mechanisms.
    ▪ The WRC has supported the commercialisation of products (where
      required).
    ▪ During 2007/08, the WRC undertook a number of impact studies
      addressing the impact of water research funded by the WRC.

6.    Discussions and responses

In its oversight of the annual report of the WRC, the committee raised the
following issues:

    • Through its media management initiatives, there was a lack of
      management in waste water to custodians of water sources.
    • Clarity was sought on the level of consultants employed by the WRC.
    • There was a question on whether the WRC had any relationships with
      educational institutions in the country.
    • The committee wanted to know if the Department of Water Affairs and
      Forestry provided adequate parental support to the WRC.
    • Sanitation was problematic in rural municipalities, as they did not
      have funds to build new sewerage plants, and what mechanisms did the
      commission use to assist municipalities?
    • What kind of support did the commission offer to previously
      disadvantaged students?
    • With regards to water quality and soil degradation, the committee
      wanted to know how often the department uses the WRC research.
    • To what extent was WRC involved in acid mine drainage?
    • The WRC was asked to comment on water scarcity.

In response to the above, the following was detailed:

    • According to the commission, instruments to relay information to the
      end user entailed various information dissemination methods, such as
      print, electronic, radio, etc.
    • Partnerships with various institutions of higher learning existed, for
      example, the WRC concluded a memorandum of understanding with various
      tertiary institutions as well as SALGA.
    • The WRC acknowledged the use of its research by the sector, not only
      the department.
    • The WRC reported that consultants were only providing technical
      advice.
    • Departmental assistance to the WRC was based on the mutual
      relationship and consultation to ascertain the needs.
    • The issue of sanitation was now under the Department of Human
      Settlements, but the WRC has conducted research on dry sanitation,
      composition of sludge, and urine separation. This is based on the
      practice in Sweden eco-villages.
    • There was also a study conducted on the decentralisation of sanitation
      services in the Eastern Cape, which aimed at using different
      approaches such as dual pit latrines.
    • About water quality degradation, a substantial amount of research was
      undertaken. DWAF regions were consulted, and steering committees
      formed.
    • The WRC noted that there are solutions to acid mine drainage. This
      involves closing down the mines that are not in operation. Research
      showed that a combination of mine acid and sewage was neutralised, it
      could result in good use.
    • The commission remarked that there was no water crisis for the near
      future but the problem was water management.  Therefore, water usage
      and rainfall patterns must be correctly monitored and managed.

Recommendations

The Committee recommends that:

    • TCTA should submit their BEEE strategy the next time they present
      before the committee.
    • An oversight visit could be organised to visit the TCTA projects, as
      well as the WRC offices.
    • The WRC should appear before the committee at a later stage to provide
      a briefing on its views on issues of water scarcity.

Report to be considered.

                            MONDAY, 1 MARCH 2010

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT - insert1-amended – PAGES 272-293

                            TUESDAY, 2 MARCH 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Social Development


          a) Social Assistance Amendment Bill [B 5 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – proposed sec 76) [Explanatory summary of Bill and
             prior notice of its introduction published in Government
             Gazette No 32986 of 1 March 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Social
             Development of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

National Assembly

The Speaker

1. Referral to Committees of papers tabled

     1) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Appropriations for consideration and report in terms of the Money
        Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act, 2009 (Act No 9
        of 2009):

           a) Appropriation Bill [B3 -2010]
           b) Division of Revenue Bill [B4-2010]


     2) The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Appropriations in terms of the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and
        Related Matters Act, 2009 (Act No 9 of 2009):

           a) Estimates of National Expenditure [RP3/2010]
           b) Budget Review 2010 [RP4/2010]
           c) Speech of the Minister of Finance on the National Annual
              Budget [RP5/2010]


     3) The following papers are referred to the relevant portfolio
        committees for consideration in terms of their respective mandates
        and the Money Bills Amendment Procedure and Related Matters Act (No
        9 of 2009):

           a) Vote No 3 – Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs –
              to the Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and
              Traditional Affairs for consideration and report.

           b) Vote No 4 – Home Affairs – to the Portfolio Committee on Home
              Affairs for consideration and report.

           c) Vote No 5 – International Relations and Cooperation – to the
              Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation
              for consideration and report.

           d) Vote No 6 – Public Works – to the Portfolio Committee on
              Public Works for consideration and report.

           e) Vote No 7 – Women, Children and People with Disabilities – to
              the Portfolio Committee on Women, Children and People with
              Disabilities for consideration and report.

           f) Vote No 8 – Government Communication and Information System –
              to the Portfolio Committee on Communications for consideration
              and report.

           g) Vote No 9 – National Treasury – to the Standing Committee on
              Finance for consideration and report.

           h) Vote No 10 – Public Enterprises – to the Portfolio Committee
              on Public Enterprises for consideration and report.

           i) Vote No 11 – Public Service and Administration – to the
              Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration for
              consideration and report.

           j) Vote No 12 – Statistics South Africa [Minister in The
              Presidency: National Planning Commission] – to the Standing
              Committee on Finance for consideration and report.

           k) Vote No 13 – Arts and Culture – to the Portfolio Committee on
              Arts and Culture for consideration and report.
           l) Vote No 14 – Basic Education – to the Portfolio Committee on
              Basic Education for consideration and report.

           m) Vote No 15 – Health – to the Portfolio Committee on Health for
              consideration and report.

           n) Vote No 16 – Higher Education and Training – to the Portfolio
              Committee on Higher Education and Training for consideration
              and report.

           o) Vote No 17 – Labour – to the Portfolio Committee on Labour for
              consideration and report.

           p) Vote No 18 – Social Development – to the Portfolio Committee
              on Social Development for consideration and report.

           q) Vote No 19 – Sport and Recreation South Africa – to the
              Portfolio Committee on Sport and Recreation for consideration
              and report.

           r) Vote No 20 – Correctional Services – to the Portfolio
              Committee on Correctional Services for consideration and
              report.

           s) Vote No 21 – Defence and Military Veterans – to the Portfolio
              Committee on Defence and Military Veterans for consideration
              and report.

           t) Vote No 22 – Independent Complaints Directorate – to the
              Portfolio Committee on Police for consideration and report.

           u) Vote No 23 – Justice and Constitutional Development – to the
              Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development
              for consideration and report.

           v) Vote No 24 – Police – to the Portfolio Committee on Police for
              consideration and report.

           w) Vote No 25 – Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries – to the
              Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries for
              consideration and report.

           x) Vote No 26 – Communications – to the Portfolio Committee on
              Communications for consideration and report.

           y) Vote No 27 – Economic Development – to the Portfolio Committee
              on Economic Development for consideration and report.

           z) Vote No 28 – Energy – to the Portfolio Committee on Energy for
              consideration and report.

          aa) Vote No 29 – Environmental Affairs – to the Portfolio
              Committee on Environmental Affairs for consideration and
              report.

          ab) Vote No 30 – Human Settlements – to the Portfolio Committee on
              Human Settlements for consideration and report.

          ac) Vote No 31 – Mineral Resources – to the Portfolio Committee on
              Mining for consideration and report.

          ad) Vote No 32 – Rural Development and Land Reform – to the
              Portfolio Committee on Rural Development and Land Reform for
              consideration and report.

          ae) Vote No 33 – Science and Technology – to the Portfolio
              Committee on Science and Technology for consideration and
              report.

          af) Vote No 34 – Tourism – to the Portfolio Committee on Tourism
              for consideration and report.

          ag) Vote No 35 – Trade and Industry – to the Portfolio Committee
              on Trade and Industry for consideration and report.

          ah) Vote No 36 – Transport – to the Portfolio Committee on
              Transport for consideration and report.

          ai) Vote No 37 – Water Affairs – to the Portfolio Committee on
              Water Affairs for consideration and report.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1. The Minister of Finance

           a) Estimates of National Expenditure 2010 [RP3/2010]

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

1.    REPORT OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS ON AN OVERSIGHT
VISIT TO TELKOM SA, DATED 24 FEBRUARY 2010:

1.    INTRODUCTION

The Portfolio Committee on Communications, as part of its oversight mandate
took a decision to visit Telkom SA in Melkbosstrand on Wednesday, 21
October 2009. The purpose of the visit was to provide Members an
opportunity to understand the nature of the work of this entity and to
exercise oversight. The delegation consisted of the following Members: Mr I
Vadi (Chairperson), Mr SE Kholwane, Ms MN Magazi, Ms WS Newhoudt-Druchen,
Ms SR Tsebe (all from the ANC); Mr NJ Van Der Berg (DA) and Mr KM Zondi
(IFP).  The secretariat consisted of the following parliamentary staff
members: Mr Thembinkosi Ngoma (Committee Secretary) and Mr Luvo Nxelewa
(Committee Assistant).

2.    MEETING WITH SENIOR MANAGEMENT
The Committee met with Telkom senior management, including the Group Chief
Executive Officer, Mr Reuben September at the Cape Town International
Convention Centre (CTICC). Mr September briefed the Committee on Telkom’s
Strategy going forward. The briefing document was not distributed as it
contained confidential information.

3.    TOURING TELKOMSA - MELKBOSSTRAND

After the discussions at CTICC, the Committee went on a tour of the Telkom
SA Plant in Melkbosstrand.  Upon arrival, Mr Johan Meyer presented as
follows on Submarine Cables and International bandwidth:

Telkom undersea capacity has been significantly upgraded, especially with
2010 FIFA World Cup in mind. There are at least nine undersea
telecommunication cables including South Atlantic 3 and South Africa Far
East (SAT3 & SAFE) that will connect various parts of Sub-Saharan Africa to
the rest of the world by the end of 2011. By the end of 2009, the SAT3 and
SAFE upgrades to at least three times their current capacity will be
concluded.

South Atlantic 3 and South Africa Far East commenced service in 2002 with a
mere 20Giga bites per second of equipped capacity but, by the end of
October 2009, both cables will be equipped with capacity that exceeds
300Gb/s.

Telkom and SAT3/WACS/SAFE (S3WS) partner their abilities by using S3WS for
2010. The SAT3 provides the shortest route to Europe and SAFE is the
shortest link to Asia. The S3WS offers fully diverse solutions out of South
Africa. It will have sufficient spare capability to transport all World Cup
2010 requirements out of South Africa. Telkom provided numerous solutions
to FIFA and the international broadcasting community during the 2009
Confederations Cup. It is also a proud National Supporter of FIFA World Cup
2010.

4.    CONCLUSION

Members were taken on a tour of SAT3 and SAFE. The Committee found the tour
informative and productive as it broadened the Members’ knowledge and
understanding of the work of Telkom.


