---
title: 'National Assembly - 14 September 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-09-14
---

TUESDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:06.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                                 NEW MEMBERS

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I wish to announce that the vacancies
which occurred owing to the resignations of Mr R Coetzee, Mr A T Fritz, Ms
D van der Walt and Mr A Louw have been filled with effect from 10 September
2010 by the nominations of Mr T D Harris, Adv L H Max, Mr J F Smalle and Mr
D J Stubbe, respectively.

In terms of section 48 of the Constitution members of the National Assembly
must swear or affirm faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to the
Constitution before they begin to perform their functions in the National
Assembly. Will two members please accompany the members into the Chamber?
[Applause.]

                                    OATH

Mr T D Harris, Adv L H Max, Mr J F Smalle and Mr D J Stubbe, accompanied by
Mr M Waters and Mr A C Steyn, made and subscribed the oath, and took their
seats.

                                 NEW MEMBER

                               (Announcement)

The SPEAKER: Order! Hon members, I wish to announce further that the
vacancy which occurred owing to the resignation of Mrs P de Lille has been
filled by the nomination of Ms S U Paulse, with effect from 10 September.
Will two members please accompany the member into the Chamber.

                                    OATH

Ms S U Paulse, accompanied by Mr M H Hoosen and Mr J J McGluwa, made and
subscribed the oath, and took her seat.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION
Mr M M SWATHE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House, I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House -

     1) debates the increase in the level of home and business robberies
        across South Africa, as revealed by the crime statistics for the
        period 1 April 2009 to 31 March 2010; and


     2) comes up with possible solutions to reduce this category of crime.

Mrs S V KALYAN: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That the House debates the environmental degradation of the world’s most
  sensitive landscapes and ecosystems, with special reference to the
  current state of the Tibetan Plateau, and how such degradation can
  negatively impact on the cultures and livelihoods of certain groups of
  people.

Mr S B HUANG: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting of the House
I shall move, on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates a plan to accelerate the challenge of delivering
   water and sanitation to meet the 2014 deadline.
Mr M E GEORGE: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move, on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the total unacceptability of the continued
   bungling by the police in respect of taking blood samples of drunken
   drivers in the manner specified by the law in that once again, for the
   umpteenth time, the metro police in the so-called Jub Jub drag-racing
   accident, in which four innocent schoolchildren lost their lives, bungled
   the taking of blood samples as a result of their ineptitude and thereby
   caused the case of the state to be weakened.

Mr M MNQASELA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move on behalf of
the DA, the following motion:

   That the House debates the termination of the special dispensation to
   Zimbabwean citizens and the implications this decision may have for the
   South African economy and social cohesion.

Ms A MDA: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the House
I shall move on behalf of Cope:

  That the House debates the dire consequences of the disruption of trial
  examinations in Port Elizabeth by the ANC-aligned Sadtu and in Limpopo by
  the ANC-aligned Cosas, after a strike that has halted progress in
  preparing learners for the final examinations.
Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

   That the House debates on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of
   democracy in exile in Tibet the endorsement of the Rome Declaration on
   Tibet, adopted by the Fifth World Parliamentarians’ Convention on Tibet,
   which seeks to recognise limited autonomy for debate within a unified
   China, and full recognition of the human rights and liberties which we
   hold dear and which are enshrined in our Constitution and which are still
   denied to the people in Tibet and the people in China alike.

Mr A M FIGLAN: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that I shall move the
following motion, on behalf of the DA, on the next sitting day of the
House:

   That the House debates how the appropriate planning of human settlement
   projects can contribute to the fight against crime and whether
   interventions are required to improve planning in this regard.

Mrs H N NDUDE: Mr Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

  That the House debates whether all medical practitioners in private
  practice as well as all medical facilities, such as hospitals and
  clinics, have current contracts with registered waste management
  companies for the safe disposal of all medical waste, considering that
  two KwaZulu-Natal hospitals were alleged to have dumped medical waste
  illegally in Mariannhill three months ago.

Mr D D VAN ROOYEN: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates rural development plans to assist with the
   implementation of large-scale programmes to establish new smallhold
   farmers.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:

   That the House debates the recently released World Economic Forum Global
   Competitiveness Report of 2010 to 2011, which ranks South Africa number
   137th out of 139 countries when it comes to the quality of mathematics
   and science education, and ranks South Africa 125th in terms of the
   quality of primary school education.

Mr M H HOOSEN: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ID:

  That the House -
    1) notes that South Africa has earned a reputation in the international
       community as a nation with great respect for human rights;


    2) recognises that this achievement was only possible through sheer
       perseverance and the dedicated struggle of South Africans to achieve
       freedom from apartheid and all forms of oppression;

    3) considers the role of South Africa in supporting the people of Tibet
       in achieving the same fundamental human rights; and

    4) acknowledges their right to participate fully in all issues
       concerning their present, future and wellbeing, as well as the rights
       of freedom of religion, association and freedom from all forms of
       oppression.

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

  That the House -


  (1) debates the consequences of the long-running national Public Service
       strike on international perceptions of our country as a tourist
       destination; and

    2) determines whether any remedial action is required to improve the
       perceptions of foreigners who may be considering South Africa as a
       destination, but have had their confidence in the country dented as a
       result of the strike.

Mrs M V MAFOLO: Speaker, I hereby give notice that at the next sitting of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates confronting the challenges that stand in the way
   of reviving the primary health care system as part of reducing the huge
   burden of disease that the country is faced with.

Mrs C DUDLEY: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:

  That the House -


    1) supports calls for the consideration of the Memorandum on Genuine
       Autonomy for the Tibetan People of November 2008;


    2) notes that, as the basis for discussion leading to positive
       meaningful change in Tibet, this policy document is consistent with
       the principles outlined in the constitution and laws of the People’s
       Republic of China; and


    3) supports the recommendations of the Fifth Tibet Work Forum to improve
       the lives of the Tibetan people, especially in rural areas which are
       economically marginalised, by directly involving Tibetans in
       development programmes.

Ms S P RWEXANA: Mr Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the recent outrage expressed by women and
   children’s rights organisations regarding the sexual offence statistics
   that were released recently, in particular the accuracy of the claim that
   these statistics are like skeletons of the truth in that they do not
   flesh out the bigger picture of the problem.

Prof C T MSIMANG: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the IFP:

  That the House -


    1) debates the refusal of entry of His Holiness the Dalai Lama into
       South Africa in March 2009;

    2) notes that the Dalai Lama was due to attend a conference on freedom
       in Tibet along with South African Nobel Laureates, Archbishop
       Emeritus Desmond Tutu, Nelson Mandela and F W de Klerk;
    3) believes that this refusal of entry was due, in principle, to
       political pressure being exerted upon the government of South Africa
       by the People’s Republic of China and there was no reason, other than
       that of political interest, for preventing the Dalai Lama from
       entering South Africa; and

    4) notes that this was an aberration of our fundamental constitutional
       rights of religious freedom, freedom of speech and opinion, as well
       as the Dalai Lama’s reasonable entitlement to just administrative
       action.

Mr S B FARROW: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House -

     1) debates the high incidence of road accidents and fatalities
        occurring on South African roads; and

     2) comes up with solutions to decrease these.

Mr M A NHANHA: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of the
House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

  That the House -

    1) debates whether Eskom, which is unable to meet the energy demands of
       the country, is justified in supplying electricity to corporate
       businesses outside the borders of our country at prices far below
       those which obtain in respect of South African companies; and

    2) notes that by so doing it is impeding industrial growth in South
       Africa.

                        SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL PARKS

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -

     1) welcomes the announcement from the South African National  Parks  to
        allow South Africans to enter the country’s national  parks  without
        paying a fee from Monday to Friday this week;


     2) notes that this is part of the Know Your National Parks campaign to
        give South Africans the opportunity to visit our parks; and
     3) encourages South Africans, especially those  from  the  communities
        around the parks, to use this opportunity  to  visit  our  national
        parks.

Agreed to.

                  SEPTEMBER 21: INTERNATIONAL DAY OF PEACE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, I move without
notice:

   That the House -

     1) notes that in 2002 the United Nations  General  Assembly  officially
        declared September 21 as the permanent date  for  the  International
        Day of Peace ("Peace Day") and thereby  the  UN  devoted  itself  to
        worldwide peace and  encouraged  all  of  mankind  to  work  in  co-
        operation for this goal;


     2) further notes that International Day of  Peace  is  also  a  Day  of
        Ceasefire – personal or political;


     3)  recognises  that  the  International  Day  of  Peace  provides  an
        opportunity for individuals, organisations and  nations  to  create
        practical acts of peace on a shared date; and


     4) urges all South Africans to take this opportunity to promote  peace
        in our communities and society at large.

Agreed to.

 QUESTIONS NOT TO TAKE PRECEDENCE ON 15 SEPTEMBER 2010, PROVISIONS OF RULES
                      29(8) AND 113(1) NOTWITHSTANDING

                             (Draft Resolution)

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, on behalf of the
Chief Whip of the Majority Party, I move the draft resolution printed in
his name on the Order Paper, as follows:

   That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rules 29(8) and 113(1), Questions
   shall not take precedence tomorrow, 15 September 2010.

Agreed to.

                    RELEASE OF NATIONAL CRIME STATISTICS

                            (Member’s Statement)
Ms A VAN WYK (ANC): Speaker, the ANC welcomes the release of the national
crime statistics for the past fiscal year by the Minister of Police, Nathi
Mthethwa, signifying a tremendous decline in the murder rate for that
period. Murder decreased by 8,6% from 1 April 2009 to 31 March 2010.

There has been a noticeable decline in crime in other categories. Crimes
such as car hijacking, attempted murder, aggravated robberies, street
robberies, cash-in-transit heists and bank robberies all showed a decrease.

Whilst there may have been increases in crime at nonresidential premises,
we are further gratified to note that in almost all major business sectors
there has been a significant decrease in robberies.

In dealing with issues of crime, the ANC proceeds from the premise that the
rising quality of life also means improvement in the safety and security of
citizens in their homes and environments - where they live, work and engage
in extramural activities. However, the ANC is happy and encouraged by the
Minister’s resolve to continue to fight crime and to reduce the figures
even more.

We also acknowledge the role played by our communities by creating a
favourable environment for our police to execute their responsibilities.
These successes were not going to be possible if our communities were not
part of our crime-fighting strategy. Together we can do more. [Applause.]

        50TH ANNIVERSARY OF TIBETAN DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS IN EXILE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs S V KALYAN (DA): Speaker, 2 September 2010 marked the 50th anniversary
of Tibetan democratic institutions in exile, following the flight of His
Holiness the Dalai Lama and 80 000 refugees from Tibet. Since then,
Tibetans have set up democratic foundations for their institutions,
including a draft constitution of Tibet and the charter of Tibetans in
exile.

I recently travelled to Bylakuppe in India to join a group of members of
parliaments from around the world to celebrate, along with Tibetans in
exile, the 50th anniversary of Tibetan Democracy Day.

The DA applauds His Holiness the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan parliament for
having reformed the Tibetan political system by implementing democratic
institutions in exile and providing social services in health, education
and welfare, thus improving the livelihoods of the Tibetans in exile. We
commend foreign governments who have received His Holiness the Dalai Lama,
and call upon the South African government to grant the Dalai Lama a visa
to visit South Africa at a time of his choosing.

The DA urges the Chinese government to consider the Memorandum on Genuine
Autonomy for the Tibetan People of November 2008, and to note it as a basis
for substantive discussion leading towards positive meaningful change in
Tibet. It must be noted that these policy documents are consistent with the
principles outlined in the constitution and the laws of the People’s
Republic of China. [Applause.]

                     PURCHASE OF NEW HOUSE FOR GEN CELE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M E GEORGE (Cope): Speaker, Parliament is kept informed about what is
going on in the government through the media, never through Ministers who
are constitutionally bound to provide this House with reports. We learned
that government purchased a new house for Gen Cele, after reading what Gen
Cele had to say about his procurement style. The question uppermost in our
minds is whether Gen Cele is busy bullying the Department of Public Works
and his own department to get his way.

It seems to us that policies, procedures, the Public Finance Management Act
and other statutory provisions don’t matter. He makes his own rules.
Similarly, all budget constraints are swept aside and monies found when the
General demands something. [Time expired.] [Interjections.]

           NEW TRANSPORT SYSTEM: NATIONAL ROLLING ENFORCEMENT PLAN

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J J MAAKE (ANC): Hon Speaker, the ANC welcomes the launch of the new
transport system, the National Rolling Enforcement Plan, the NREP. The
campaign will be effective from 1 October 2010 until the end of October
2011. October, which is Transport Month, will be used by the department to
raise driving standards by tightening the screws on driving schools and
testing centres.

The new transport campaign will see at least a million vehicles stopped and
checked every month, and aims to reduce the number of road fatalities
across the country. The plan was informed by the Fatal Crash Report and the
Offence Survey Results for 2009.

The Department of Transport has committed itself to ensuring that the plan
is supported by a clearly targeted strategy and well-defined objectives.
According to the Minister of Transport, the strategy will be based on the
scientific analysis of statistics relating to causes of death and problem
areas in all the provinces. The campaign will be carried out in partnership
with the SA Broadcasting Corporation.

The ANC-led government supports the National Rolling Enforcement Plan and
encourages all South Africans to give their support and commitment also,
because together we can make a difference to the high offence and fatality
rates. I thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Hon George, I think there was a mistake with the timer. You
still have some time – one minute to go!

Mr M E GEORGE (Cope): Thank you very much, Speaker. I forgive you.
[Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you, Rev Mluleki George! [Laughter.]

Mr M E GEORGE (Cope): Speaker, this government clearly does not want to
operate in a transparent manner. The Congress of SA Trade Unions, Cosatu,
says that South Africa under the ANC has become a predator state.

According to Prof Galbraith, the predator state is an economic system
wherein entire sectors have been built up to feast on public systems built
originally for public purposes.

This government has been pleading poverty, saying that the envelope is not
only empty but that it is broken. On the other hand, it shows that it is
flush with cash to indulge the General in whatever he wishes. That is how
banana republics are run. I thank you. [Applause.]

                        SCRAMBLE FOR AFRICA BY CHINA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI (IFP): Mr Speaker, we stand as friends of Tibet and
as friends of China at a time when China is leading the new scramble for
Africa. In its intervention in Africa, China is not setting any conditions
for, or providing incentives aimed at, promoting democracy and human
rights, which are feeding into Africa’s endemic corruption and
malgovernance.

China will not change its ways in Africa until it changes its ways in
China. China will not change its ways in China until it rights its wrongs
in Tibet. Tibet has become a turning point in history. History will recall
how a group of peaceful monks pursued a decades-long struggle, exclusively
through the method of nonviolence.
The Rome Convention on Tibet received reports of evidence of extensive
atrocities in Tibet. We heard of the desire of many to abandon nonviolence
to embrace an armed struggle. By granting Tibet the limited and reasonable
autonomy it seeks, China will bequeath to the world a legacy of a
successful nonviolent struggle, which will undoubtedly inform how the
conflict of the present and the future may be resolved.

Conversely, the failure of the Tibetan cause may discredit nonviolence
forever. We must turn the Tibetan issue into a new unifying cause, which
can again bring together democrats from across the world, as happened with
the worldwide rejection of apartheid.

This battle may move forward because of mankind, and enable China to become
the great international partner and leader, which we all sincerely hope it
may rise to be, for its own sake and that of mankind. If we fail, Africa
will be amongst the most adversely affected. Thank you, Mr Speaker.
[Applause.]

               CALL ON ANC GOVERNMENT TO LEND SUPPORT TO TIBET

                            (Member’s Statement)


Dr C P MULDER (VF Plus): Agb Speaker, vroeër hierdie maand het die
Internasionale Netwerk van Parlementariërs oor Tibet ’n beroep gedoen op
die Chinese regering om te goeder trou met die Dalai Lama en die Sentraal-
Tibettaanse administrasie oor selfbeskikking te onderhandel.

Die VF Plus ondersteun hierdie oproep en wil vandag op die ANC ’n beroep
doen om ook hulle steun toe te sê, tydens al die beurte wat hulle vandag
gaan hê met verklarings deur lede, om ’n vreedsame oplossing vir die
menseregtevergrype van die Chinese regering in Tibet te erken, en om die
erkenning van Tibet se reg tot selfbeskikking af te dwing.

Meer as 50 jaar lank het die ANC sy stryd teen apartheid onder die vaandel
van menseregte geveg. Hiervoor het die ANC groot internasionale steun
ontvang. Dis egter dieselfde party wat die Dalai Lama herhaaldelik toegang
tot Suid-Afrika weier. Dié optrede, dat die ANC onder druk van die Chinese
regering swig, kos die land duur aan sy internasionale reputasie as ’n ware
demokratiese land. Dit het tyd geword dat die ANC-regering openlik en
onomwonde sy beleid ten opsigte van die handhawing van menseregte en die
erkenning van die reg tot selfbeskikking van Tibet verklaar.

Dit is teen hierdie agtergrond dat die VF Plus president Zuma se besoek aan
Orania vandag ook verwelkom. Die feit dat die President bereid is om self
te gaan vasstel hoe selfbeskikking in die praktyk funksioneer tot voordeel
van almal in Suid-Afrika is ’n positiewe stap, en die inwerkingstelling van
artikel 235 van die Suid-Afrikaanse Grondwet. Dankie. [Applous.]
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Dr C P MULDER (FF Plus): Hon Speaker, earlier this month the International
Network of Parliamentarians on Tibet appealed to the Chinese government to
negotiate in good faith with the Dalai Lama and the Central Tibetan
administration on self-determination.

The FF Plus supports this call and wants to appeal to the ANC to also give
assurance of its support, by using the opportunities during member’s
statements today, to recognise the finding of a peaceful solution to the
human rights violations by the Chinese government in Tibet, and also to
enforcing the recognition of Tibet’s right to self-determination.

For more than 50 years, the ANC fought its struggle against apartheid under
the banner of human rights. For this the ANC received great international
support. It is, however, the same party that repeatedly refuses the Dalai
Lama entry into South Africa. This conduct, that the ANC succumbs to
pressure from the Chinese government, is doing a lot of damage to the
country’s international reputation as a truly democratic country. The time
has come for the ANC government to openly and unequivocally declare its
policy with regard to maintaining human rights and to recognising Tibet’s
right to self-determination.

It is against this background that the FF Plus today also welcomes
President Zuma’s visit to Orania. The fact that the President is prepared
to personally ascertain how self-determination functions in practice to the
benefit of everyone in South Africa, is a positive step and gives effect to
section 235 of the South African Constitution. Thank you. [Applause.]]

      OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS PUBLISHES NEW ISIZULU-ENGLISH DICTIONARY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A C MASHISHI (ANC): Mr Speaker, the ANC welcomes the announcement by
Oxford University Press last week that they have published a new IsiZulu-
English dictionary, four decades after the last such reference book was
released for one of South Africa’s most widely spoken languages.

In a country with a linguistic diversity spanning 11 official languages, it
is essential that our learners are able to access languages other than
their mother tongue. With more than 2,8 million pupils taking isiZulu as a
language subject at school, the dictionary will help pupils and teachers to
keep up with the changes in the language.

South Africa is a multilingual country, and besides the 11 officially
recognised languages, scores of other languages - African, European, Asian
and more - are spoken here as the country lies at the crossroads of
Southern Africa. The ANC has raised and will continue to raise and lobby
around issues of multilingualism, linguistic diversity, linguistic
integration, linguistic equity and language rights. Together we can protect
and promote our linguistic diversity. I thank you. [Applause.]

     JOHANNESBURG UNDERCOVER POLICE OFFICERS ARRESTED BY THEIR HILLBROW
                                COUNTERPARTS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Rev K R J MESHOE (ACDP): Speaker, yesterday there was a report in The Star
newspaper about three Johannesburg undercover police officers who were
arrested by their Hillbrow counterparts for conducting a drug bust in
Hillbrow, allegedly without permission.

The ACDP is shocked by such appalling action by the Hillbrow police
officers, who allegedly protected drug dealers who were about to be
arrested by the three undercover police officers from Johannesburg. The
Hillbrow officers who arrested their counterparts were reported to have
said that the undercover officers had jumped their territorial boundary,
and that the Hillbrow officers were always arrested in the Johannesburg
central area.

The ACDP urges the Minister of Police to call for an investigation into
what appears to be a territorial war between the Johannesburg police and
the Hillbrow police, who should be working together to fight crime, and
also to charge the Hillbrow police officers for arresting their
Johannesburg counterparts for conducting a drug bust in Hillbrow and not
the drug dealers.

The ACDP also wants to see closer scrutiny of what is really happening at
the Hillbrow police station. Hotel owners in the area claim that whenever
police raids are planned, drug dealers disappear from the streets two hours
before the raids take place because they are tipped off by some officers
from that station.

We further urge the Minister to send outside police units to Hillbrow to
deal with the drug problem and corruption in the Hillbrow area. Thank you.

                FEWER JOBS CREATED BY ARMS DEAL THAN PROMISED

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr T D HARRIS (DA): Speaker, the performance review of the Department and
Trade and Industry’s National Industrial Participation Programme, the NIPP,
tabled last week reveals that international arms deal contractors have
created only 40% of the jobs that government expected them to create - only
26 000 jobs in 10 years, instead of the 65 000 jobs originally promised.

The R48 billion arms deal was signed on condition that international arms
companies would offset their contracts by investing directly in South
Africa. A decade on, it is close to impossible to assess the status of the
NIPP because the Department of Trade and Industry continues to obfuscate in
its reporting, concealing the true cost of the arms deal to our country.
There is simply not sufficient information in this report to properly
assess the programme. What numbers there are, however, point to a general
failure to create a sufficient number of jobs. In addition, the German
frigate consortium, backed by ThyssenKrupp, is R1,3 billion short on its
offset obligation.

The NIPP report refers to R136 billion worth of offsets realised, but given
that the strategic defence package accounts for approximately 85% of the
NIPP, the total amount of arms deal offsets realised so far would be around
R116 billion. Eleven years ago, the Defence Minister announced that the
NIPP would bring in R110 billion, but, in 2010 prices, that amount should
be upwards of R200 billion. If that is the case, where will the missing
R84 billion come from?

The legacy of the arms deal lives on, but accountability cannot fade with
time. The NIPP report needs the considered attention of this House and
government. I therefore look forward to the Department of Trade and
Industry’s presentation of the progress report on the NIPP to the Portfolio
Committee on Trade and Industry as promised in their annual report.
[Applause.]

                         ANNUAL NATIONAL WILLS WEEK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J B SIBANYONI (ANC): Speaker, regarding the Annual National Wills Week,
the ANC commends the Law Society of SA and its six constituent members for
presenting the National Wills Week project, which is an access to justice
campaign that began in 2008. Attorneys are called upon to assist members of
the public to write basic last wills and testaments free of charge. This
year the campaign was conducted from 6 September to 7 September.

We in the ANC also commend both the attorneys who volunteered their time,
professionalism, legal knowledge and expertise, and members of the public
who participated in this project.

By making a will you ensure that your assets are disposed of in accordance
with your wishes after your death. This privilege is called the “freedom of
testation”. An attorney ensures that your will is valid and complies with
your wishes. If you die without a will, your assets are transferred to the
Guardian’s Fund for safekeeping until your children reach the age of
majority. Obviously, being under state control, the red tape involved is
something to be avoided at all costs.

The six constituent members are the Black Lawyers Association, the National
Association of Democratic Lawyers, the Cape Law Society, the Law Society of
the Free State, the KwaZulu-Natal Law Society and the Law Society of the
Northern Provinces.

Bakithi bhalani izincwadi zamafa zingakafiki izinsuku zokuthi nihambe
emhlabeni. Ngiyathokoza. [Ihlombe.] [Hon members, please write your wills
before you die. Thank you. [Applause.]]

      INHUMANE TREATMENT OF TIBETAN MONKS BY PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Prof C T MSIMANG (IFP): Hon Speaker, the IFP condemns in the harshest sense
the cruel and inhumane treatment of Tibetan monks by the People’s Republic
of China in the Chinese province and autonomous region of Tibet. The
Tibetan monks are a peace-seeking religious order, whose leader, the Dalai
Lama, has been in exile in India for the last 50 years because of the
Chinese occupation of Tibet.

The peaceful Tibetan monks have been beaten and, in many instances, shot
and killed by the armed forces of the People’s Republic of China whilst
participating in peaceful protests against the Chinese occupation of Tibet.
These human rights travesties by the People’s Republic of China are largely
left uncondemned by the West, because it is against the political and
economic interests of many governments to voice outright dissent with
regard to these barbaric acts.

The IFP sincerely hopes that the governments of the world, and the South
African government in particular, will develop a conscience and begin to
voice its very necessary and long-overdue condemnation of the human rights
travesties currently occurring in Tibet. I thank you. [Applause.]

           MINISTER ACCUSED OF WASTEFUL EXPENDITURE AND CORRUPTION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs J D KILIAN (Cope): Speaker, as a rookie Minister, Minister Nyanda first
drew attention for his flashy taste in motorcars. He has remained in the
news ever since for all the wrong reasons: controversial tender practices,
transgressing the Cabinet code of ethics, documented extravagant taste in
hotel accommodation, and now the outrageously flashy offices, which cost
the taxpayer millions of rands annually to house only 13 officials.
Reports of his involvement in controversial appointments and the sacking of
officials at Sentech and within his department continue to surface. There
are also questionable procurement and tender practices involving his
private business interests, whether direct or under the guise of a family
trust. His personal auditors, Ntumba, have been awarded contracts under
questionable, if not outright illegal, procurement processes within the
Department of Communications and in Sentech.

Instead of giving visionary leadership to a department with the potential
to boost national economic growth by at least one percent annually, he
appears to be jumping from one entity to the other to interfere and allows
himself to be dragged into factional boardroom politics by some of his
friends deployed to those entities.

Recently, Minister Nyanda was also embroiled in a bitter row with the
Director-General of the Department of Communications. Therefore, Cope calls
on President Zuma to make Minister Nyanda the first example of his
commitment to clean governance. We call on the President to fire Minister
Nyanda. Thank you. [Applause.]

            IRREGULARITIES AND CORRUPTION IN RDP HOUSING PROJECT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D C SMILES (DA): Mr Speaker, as part of our oversight responsibility, a
delegation of DA public representatives recently visited a Reconstruction
and Development, RDP, housing project in Jansenville in the Ikwezi
Municipality. This project started in 1996 as a mud house project of 75
houses and evolved into an RDP project consisting of 350 houses. The
initial project was meant to demolish the mud structures, many of which
were very old or dilapidated, and to replace them with new RDP houses.

The Ikwezi Municipality, as the implementing agent, derailed this project
to such an extent that beneficiaries and residents were frustrated by the
level of corruption, and by the irregularities and administrative bungles.
A combination of shortcomings, including the weak capacity of the
municipality and the fact that a community development worker acted as the
housing official on the project, amplified the propensity for corruption
and irregularities to take place.

Some of the observations and findings included, amongst other things,
seriously unfair and unscrupulous administration flaws. Although the houses
are of a generally acceptable standard, some were built on business sites,
some on a church site and, in many instances, two houses were built on the
same site. There are even allegations that houses were allocated to people
who did not qualify. It was observed that even the ex-mayor had an RDP
house built in his back yard. [Interjections.] The DA believes that housing
... Thank you. [Time expired.]

      INMATES AT CORRECTIONAL SERVICE CENTRES ACHIEVE ACADEMIC SUCCESS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S ABRAM (ANC): Hon Speaker, the ANC believes that the service in
correctional centres – hitherto called prisons – must play its part not
simply in restraining convicted persons, but in rehabilitating and training
them.

As a result of this policy, 170 inmates from prisons across Gauteng
graduated from the University of South Africa on Wednesday,
8 September 2010. They were awarded their certificates, diplomas and
degrees during a graduation ceremony at the Pretoria Correctional Centre.
Amongst the graduates was a top achiever, 63-year-old Casper Greeff, who
was awarded a doctorate in Biblical Archaeology.

Geluk, eerwaarde dominee doktor Greeff. [Congratulations, venerable
Reverend Doctor Greeff.]

Inmates who study receive no special treatment and still have to deal with
the challenges of being in a correctional centre, which make the
achievements of those who graduated even more remarkable.

The ANC affirms that education will go a long way towards helping inmates
with their rehabilitation process, and commends the significant role played
by the Department of Correctional Services in making it possible for
inmates to learn and acquire skills while in correctional centres. The ANC
encourages the department to step up these programmes. I thank you.
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order! That concludes Members’ Statements. Before I take the
Ministers’ Responses, I would like to say that although there are 21
members of the executive, that is Ministers and Deputy Ministers, present
in the House, I can only take six responses. Are there any Ministers’
Responses?

                         ANNUAL NATIONAL WILLS WEEK


                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Speaker, we
would like to thank the hon J B Sibanyoni for his statement on National
Wills Week. We would also like to thank members of the legal profession for
their contribution to the promotion of access to justice in this important
area. We encourage all members of the legal profession to follow this
example and to extend it to other areas.

The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development will be introducing
the Legal Practice Bill in the near future. This Bill will encourage pro
bono work and community service by lawyers, thereby contributing to the
promotion of access to justice for all South Africans.

On a lighter note, I’d like to urge the ID to heed the warning in the hon
Sibanyoni’s statement in that, as a result of dying without a will, your
assets will be transferred to the Guardian’s Fund for safekeeping until
your children reach the age of majority and vote ANC. Thanks. [Applause.]
[Laughter.]

      INMATES AT CORRECTIONAL SERVICE CENTRES ACHIEVE ACADEMIC SUCCESS
      OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS PUBLISHES NEW ISIZULU-ENGLISH DICTIONARY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Thank you, Chairperson. I
just wish to quickly respond to two members’ statements. The first was on
the achievements of inmates who recently graduated. This shows that the
policy of government, which is the rehabilitation of offenders, is indeed
bearing fruit rather than what a punitive programme would have achieved. I
do agree with the hon member that education is a very important tool in
rehabilitation. My department is having discussions with the Minister of
Correctional Services also to expand skills development programmes in our
correctional facilities in South Africa.

Secondly, we do indeed welcome the launch of the new Oxford IsiZulu-English
dictionary. Government feels that we need to go beyond translation between
isiZulu or Setswana and languages from outside South Africa, and also to
focus on developing purpose-made dictionaries such as an explanatory
isiZulu dictionary. We already have one at the moment, which is the first
of its kind, and as government we are committed to continuing with that.

Government is also committed to expanding the use of African languages,
especially in institutions of higher education and, to this end, the
Department of Higher Education and Training next month will be calling a
group of about 60 to 80 experts in African languages to see how we can
actually strengthen and promote the use, teaching and research of African
languages in our higher education institutions.

Siyabonga, Sihlalo. [Ihlombe.] [Thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]]

                FEWER JOBS CREATED BY ARMS DEAL THAN PROMISED

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: Thank you very much,
Chairperson. Chairperson, I need your guidance here on an issue that was
raised by a DA member on the Department of Trade and Industry committee.
The questions he asked are based on an undertaking that was made by a
member of this House right now. The answers are very readily available by
that member, and I wonder perhaps if the House would consider that these
questions, which are offset by the arms deal, be directed very clearly to
the member sitting there - Lekota - to explain exactly what it is that he
meant at that time. Could you please scrutinise the Rules of Parliament and
make sure that he accounts? He might as well start earning his keep over
there. Thank you. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Minister, I thought you were
responding to the ... [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND MILITARY VETERANS: My apologies, I thought I
would ask a question instead. Thank you.

           NEW TRANSPORT SYSTEM: NATIONAL ROLLING ENFORCEMENT PLAN

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Madam Chair, I would like to respond to the
statement on the National Rolling Enforcement Plan in that on Friday
traffic officers from municipalities and provinces throughout the country
signed a pledge that as from 1 October this National Rolling Enforcement
Plan would be enforced.

You will drive with a driver’s licence, you will not drink and drive,
otherwise you will be arrested. We are embarking on this enforcement plan
to ensure that every month one million vehicles are inspected and one
million drivers are checked. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

           MINISTER ACCUSED OF WASTEFUL EXPENDITURE AND CORRUPTION

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Chairperson, I would like to respond to
what the hon Kilian alleged here. Firstly, I want to find out which
executive code she is referring to that the Minister of Communications has
breached, because I have no knowledge of such a breach and no such breach
has been reported or indicated in any communication whatsoever.

Secondly, on the matters she raised, the Public Protector has clearly
indicated that there has been no breach whatsoever by the Minister of
Communications in relation to the business that he did before he was
appointed as the Minister of Communications. Now, I think the DA, as well
as Cope, abuses the good offices of Parliament to ask questions and then
send those responses to the media.
On the question of the offices, you know very well that the Minister of
Communications is not responsible for getting office space and so on, but
you will take the answers that we provide to you in good faith and give
them to the newspapers. This must stop. [Interjections.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, hon members! Order, please.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, the hon Nyanda is suggesting that it is wrong
for us to ask questions of Ministers and give that information to the
press. There is nothing in the Rules of Parliament that says that is not
allowed. I am extremely concerned, Madam Chair, that he is trying to create
a precedent here which is absolutely unacceptable to the opposition
parties. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, my understanding was
that the hon Minister Nyanda was responding to the issue that was raised by
the hon Kilian. I believe that when members read or present statements,
they want the Ministers to respond, and the Ministers have responded,
including the hon Nyanda.

            IRREGULARITIES AND CORRUPTION IN RDP HOUSING PROJECT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Chairperson, I would like to
respond to the member who raised the issue of corruption with regard to RDP
houses in the Ikhwezi Municipality. I would like to remind members of this
House that we have on a number of occasions indicated that we are fighting
corruption in Human Settlements. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, hon member!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: The Special Investigating Unit is
there to ensure that we do that. Those who don’t believe in us, don’t
believe in themselves. What is of importance with regard to what the member
raised is that he must give us concrete information in terms of the erf
number he is talking about and the names of the people involved in that
area so that we are able to talk in terms of information. If you do have
information, please forward that information to me so that I can do the
necessary investigation. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Madam Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): What is your point of order, hon
member?

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: In terms of the Rules, no member has the right to
receive an answer from the government, but I think that when the entire
gallery is packed with friends of people who participated in the debates
and so many statements have been made, it is unconscionable for government
not to give a single answer and there is at least a legitimate expectation
for a word to be said, and that must be read in the Rules. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please! Order, hon members!
Hon Dr Ambrosini, yes the Rules allow the Ministers to respond, but there
is no Rule that says whether the Ministers like it or not they have to
respond. I have given the Ministers an opportunity to respond to the
questions and we had ... [Interjections.]

Hon members, if you want to have questions and points of order responded
to, you must also be able to listen.

Secondly, the Rules that are used by this House were drafted and adopted by
this very same House. Hon Ambrosini, I think that you were not part of this
House when the Rules were adopted, but I think you were part of this House
when they were reviewed. Therefore, I don’t think you have to argue about
them. You must look at them and rectify the Rules if you want to amend
them, and then you will know which procedures you have to follow.

                         SOUTH AFRICAN POSTBANK BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Chairperson, hon members of the House,
ladies and gentlemen, it is with great pleasure that I introduce the South
African Postbank Bill in the National Assembly today. When the White Paper
on Postal Policy was passed in 1998, it was recognised that the Postbank as
an institution would play an important role in satisfying the saving needs
...

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chair, I rise on a point of order.
There is a clause in this Bill that provides for monies to be made
available via the MTEF, the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, to the bank
in order to fund the bank’s operations. Now, I understand that that type of
clause in the Bill provides specifically for this type of legislation to go
via the Portfolio Committee on Finance. I want to know whether, in fact,
this Bill has gone to the Finance committee and, if not, why not, because
my belief is that this is a money Bill and should have gone to the Finance
committee.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Chief Whip of the Opposition,
we have a joint tagging mechanism, which decides on the classification of
Bills in terms of which committees they fall under. According to that
classification, the Bill falls under the Portfolio Committee on
Communications. According to my understanding, when the same issue was
raised in the Chief Whips’ Forum they said that the Finance committee was
consulted on the matter and that it was therefore agreed that the Portfolio
Committee on Communications would continue with the legislation. Based on
that, I therefore allow the Minister to introduce the Bill and continue
with the debate. [Applause.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chair, with respect to your ruling,
first of all, when this was raised in the Chief Whips Forum, exactly that
was indicated. But my information, which is correct, was that the committee
was not consulted. The chairperson of that committee was consulted. Second
of all, notwithstanding the fact that there was a process which you
outlined that indicated where this Bill should go, I do not believe that
the people who made that classification had actually read the Bill. The
Bill specifically makes money available from the MTEF for the operations of
this bank. Therefore, it must be a money Bill.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, this Bill was not
tabled in Parliament yesterday. It was tabled in Parliament through the
Office of the Speaker and the Office of the Chairperson. The members who
comprise the joint tagging mechanism are the Speaker of the National
Assembly and the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces and they
are advised by the legal team of Parliament. I believe that members of this
House have the right to advice as early as possible. I don’t think that, in
reality, it is necessary to raise this issue now, because all Members of
Parliament from all political parties participated in the debate and
discussions. It is unfortunate that you heard that it was only the
chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Finance who was consulted on the
matter.

In terms of the report, when the Chief Whips’ Forum agreed to continue with
the process of this legislation they were informed that the committee had
been consulted. Also, it was agreed that the Bill was to be part of the
programme by the very same Chief Whips’ Forum of which the member is a
part. This was also agreed to by the programming committee of which the
member is also a member. If the intention was not to continue with this
particular Bill, it was not supposed to have been agreed to at the Chief
Whips’ Forum and also not in the programming committee. Could we please
allow the Minister to continue? I am not going to entertain any further
discussion on this.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chair, I really do not wish to be
obstructive. My intention in rising is not to be obstructive. My intention
is to point out ... [Interjections.] ... that clause 22 of this Bill
provides for monies to be appropriated from Parliament, and that makes it a
money Bill.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Ian Davidson, could you please
take your seat. You were part of all these forums that I have mentioned.
You were part of them. You were part of the forums where it was decided
that this Bill should be part of the programme. Therefore, just take your
seat. [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chair, I shall take my seat, but
your interpretation of what took place at the Chief Whips’ Forum is
entirely incorrect. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, take your seat. Hon
Minister, continue.

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When the
White Paper on Postal Policy was passed in 1998, it was recognised that the
Postbank, as an institution, would play an important role in satisfying the
saving needs of the rural and underserviced communities in our country.

The Bill before you seeks to establish the Postbank as a subsidiary of the
SA Post Office, which will provide a range of services to the majority of
our citizens without any of the hurdles they would be experience at a
commercial bank.

The Postbank will be restructured to accommodate the developmental goals of
the state. It is therefore the objective of this Bill before you to create
a bank of first choice for the lower income groups, providing them with
appropriate banking products and high-quality services.

As a bank of first choice to the rural and marginalised communities, it
will enable our people to access banking services, previously out of reach
to many. In time, it will expand its financial services. It will do so,
however, only after the Minister of Communications, in concurrence with the
Minister of Finance, agree with the need for such expansion.

This will also significantly strengthen our efforts to inculcate a culture
of saving and stimulate socioeconomic development, particularly in the
rural areas. The primary aim is to provide financial services to
communities within the proximity of their dwellings.

The tabling of the South African Postbank Bill in this House is a step in
realising this vision. In this regard, the main purpose of the Bill is to
corporatise the Postbank, which is currently a division of the Post Office.
It will utilise the infrastructure and facilities of the SA Post Office.
The post office has a large footprint, covering over 70% of the country,
thus enabling the possible spread of the services the Postbank will
provide.

The Postbank, as a company, will be managed by its own board with all the
required corporate governance requirements and all mechanisms that will
ensure accountability. The details on the implementation and capacity of
the board plan will be directed by ministerial policy. A memorandum of
understanding will be developed between the Department of Communications
and the SA Post Office soon after the Bill is promulgated.

Importantly, the Postbank will be brought within the ambit of the financial
and banking regulatory environment, as regulated by the Registrar of Banks.
The Postbank will become a key player in the promotion of universal and
affordable access to banking services. It will ensure that the rates and
charges of the Postbank take into consideration the needs of the people in
the lower income group.

The approval of this Bill will break new ground in creating a financial
institution that communities will identify with by virtue of its location
in underserviced areas. This Bill provides for the Minister of
Communications to exercise oversight in cases that require Treasury
intervention. The concurrence of the Minister of Finance is required. I
have no doubt that the passing of this Bill will bring much relief and
excitement to the marginalised citizens of this country.

In conclusion, I want to state that the Bill has been thoroughly consulted
on by the working committee, comprising the Department of Communications,
the National Treasury, the Reserve Bank and the SA Post Office, during the
public consultations in all nine provinces. The Portfolio Committee on
Communications also played a key role in the refinement of the Bill.

I want to thank the chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Communications, Mr Ishmael Vadi, and members of the committee who had
marathon meetings in considering the Bill. Finally, I wish to recognise the
able support of the Deputy Minister of Communications, Ms Dina Pule. I also
wish to thank the senior management of the Department of Communications and
my staff for the effort they put into ensuring the drafting and
finalisation of this Bill. I thank you for allowing me to introduce this
Bill and look forward to its speedy passage through this House. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr I VADI: Chairperson, it is a privilege to speak in support of the South
African Postbank Bill. Once passed, the Bill will corporatise the Postbank
into a fully fledged public bank. It is envisaged that the Postbank will
become the bank of first choice for lower-income groups in society.

The local post office in one’s town or locality currently provides standard
postal services, allows for a personal savings facility and sells
stationery and newspapers. It also serves as a monthly pension or grant pay-
point for the elderly and the disabled respectively. Once the new Postbank
is launched and registered, it will not only act as a savings bank, but
will lend and borrow money, particularly to the poor, to rural dwellers and
to youth and students. In this sense, this Bill is one of the most
important pro-poor measures introduced by the ANC government in the current
term.

The new bank will bring to reality the vision of the White Paper on Postal
Policy. It will serve as a powerful support structure for rural-urban
financial linkages, allowing for easier financial access for migrant
workers and promoting economic growth in rural areas. It will strengthen
the prospect for savings and generate investment capital among rural
communities. In the short term, the Postbank can become a critical poverty-
combating instrument in poor communities. In the near future, it has the
potential to develop into a powerful state bank comparable to similar
financial institutions in Germany and Japan.

The Postbank will be an autonomous company, wholly owned by the Post
Office. It will be owned indirectly by government. It will be managed by an
independent board of directors, composed of 10 persons including the bank
manager. The board will be accountable to the Post Office, the Minister of
Communications and to Parliament. The public, together with the Post
Office, will be invited to nominate suitable persons for board membership.
These will be screened by a nominations committee, which will make final
recommendations to the Ministers of Communications and Finance. In the end,
board membership is dependent on nominees passing the fit and proper test,
set by the Registrar of Banks.

Structurally, and in terms of policy formulation, the bank is located
midway between the Minister of Communications and the Minister of Finance.
For this reason, the committee has ensured that all major policy and
operational decisions enjoy the concurrent support of both Ministers. The
committee has also insisted that the responsible Ministers develop
appropriate investment, lending and borrowing policies for the bank. These
policies must be approved by Cabinet and must be tabled before Parliament,
so as to ensure that there is no repeat of the debacle that we have seen at
the Land Bank. Furthermore, any decision of the Postbank that is
inconsistent with the policy framework determined by government will be of
no force or effect.

The committee has also introduced stringent criteria for appointment to the
board of the Postbank. A person with any material conflict of interest will
not be eligible to serve on the board and his or her business enterprise
will not be able to enter into any business transactions with the bank. The
committee has introduced provisions that criminalise a failure to declare a
conflict of interest. The insertion of such onerous provisions is there to
ensure that there is no possibility for any abuse by either the board or
any member of the board.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: [Inaudible.] ... like the rest or some of the civil
service.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please!

Mr I VADI: House Chairperson, I would like now to address the Chief Whip of
the Opposition, the DA, with your kind permission. I am disappointed that
the DA has decided to vote against this Bill. This Bill is complex, but it
is not politically contentious. The process by which we reached this stage
has taken a long time. You will recall that the Bill was first referred to
the committee in November last year. The committee held public hearings on
the Bill on 23 March this year. In April, the committee agreed to a
sensible proposal from the hon Kilian to include the National Treasury in
all its deliberations. In total, the committee spent 10 weeks examining the
provisions of the Bill and on amending it.

In all this time, the DA did not once indicate that this Bill was
undesirable or that it should be processed by the Finance committee.
[Interjections.] If it had made that suggestion, the committee would have
made arrangements earlier for conferring fully with the Portfolio Committee
on Finance. So, this came as a total surprise to us when in the last week,
in the last meeting of the committee, the DA expressed its intention to
vote against this Bill. I do believe that this is a vote against the poor
and downtrodden in our society. [Applause.] [Interjections.]

It is my hope that the Postbank becomes as successful as the Grameen Bank
in Bangladesh, which uses microloans without collateral, to help eradicate
poverty in developing countries. It has now opened a branch in the United
States, called Grameen America. It offers loans from $500 to $3000 to
vendors who borrow money daily to rent carts to sell their wares, or to a
hair salon owner who needs cash to buy shampoo. One of the first persons to
whom it disbursed a loan is Socorro Diaz. Thank you very much. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mr N J VAN DEN BERG: Hon House Chairperson, hon members of this House, it
is always a privilege to speak in this House on behalf of the DA. The South
African Postbank Bill proposes to establish a company owned by the
government that will ultimately operate as a regular bank. The Bill
proposes a structure similar to that of state-owned, corporatised
enterprises. Although government-owned, a board will preside over the bank
and therefore enjoy all the perks of a private entity.

In die struktuur van ’n private maatskappy is dit normale praktyk. Die raad
van die maatskappy het ’n toesighoudende funksie oor die besluite wat die
uitvoerende bestuur van dag tot dag maak. Die raad staan, by wyse van
spreke, pa of ma vir die besluite van die uitvoerende bestuur en is
verantwoordbaar teenoor die aandeelhouers. Die aandeelhouers van die
privaat onderneming wen, indien alles klopdisselboom verloop met die
maatskappy. Indien sake skeefloop, verloor hulle dalk al hulle beleggings.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[In the structure of a private corporation this is normal practice. The
board of a private corporation has an oversight function over the decisions
the executive takes from day to day. The board is, in a manner of speaking,
answerable for the decisions of the executive, and it is accountable to the
shareholders. When everything is hunky-dory in the corporation’s affairs
the shareholders gain, but when things go wrong they may lose their entire
investment.]

The South African government will be the sole shareholder in this state
entity. As it will be underwritten by government, the success and
weaknesses of the bank will also be those of the government. Financial
success means profit for the state coffers but, alarmingly, the government
will also bear the burden of its failure. If the government has to bail out
the Postbank, it is actually you and I, the humble taxpayers, who will pay.

The hon members of this House must think very carefully before they vote
yes or no to this Bill. As members, we are representing millions of people
in this House. We are representing the people of South Africa. We are
voting on behalf of the voters. What will your people, your constituency
say? Yes, we are fully aware that people, specifically in poor rural areas,
need the financial support of the banking system, but have you told them
what the consequences might be? No, you have not.

Did you tell your poor voters that if anything goes wrong, it is they that
will have to pay? It is these citizens that will have to pay for the
mistakes of the Postbank board – a board they will probably never meet and
whose members are barely known to the public. If you say yes to this Bill,
you agree that your voters will pay for whatever mistakes the board of the
Postbank will make. You will ultimately place the financial fate of many
rural, poor citizens in the hands of the Postbank, a government-run entity
that will operate in a vigorous financial environment.

South Africa’s banking sector is robust and amongst the best in the world,
as evidenced during the global financial crisis. There are other solutions
to the problem. Why not look at incentives for the formal banking sector to
ensure that it offers banking services to the income groups to be targeted
by the Postbank? Mzanzi accounts are excellent examples.

Alhoewel die DA krities staan teenoor die Wetsontwerp op die Suid-
Afrikaanse Posbank, stel ek dit namens die DA baie duidelik – en ook in
antwoord op die opmerking wat agb Vadi gemaak het – dat die DA geensins
gekant is teen die oogmerke van die wetsontwerp nie. Die arm en dikwels
geïsoleerde mense in die landelike gebiede van Suid-Afrika moet op
gelykwaardige wyse as burgers van ons land geëer en gerespekteer word.
Hulle moet aan die gestruktureerde bankwese van Suid-Afrika kan deelneem.

Die fundamentele vraag bly steeds – gegewe die behoeftes van die arm,
landelike mense – is dit die rol van die staat om in hierdie behoefte te
voorsien? Dit is asof die ANC in die regering senuagtig rondskarrel om
oplossings te vind vir die vele sosio-maatskaplike en ekonomiese probleme
in ons jong demokrasie.

Die probleme die afgelope 16 jaar het nie kleiner geword nie. Die probleem
het gegroei van ’n groot molshoop tot ’n reusagtige berg. Daar moet
kollektief na oplossings gesoek word om die arm mense in ons land te help,
en ek wil die regering verseker dat die DA onverpoosd werk en na oplossings
soek. Gelukkig kan die DA meld dat die mense lank laas in hulle lewe so ’n
goeie regering gehad het in die Wes-Kaap soos nou. Dit is onder die
leierskap van Helen Zille. Die DA in die Wes-Kaap is ’n uitstekende
voorbeeld van hoe om ’n oplossing vir ’n probleem te vind.

Die Wetsontwerp op die Suid-Afrikaanse Posbank probeer iets oplos sonder
dat die regering weet wat die onderliggende oorsaak is - die totaal
verkeerde medisyne vir ’n lank reeds bestaande siekte, by wyse van spreke.

Die ANC en sy alliansievennote moet besef die rol van die regering moet
kleiner word en nie groter nie. Al wat die ANC nou doen is om die druk op
die uitgawekant van die staat nog groter te maak - meer personeel,
salarisse, ensovoorts.

Kom ons wees eerlik. Staatsentiteite vaar nie goed nie – power, om die
minste te sê – veral nie die staatsentiteite wat aan die Minister van
Kommunikasie verslag doen nie. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs
follows.)

[Although the DA adopts a critical stance towards the South African
Postbank Bill, I wish to state it very clearly on behalf of the DA – partly
in response to the remark by the hon Vadi – that the DA is in no way
opposed to the aims and objectives of the Bill. The poor and often isolated
people in the rural areas of South Africa must be honoured and respected in
an equitable way as citizens of our country. They must be able to
participate in South Africa’s structured banking sector.

But the fundamental question remains – given the needs and requirements of
the rural poor – is it the role of the state to provide for these needs? It
appears that the ANC in government is nervously scrambling about to find
solutions for the many social and economic problems in our young democracy.


The problems have not become any smaller over the past 16 years. The
problem has grown from a major molehill to a giant mountain. There must be
a collective search for solutions in order to help the indigent in our
country, and I want to assure the government that the DA works ceaselessly
in the search for solutions. Fortunately the DA can report that it has been
a long time since the people had such a good government in the Western Cape
as they have now. That’s the government under the leadership of Helen
Zille. The DA in the Western Cape is an excellent example of how to find a
solution to a problem.

The South African Postbank Bill is an attempt to solve a problem without
identifying the underlying cause – a totally wrong remedy for a long-
standing disease, in a manner of speaking.

The ANC and its alliance partners must realise that the role of government
needs to be reduced, not increased. What the ANC is doing at present is to
further push up the pressure on the expenditure side of the state – more
staff, more salaries, and so forth.

Let us be honest. State entities are not performing well – poor, to say the
least - especially not the state entities reporting to the Minister of
Communications.]

In this instance, one can name a few: the SABC, the Independent
Communications Authority of SA, Icasa, and Sentech. In this regard, the
Business Times wrote:

   Sentech, the company responsible for bringing TV broadcasts to South
   Africans and which is on the verge of financial collapse, granted more
   than R117 million in contracts that did not go to tender over a period of
   two years.
There are a lot of other examples.

The state entities in the Communications portfolio have no respect for the
Public Finance Management Act, the PFMA. Given this track record, there can
be no assurance that the Postbank will respect the PFMA. Hon Chairperson
and members of this House, your decision to implement this Bill will be on
your conscience for the rest of your lives. I rest my case.

Speaking at the Banking Association of South Africa’s inaugural banking
summit, Mr Michael Katz, the Chairman of Edward Nathan Sonnenbergs,
said:“The culture of management, rather than ticking boxes, will prevent a
crisis.” I further quote him from Fin24: “Whatever regulatory environment
you have in place, if the culture of management does not recognise these
issues, then you will not have a sound bank.”

This Bill does not nearly touch the aching root of the problem. In SA Today
of 10 September 2010, the leader of the DA, Helen Zille wrote:

   Entrenched poverty is, without doubt, the greatest obstacle we must
   overcome if we are to become a successful and sustainable democracy in
   which people can live lives they value. Sustained economic growth is an
   essential, if not sufficient, precondition to overcome poverty. This
   means devising and implementing policies designed to make our economy
   more globally competitive so that we attract more investment and create
   more jobs. Every country that has sustainably lifted its poorest citizens
   out of poverty has done so by becoming more competitive.

The DA’s view is that a government-owned and controlled bank of this nature
is not required, and is open to mismanagement and the misappropriation of
funds. In this event, taxpayers will be required to serve as the lenders of
last resort and fund another failed and unprofitable state-owned
enterprise. The DA will not support this Bill. I thank you, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Mrs J D KILIAN: House Chairperson, the accessibility and affordability of
banking services have been the subject of many a debate in our developing
country. Despite the many challenges that cannot be ignored and concerns
that one might raise, the principles of the South African Postbank Bill,
which will provide basic banking services at affordable rates and which
will be accessible through post offices in almost every town and village of
South Africa, could fill an enormous gap in the unbanked sector of our
society.

We must remember that it has been calculated that up to 12 million people
are in the unbanked sector, especially poor people and those residing in
rural areas. Cope therefore supports the Bill, but we want to raise some
concerns.

We believe that state intervention that compels banks to break economic
rules and procedures, that provides uneconomic and high-risk services and
that is self-destructive will lead to more taxpayer money having to prop up
the Postbank. Talk of the nationalisation of banks, which has recently been
mooted by some elements in the tripartite alliance, is therefore very
irresponsible. We trust that the hon Manuel and Minister Gordhan will be
able to explain to their vociferous young partners in Durban that that
would be a recipe for disaster. Therefore, Cope believes that ...
[Interjections.]

Mr T W COETZEE: Chairperson, is the member willing to take a question about
nationalisation in the UK?

Mrs J D KILIAN: I will take a question at the end of my speech, thank you.

Mr T W COETZEE: No, that will be too late.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Therefore, the Postbank Bill will be the better option.
However, we must remember, however positive and idealistic the concept may
be, the road ahead is littered with dangerous potholes. This can result in
a type of management and financial crisis that we have recently seen in the
case of the Land Bank – which has now recovered slightly – Eskom, Ithala
Bank and other state-owned enterprises.
And no matter what the young gentleman from Limpopo might argue, universal
economic wisdom and experience throughout the world and throughout history
indicate that governments, by the very nature of their being, rarely
succeed in operating a business enterprise without regular state bailouts,
and are always prone to endemic mismanagement and corruption.

But because we have deliberated vigorously, we have moved in and improved
very specific sections of this Postbank Bill today to ensure that we have
good governance in place, that we have controls that will limit conflicts
of interest and that we have made criminal certain actions of board
members. We can confidently say today, as Cope, that we can support this
Bill because we realise the needs of people out there in the rural areas
who do not have access to banking services. Thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Mr N SINGH: Chairperson and hon members, I do not serve on this committee.
My colleague the hon Rev Zondi does, but I do come here on behalf of the
IFP to unreservedly support this Bill with a clear conscience. [Applause.]
As we have heard from the Minister, this Bill ushers in a new era of
personal banking and financial services, an era in which personal banking
and financial services will be available and accessible to every South
African.

Now, we have heard the argument as to why this shouldn’t go to private
banks. Why shouldn’t private banks do this? Private banks and their
accessibility in rural areas is something that leaves a lot to be desired.
They are few and far between in the rural areas. In fact, many of them have
closed down agencies and do not even provide ATMs in the rural areas. So, I
do not believe that we should be relying on private banks; we should rather
use this as an initiative to promote economic growth, especially amongst
our people in the rural areas. [Applause.]

As you walk into Parliament, you notice the Postbank and a sign that says:
Post Office Savings Bank. The fact that this should be savings driven has
been emphasised, but what I am afraid of is that a culture of saving does
not seem to be inculcated in our younger society nowadays. When I was in
class some 50 years ago and when I first went to school, the principal of
the school used to sell us stamps for which we used to pay a tickey each,
and we used to stick those stamps on a card. When the card was full, we
would take it to the Post Office where they would enter one pound in our
bank. Fifty years later, I still have my savings bank account and my book
with me.

Hon Minister, I don’t see any Ministers of Education here in the House.
Maybe they should start inculcating a culture of saving amongst the youth,
even if it is 50 cents or one rand a week. As they grow up, this culture
will be inculcated in their minds. [Applause.] This is something that we
hope the Postbank encourages and does, and that it works very closely with
the education sector. We will support the Bill. Thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

Ms S R TSEBE: House Chairperson, hon Ministers present here today, Members
of Parliament, the need for the establishment of a Postbank that will cater
for the needs of the majority of the people who are underbanked and
unbanked has been identified as a central pillar in our efforts to
integrate our people into the mainstream economy.

On World Post Day, Monday, 19 October 2009, the Minister of Communications,
Gen Siphiwe Nyanda, stated that, I quote:

  The Post Office has begun the process of corporatising the Postbank, with
  the chief objective of providing underserviced communities access to
  vital financial and related services and thereby contributing to economic
  and social development.

Indeed, the proposed legislation seeks to uplift the socioeconomic
conditions of our people, in particular the rural poor who have been
previously disadvantaged - a better life for all!

We have interrogated the merits of creating a South African Postbank
Limited that will cater for the majority of the people whom the commercial
banking sector classifies as a risk and unprofitable. We have given the
adoption of this Bill the thumbs up.

Now that we are at the stage of registering the Postbank it is, of course,
important to realise that the Postbank is envisaged to be an independent
state entity under the oversight of Parliament, and that this is the final
stage of an evolutionary process that was occasioned by the White Paper on
Postal Policy of 1998. We therefore support the initiative to complete the
process, since we have not found any contrary reason to deviate from the
cause of creating an independent bank of the people.

However, it is our humble hope that the Postbank has developed full
institutional capacity to be transformed into a fully fledged bank, able to
provide all banking services, including the provision of credit, and that
all proper management controls are in place to ensure that it does not
collapse like the other small banks that have gone that route before. This
is because the commercial banking sector, with which they will be
competing, is highly competitive and this bank shall be made to operate
within the parameters of the banking laws of the country.

As stated in the Bill, the newly corporatised SA Postbank Limited will use
the staff of the Postbank. It is our humble hope that these staff members
will be adequately trained for the administration of the added
responsibility that comes with a new mandate.

In the area of providing financial services, there is no room for error. We
therefore wish to pose a challenge to the two departments that are tasked
to oversee the process of registering the bank, namely the Departments of
Communications and Finance, to ensure that this matter is not left
unattended. It is also important to note that in Eastern Europe some
postbanks were established with good intentions, but collapsed owing to,
among other things, premature privatisation strategies.

During the South African Postbank Bill hearings, Cosatu also expressed the
view that corporatising the Postbank would pave the way for its
privatisation. In this regard, a very crucial issue that emerged during the
deliberations was the need to protect the currently marginalised groups
from being excluded from exercising financial services once the SA Postbank
becomes a fully fledged bank.


Subsequently, the committee included the following provisions in clause 2,
which culminated in the objects of the Bill, with the aim of, among other
things: “expanding the range of banking services and developing into a bank
of first choice, in particular to the rural and lower income markets as
well as communities that have little or no access to commercial banking
services or facilities”.


Sustainable financial service systems for the poor are crucial because they
attract a large section of people who have been excluded from the banking
system. Any institution that is able to develop ways of serving the poor at
minimal risk has the potential for a profitable market. There are too many
people out there who require the services of the banking sector but who
otherwise do not qualify to hold bank accounts owing to their status as low-
income earners. This is a market on its own.

The lack of access to banking services has disadvantaged many people, as
some have to have their wages paid in cash over the counter, as opposed to
direct credits into accounts. Even when they are paid through bank
transfers, most of them are forced to withdraw all their earnings because
of the distance between their areas of residence and the banks.

In conclusion, we support the route of using the option of the state
actually rendering the service itself, rather than finding ways to
incentivise the private sector to invest in rural areas.

A new era of hope for the poor has dawned and ushers in their active
participation in financial markets. Our responsibility as hon members of
this House is to be honourable enough to go out there, to inform, educate
and popularise this newborn South African child.

There can be no justification to oppose such a progressive move that will
benefit the rural masses of the population. The ANC supports this Bill.
[Applause.]

Mrs I C DITSHETELO: Madam Chair, we welcome the South African Postbank Bill
with the fervent hope that it shall not suffer the same demise that has
befallen other state-owned enterprises. We hope that South Africa will
finally set up a banking service that will service the poor and those with
low incomes, in particular.

It is, however, not clear why there is a provision that allows the new
Postbank to operate as a company before it complies with the Banks Act. It
is imperative that, as we establish such entities, we also insist on
uncompromising adherence to existing legislation.
The UCDP accepts the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Chairperson, Ministers and
Deputy Ministers, hon members, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
it is indeed an honour for me to be part of this historic occasion to
present the South African Postbank Limited Bill to Parliament. This Bill,
introduced here today by Minister Siphiwe Nyanda, was a collective effort
over several months of hard work by several stakeholders.

Building on what Minister Nyanda stated in his introduction to the Bill,
this Bill has huge social and economic potential to transform the lives of
our people, particularly the unbanked in the rural areas of our country. It
speaks to achieving some of the Medium-Term Strategic Framework goals, like
creating cohesive and sustainable communities, spurring rural development
and developing economic and social infrastructure. It will provide access
to institutional capacity to the many that are deprived of such services.

The Postbank will further strengthen the entrepreneurial culture and
savings initiatives of our people. It provides a platform for the
integration into the mainstream economic activities of, for example, the
youth and rural women who are the most oppressed in our marginalised
society.

Institutions that have acted as insurance against poverty and the
maintenance of social cohesion, such as burial societies, stokvels and
women’s social clubs, will benefit greatly from the creation of this
Postbank. It will also add value to the already productive activities of
our people, such as small-scale agricultural projects, crafts and home
industries, and trade and commerce.

Furthermore, through its expansion, the Postbank will advance the
government’s goal of job creation and human resource development. This
includes sectors like front-desk services, information and communication
technologies services and product development.

I would also like to thank hon member Kilian for the warning that she has
given to us. We want to assure her that we have laboured diligently by
building the necessary safeguards into the legislation to protect this bank
from corporate mismanagement. You will find the clauses on corporate
governance, in respect of both the board and the executive of this banking
institution, to be onerous, strict and punitive in the event of any foul
play.

We crafted this Bill to send a clear message that this is not an ordinary
bank, but a bank with a heart and a clear socioeconomic mandate to uplift
the rural and lower income groups and markets.

The Postbank will impact greatly on our society, and its success will
strengthen the self-sufficiency of our people, as well as further expand
the flourishing of an entrepreneurial culture.

The extensive and proven infrastructure of the Post Office provides the
Postbank with the necessary capacity and possibility for success. We all
have a collective responsibility, in terms of our oversight as Parliament,
to ensure that this bank achieves its goals and objectives in the
foreseeable future.

I want to state that voting against this Bill is to be anti-poor, anti the
redistribution of the socioeconomic opportunities of our country, and
downright in favour of a privileged society for the few and previously
advantaged.

Once again, we would like to express our gratitude, thanks and appreciation
to all stakeholders, namely Cabinet, the Department of Communications,
under the able leadership of hon Minister Nyanda, the Department of
Finance, the Post Office, the Portfolio Committee on Communications, led by
the chairperson the hon Vadi, the state law advisers, as well as Parliament
as a whole, who contributed so much to bringing this Bill to Parliament.
Thank you very much, hon Chair. [Applause.]

Adv J H DE LANGE: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers and hon members, I rise in
unconditional support of this Bill on behalf of the ANC. May I also thank
everyone who played a role in drafting of this Bill which at last, I think,
is going to be very important in the future of this country, particularly
as it relates to the poor.

When we started working on the Bill, as the hon Kilian and others have
pointed out, we were very aware of the risk attached to a venture like
this. We looked at other examples in the world, as our chairperson has
already said.

For example, Japan and Germany, major industrial countries, started these
state banks just after the war, and today they are huge conglomerates and
enterprises, having focused on the poor, the needy and the disadvantaged in
those societies.

Therefore, as we started working in the committee, all the parties were
quite clear as to what the vision of this Bill was in this regard. So, we
want to thank everyone that helped us draft a Bill that, in the end,
actually contained the risk that attaches to a venture like this. And,
obviously, in that sense, one is very saddened by the last-minute
turnaround of the DA.

The members of the DA in the committee co-operated very well throughout on
attaining the objectives of the Bill. It was at the last minute that they
said that their caucus was not prepared to vote on this Bill, and today
they have gone even further and we have seen the sleight of hand of their
Chief Whip, who tried to pretend that this was a money Bill.

I say “tried to pretend” because you don’t have to be a genius to know what
a money Bill is. You take this Constitution, you open it at section 77 and
there the heading says “Money Bills”. It doesn’t say “Other Bills”; it says
“Money Bills”. [Laughter.] It tells you exactly what a money Bill is.
Section 77 says that a money Bill is a money Bill if it “appropriates
money”; “imposes national taxes, levies, duties or surcharges”; “abolishes
or reduces, or grants exemptions from, any national taxes, levies, duties
or surcharges”; or “authorises direct charges”. Later, the section says
that nothing else may be contained in a money Bill except those four
issues; and elsewhere it says that only the Minister of Finance can
introduce a money Bill.

Now, of all the submissions that Cabinet, the Minister of Finance, the
state law advisers, Parliament’s tagging mechanism and the committee
received in respect of this Bill, not a single person even vaguely referred
to section 77 and this Bill being a money Bill. It is clearly not a money
Bill. That was just a sleight of hand to try to stop this Bill being passed
today.

Now, I don’t understand this, because I would ask the DA members, those
that are able to understand things, to take this Bill and read it.
[Laughter.] Read it as it is now, and then tell me that this Bill doesn’t
target the poor and the marginalised and that we haven’t looked at the
risks and created mechanisms to try to deal with those risks.

Last week I read a whole lot of articles in the newspapers on how the DA
was going to reach out to the poor. They buy people, so the media is now
writing these things about the DA. [Interjections.] The DA is going to ...
[Interjections.] You buy the media; your premier has said so. You go and
pay them and say, “Give us space”, and if someone else does that then you
say, “Oh, that’s terrible. This is the worst thing for democracy.” Can I
suggest that you buy more space and get more consultants, read this Bill,
and then you will see a few things. [Interjections.]

Firstly, it is targeted totally and utterly towards ... [Interjections.]
Oh, you know, you are such a ... You’ve got that grating voice, you know.
You really ... [Applause.] [Interjections.] Why they made you the deputy
president of the organisation, God alone knows. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please! Order, hon members!

Adv J H DE LANGE: When we received the Bill we were worried like everyone
else ... [Interjections.] No, I am not the Deputy Minister. I have been
demoted, so don’t worry about that. [Laughter.]

Obviously, I’m too stupid. I’m like a DA member. I am stupid, that’s why.
[Interjections.] Why don’t you deal with the issues, Kohler-Barnard? You
are always being personal. Why don’t you go and say to foreigners that they
are not welcome in this country; our people must kill them? Why don’t you
go and say that again ... [Interjections.] ... as you keep on doing that.
[Interjections.]

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Excuse me.

Adv J H DE LANGE: They are obviously trying to ...

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: I rise on a point of order.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, what is your point of
order?

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: On a point of order: I would like that comment to be
withdrawn. I have never in my life told anyone to kill anyone. I take the
most gross ... Really! Really! I want that withdrawn please.

Adv J H DE LANGE: Ask your own members what they think about it.
Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: It is totally, totally unparliamentary to suggest such
a revolting thing.

Adv J H DE LANGE: I withdraw. I withdraw. Sit down, I want to go on.
[Laughter.]

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Chair, are you chairing this debate? [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, hon member!

Adv J H DE LANGE: I withdraw. Sit down.

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: Excuse me, House Chairperson, are you chairing the
debate?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please!

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD: ... because I don’t take orders from the ANC.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon De Lange, order please.

Adv J H DE LANGE: Sit down. I withdraw.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): You may continue.
Adv J H DE LANGE: I withdraw. Thank you. [Interjections.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please! Hon Davidson?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chair, I really think an
appropriate withdrawal is in order. I would ask you that he withdraw those
remarks. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, he said he withdrew.

Adv J H DE LANGE: I’ve withdrawn, Chair. Can I go on?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Yes.

Adv J H DE LANGE: Thank you. One of the issues we were worried about was
that the way the Bill was drafted, it created a commercial bank, and we
were ...

An HON MEMBER: Why were you fired?

Adv J H DE LANGE: Oh, Michael, shut up!

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please!

Adv J H DE LANGE: You know why I was fired. I was demoted, you idiot.
[Interjections.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, order please!
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member?

Mrs J D KILIAN: I rise on a point of order, hon Chairperson. I submit that
the use of the word “idiot” is unparliamentary.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon De Lange, could you withdraw
the word “idiot”.

Adv J H DE LANGE: I withdraw.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you. Continue, hon member.

Adv J H DE LANGE: Would “those people who are deficient of certain
intellectual capacities” be better? [Laughter.] Okay. [Applause.] Those are
the people I am referring to.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, hon members!

Adv J H DE LANGE: What I was trying to say is that what we then did was
look at the three major powers of a bank, that is, investing, lending and
borrowing. And we then made sure that this bank would not have unfettered
powers to lend, to invest or to borrow, because if it did, there would be a
risk attached to it. For example, if this bank went and invested its monies
in Greece or another country which has problems with its banking system,
then it could clearly hit back at us.

What we have done is made those three powers subject to a policy passed by
Cabinet and introduced in this Parliament to actually prescribe the
lending, the borrowing and the investment powers of the bank.

The most important power you can give the Ministry and the executive is to
set the parameters of policy - and all the opposition parties agree with
this. So, if you don’t like something - for example, what the Land Bank
did: at one stage it started borrowing money for golfing estates – you
would make sure that the policy spelt out clearly that that couldn’t be
done. You would make sure that it couldn’t invest in certain places.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, your time has expired.

Adv J H DE LANGE: I was interrupted so much, but thank you, Chair. For
those that are intellectually deficient, please continue with your
heckling. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Hon Chair and members, firstly, I would
like to thank the members who have risen on behalf of their parties to
support this Bill. I would like to thank Cope in particular, even though
their support was grudging because of their worries about corporate
governance and the powers of the Minister and so on, but I think it is
better than opposition or prevarication. Let me thank the IFP for their
unequivocal support, and thank the ACDP as well.

I think the Deputy Minister as well as the hon De Lange have responded to
some of the worries that the other members have pointed out with respect to
this Bill, and have assured members that there are good safeguards in the
Bill in order to ensure that there are very few risks or no risks at all to
the savings that the poor will make.

I would like to respond to some of the issues that the DA raised. The ANC
fought and won the election in 2009 with an overwhelming majority. In our
election manifesto we promised the electorate to deliver on a mandate which
prioritised rural development, poverty alleviation and economic growth,
among other things.

The Bill is consistent with the mandate derived from the electorate. It
will be an important catalyst for economic growth, and seeks to empower the
marginalised communities of the country, which to most men and women are
represented by the ANC and not the DA. The ANC speaks for the people of
South Africa as a whole, but we speak in particular for the disadvantaged
and the poor. The DA speaks for the advantaged class and the rich, and that
is why they do not support this Bill. [Interjections.] The contention that
the Bill gives the Minister too much power has become a familiar refrain in
the discourse of the opposition. [Interjections.] They would rather that
the power lies in some unelected entity where they would have an impact or
influence.

The majority black government must be weakened by committees that supersede
the executive authority of the elected majority party. But the Minister
needs power, which she or he exercises through the Cabinet.
[Interjections.] This Bill provides for the establishment of the Postbank
as a financial institution, which should be governed as a bank, and the
Minister will act with the concurrence of the Minister of Finance. I do not
see anything amiss with that.

Policy for the Postbank must be informed by the needs of the developmental
state and the priorities which our people mandated us to pursue, and we
will do so doggedly and unflinchingly. We will not be lectured to on
democracy and good governance by those we fought for and gave democracy and
good governance to. We will not abuse the power that we get, and we will
not deliberately create mechanisms that give rise to such abuse.
[Interjections.]

We suffered such abuse and autocracy for decades, but we will not hesitate
to get the power that we need to drive our developmental agenda. We cannot
afford to be emasculated by pontificating and fine-sounding phrases which
we know are not genuinely meant. I thank you. [Applause.]

Prof B TUROK: Chair, I have a point of order. I did not want to interrupt
the Minister, but I did feel that throughout his speech there was a level
of noise coming from that corner, which was unacceptable, and I would point
out to you that, because the microphones in that area are very close to the
speaker - whereas on this side the Ministers and members are much further
away – disruptions and heckling from that side totally disrupt the speaker.
It has often happened to me that I have been unable to hear myself
speaking. [Interjections.] I appeal to you, the Chair, and the Speaker to
ensure that the noise levels coming from that corner do not disrupt the
speaker, who cannot hear himself speak. I ask for you to make a ruling on
this. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon member. Hon member,
I did not want to disrupt the Minister either. There was also noise from
the other speakers as well, because there was a lot of noise in this House.
So, I do believe that when the voters are listening to the debates, they
know what kind of people are representing them. [Interjections.]

Mr T W COETZEE: What kind is that?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Are those the kinds of members
that were elected by the people who always like to make a noise, rather
than concentrating on what the speakers are saying at the podium?

Prof B TUROK: I have a further point of order, Madam Chair. I think that
when members ask you questions as they did now, it is an insult to the
Chair and it is an insult to the House. I think you should ask him to
withdraw that. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Turok, the challenge is that
the very same people who were making a lot of noise - some of whom were the
Chief Whips and the Whips - are the ones who have to maintain order in this
House. I believe that all political parties have to take the responsibility
to advise or to train their Whips on their roles, irrespective of whether
it is a Chief Whip or just a Whip. Could you take your seat, hon Ben Turok.

Mr T W COETZEE: Madam Chairperson, I rise on a point of order: When the
Minister attacks us by saying that we represent the advantaged, when the
Minister himself relishes staying in a five-star hotel, that is
fundamentally hypocritical, and we have every right to object.
[Interjections.] [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, that was not a point
of order. The challenge is that some of you were provoking the Minister,
and you were even provoking other members. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): If you don’t know what is meant by
“provoke” then you have to look it up in your dictionary. That’s the
unfortunate part of this.

Ms B N DAMBUZA: Hon Chairperson, I want to ask whether the member on that
side is the Chief Whip of the Opposition party. I just want to be sure.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, could you please take
your seat.

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time (Democratic Alliance dissenting).

                CIVILIAN SECRETARIAT FOR POLICE SERVICE BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, may I appeal to
members to behave in this session. All the Whips from all political parties
should make sure that their members behave.

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon House Chair, hon Members of Parliament of this
House, in order for us to achieve our strategic goal of ensuring that the
people in South Africa are and feel safe, much depends on the kind of
civilian oversight we establish. Section 208 of our Constitution gives
effect to the establishment of the civilian secretariat under the direction
of the Minister. The White Paper on Safety and Security also required of us
to reform this policy to ensure that both policy planning and policy
monitoring occurred outside of the department, but within the Ministry.

Over a period of time, we have said that we have a duty to fight crime
smartly and toughly, with no mercy for those heartless criminals. At the
same time, we depend much on Bills like the one before us today, the
Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill, to ensure that there are no
abuses from that point of view.

We said a few weeks ago when we passed the Intellectual Property Laws
Amendment Bill here that these kinds of interventions aimed at
strengthening the civilian oversight arm are made to ensure that we will
never experience a police state. Therefore, the separation of powers and
the determination of their implementation have to be the order of the day.
This Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill seeks to ensure that a
few things are observed: one, to ensure that there is strong civilian
oversight; two, to ensure that there are partnerships; three, to ensure
that proper policy advice is given to the Minister; and, lastly, to ensure
that the civilian secretariat becomes a designated department. The co-
operation between the civilian secretariat and Independent Police
Investigative Directorate is of the utmost importance.

Another key aspect of this Bill relates to the establishment of the
provincial secretariat. We are putting more emphasis on ensuring that we
strengthen this part of the secretariat to ensure that where things happen,
at the coalface in the provinces, the monitoring and evaluation units are
working, and working effectively. As we demonstrated before, when we all
pull together we succeed. When we focus our energies, our commitment, and
walk our talk, we overcome together.

This is a new era, a new way of doing things and a new way of securing our
democracy through civilian oversights over police practices, budgets and
performance. We remain committed to seeing through our vision of a
transformed, accountable, and effective Police Service. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA: Hon Chairperson, members of Cabinet, hon Members of
Parliament, fellow South Africans, in December 1997, at its 50th national
conference in Mafikeng, the ANC – the people’s liberation movement, the
oldest organisation in South Africa, in Africa, and one of the few oldest
organisations in the world – resolved that: “The political oversight and
authority of the SAPS Ministry shall be enhanced to ensure compliance with
the aims of the government of the day.”

The Bill before the House today is in line with the Mafikeng ANC national
conference resolution. As a matter of fact, it unapologetically implements
that resolution. By the way, the ANC leads, and the ANC lives. [Applause.]

As contemplated in section 208 of the Constitution, a civilian secretariat
for the police must be established by national legislation to function
under the direction of the Cabinet member responsible for policing. The
Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill hereby intends to establish
the police civilian secretariat.

In 1995, when the SA Police Service Act was passed, it established the
Secretariat for Safety and Security. Currently, even if it is expected to
exercise civilian oversight over the Police Service, the secretariat has to
depend on the SAPS for its budget or finances. Since it gets its budget
from the SAPS, it equally has to account to the SAPS on how it spends its
allocated budget. This undermines the civilian oversight role of the
secretariat over the police.
This Bill establishes a civilian secretariat as a designated department at
national level. This means that as soon as this Bill is passed and becomes
an Act, the secretariat will get its budget from Treasury and that budget
will be approved by Parliament. The secretary will be an accounting officer
of the civilian secretariat. This, on its own, is indeed a milestone.

The Bill clearly defines the objects, functions and powers of the civilian
secretariat, the objects of which are: to exercise civilian oversight over
the Police Service; to give strategic advice to the Minister in respect of
developing and implementing policies; to provide administrative support
services to the Minister; to ensure South Africa’s engagement with regard
to relevant international obligations; to liaise and communicate with
stakeholders; to implement a partnership strategy to mobilise role-players
and stakeholders; to implement, promote and align the operations and
functions of the national and provincial secretariats; to promote co-
operation between the secretariat, the Police Service and the directorate,
that is the Independent Complaints Directorate, ICD, or Independent Police
Investigative Directorate, IPID; to provide guidance to community police
fora and associated structures and to facilitate their proper functioning;
and to provide for the establishment, composition and functions of a senior
management forum and ministerial executive committee.

Lo Mthethosivivinywa unika uNgqongqoshe woMnyango wamaPhoyisa, esebenzisa
imithetho yabasebenzi, amandla okubeka owesilisa noma owesifazane ukuba abe
ngunobhala isikhathi esiyiminyaka emihlanu, ingavuselelwa kanye, ukuze
aphinde aqhubeke aphathe eminye iminyaka emihlanu. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[This Bill gives the Minister of Police, through the use of labour laws,
the power to appoint a male or a female as secretary for a period of five
years, which can be renewed for another term so that he or she can continue
for another five years.]

It is the secretary who is ultimately responsible and accountable for all
that happens in that office at national level.

Lo Mthethosivivinywa uphinde unike uNgqongqoshe woMnyango wamaPhoyisa
amandla okuba asuse unobhala uma engaziphathi kahle, ngenxa yesimo sempilo
engeyinhle noma ukuhluleka ukwenza umsebenzi ngokufanele. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[This Bill also gives the Minister of Police the power to remove the
secretary if he or she does not conduct himself or herself well, because of
ill health, or because of incompetence.]

The secretary is obligated to submit quarterly reports to the Minister and
the parliamentary committees responsible for policing on the activities of
his or her office. As with all departments, organisations and entities, the
secretary shall prepare and submit to the Minister an annual report which
the Minister will table in Parliament.

The Bill provides for transitional arrangements and further repeals section
2 of the South African Police Service Act, Act 68 of 1995, and amends
section 1 of the SAPS Act, and section 1 of the Firearms Control Act, Act
60 of 2000.

As I conclude, I want to say that our vision is derived from the Freedom
Charter, which proclaimed in 1955 that there shall be peace and friendship.
This was against the backdrop of an apartheid state and security system
which undermined the human dignity and the rights of our people, and
simultaneously promoted war, not only in the country, but in the region and
on the continent as well.

In building on this vision of the Freedom Charter, the ANC declared at the
1997 Mafikeng national conference that its vision was to create structures
of civilian oversight, at local and national levels, to ensure that the SA
Police Service became accountable to the civilian authority through the
establishment of a civilian secretariat, the community policing forums, and
others. This resolution was taken in order to promote democratic
accountability, transparency and openness within the SA Police Service.
Police members in possession of such powers need close monitoring and
oversight by different organisations, and the civilian secretariat is one
of them.

The Bill provides the Ministry of Police, the Secretariat of Police and the
SAPS with yet more effective ammunition in the fight against crime. It
remains our firm belief that we have to do everything we can and that is
possible to ensure that crime is fought and that people are and feel safe.
As Parliament, the executive, the judiciary and South Africans, we are up
to the task and capable of addressing the crime-related challenges that lie
ahead.

Together we are turning the tide against crime and criminals. Working
together, we are winning the war. Let me thank the Secretary of Police, Ms
Jenni, the state law advisers and all organisations and individuals who
made written and/or oral submissions to Parliament on this Bill. They all
assisted the committee in the processing of this Bill.

Ningadinwa nangomuso. [Please do it again in the future.]

Hon Chairperson, I present to the House the Civilian Secretariat for Police
Service Bill of 2010. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs D A SCHÄFER: Mr Chairperson, in passing this Bill we will not be
creating a new entity, but rather re-establishing an existing one as a
separate entity in terms of its own legislation, and not as a subsection in
the South African Police Service Act.

In doing so, more credibility is given to the police secretariat, as a
civilian oversight entity independent of the police. The Bill gives more
clarity with regard to the objects and functions of the secretariat and
extends its functions in several important respects.

It provides for the secretariat to have its own budget, and to provide for
its establishment at national and provincial levels as an effective and
efficient organ of state. It also provides for close co-operation between
the secretariat and the soon-to-be Independent Police Investigative
Directorate, or IPID, currently known as the Independent Complaints
Directorate, ICD, as well as provincial secretariats and provincial police
heads.

Importantly, this Bill also makes provision for the monitoring of police
action and for ensuring that the SAPS puts in place effective systems for
the reporting and resolution of complaints from the public.

Whilst this legislation is a step in the right direction, we need to keep
in mind that the enactment of legislation alone is not going to suddenly
create a body that is a well-oiled piece of machinery. No matter what the
legislation says, if you do not have the right people in the right
positions to give effect to this legislation, then it will mean nothing.

In this connection, one could be forgiven for not even knowing there was
the Secretariat for Safety and Security until about a year ago when a new
police secretariat was appointed. Until that point, the secretariat was
probably one of the most dysfunctional bodies we had, frittering away money
on izimbizo and activities of which we were largely unaware, as they did
not file many reports either.

In my budget speech in 2009, I highlighted the fact that the department had
a total staff of 37. Of these, four were directors, at a salary of
R2,5 million per annum each. We had four deputy directors, at just under
R1,4 million each; three assistant directors, at just under R700 000 each;
and another five assistant directors, at just under R900 000 each. Thus, a
total of 43% of the staff were directors. This veritable array of extremely
well-paid directors managed to meet five out of their 19 performance
targets for the previous financial year.

We are very pleased to see a huge improvement in the functioning of this
department since then. If this continues, then this legislation will assist
them in ensuring that they play the vital role of civilian oversight of the
police, as envisaged in section 208 of the Constitution.

We have been concerned for a very long time that the recommendations of the
ICD have not been enforced by the SAPS and that there was no legislation
compelling them to do so. The recent Independent Police Investigative
Directorate Bill that was approved by this House will change that and
strengthen the ICD’s powers. But their recommendations will be even further
strengthened by this Bill, which provides for the secretary to receive
reports from the executive director of IPID regarding recommendations they
have made as a result of their investigations.

The secretariat must then monitor the implementation by the Police Service
of the recommendations made by the directorate and provide the Minister
with regular reports on steps taken to ensure their compliance. Thus, if
the SAPS does not implement the IPID’s recommendations, the Minister is
accountable. This is a huge step forward in terms of police accountability,
and we welcome it.

One of the other most significant changes in the functions of the
secretariat is that it will now take over the responsibility of monitoring
the police’s compliance, or rather lack thereof, with the Domestic Violence
Act. This was previously the responsibility of the ICD, which performed
rather dismally in that regard.

The initial IPID Bill purported to repeal the whole of section 18 of the
Domestic Violence Act, causing a justified outcry from NGOs working with
victims of domestic violence. However, this has now been remedied, and it
just provides for the secretariat to take over the responsibilities which
were previously those of the ICD.

Once again, legislation can only be effective if the correct people are in
place and also the necessary resources. I trust that the Secretary of
Police realises the huge task that this is going to be. The report of the
ICD in 2008 showed that approximately 65% of police stations fail to comply
with the Domestic Violence Act. The DA registered our concerns at the time.

We had to reiterate those concerns in 2009, when a report from the Auditor-
General documented chronic failure in terms of adequately reporting
domestic violence incidents at police stations in eight of the nine
provinces. The report even highlighted, in some instances, 75% failure
rates in recording domestic violence incidents in occurrence books. This
obviously affects the crime statistics and makes it difficult to gauge the
true extent of the problem.

Our oversight visits in the last year have shown that, to this day, many
police officers show scant regard for the Domestic Violence Act, and that
they regard it as an inconvenience in their busy life of real policing. The
fact that after 10 years of the Act being in force there is still a
provision in the Domestic Violence Act allowing for police officers to
apply for exemption from being charged with misconduct if they fail to
comply with it, is a travesty of justice. The secretary has undertaken in
our committee to review at the entire Act, and this clause in particular,
and we will hold her to that.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I need to engage in a spot of self–indulgence, as this
is the last time I will speak in this House as a member of the Portfolio
Committee on Police.

As a new Member of Parliament, I can think of no nicer committee to have
served on. From the start, we have worked together well and extremely hard,
and in such a way that I have been inspired that there is hope for service
delivery from the police in this country.

To all the members who have taught me so much so quickly, a very big thank
you. But special thanks must go to the hon Chikunga, our chairperson. She
is a slave-driver of note, but she works just as hard herself, if not
harder. Her unfailing commitment to sorting out the Police Service is to be
commended, as well as her very strong, yet very human nature.

Thank you for everything. It has been a privilege to serve on your
committee. The DA will support this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr M E GEORGE: Hon Chair, the South African Constitution requires in
section 208 for the civilian secretariat to function under the direction of
the Minister. It is designated as a department at the national level in its
own right with its own budget. The secretary will be the accounting officer
from now onwards.

It is worth taking a moment to underscore clause 4(4) of the Bill which
reads:

   The Civilian Secretariat ... must exercise its powers and perform its
   functions without fear, favour or prejudice in the interest of
   maintaining effective and efficient policing and a high standard of
   professional ethics in the police service.

This provision, read in conjunction with clause 4(6) in the Bill, provides
that the secretariat will obtain its budget from money appropriated by
Parliament, giving the secretariat the autonomy to function independently
of the police.

This is indeed a very healthy development. The only question that we have
is whether this autonomy will last. A few years ago, we were all very
excited about the creation of the Scorpions, but it was too good to last.
If the civilian secretariat functions too well, it may also be disbanded,
not because it does not answer the needs of South Africans, but because it
does not suit the ruling party.

The civilian secretariat is mandated in this Bill to give strategic advice
to the Minister in respect of developing and implementing policies. I
believe that the Minister is duty-bound to report to Parliament as to what
he makes of the strategic advice he is given. While it will be his right to
take advice or decline it, we will need to know because it is our function
to exercise oversight over the Minister.

The fact that this Bill requires in clause 6(2)(a)(1) for the civilian
secretariat to conduct research into policing matters and to establish
competencies means that the Minister will be getting advice on the basis of
research.

The creation of the resource information centre is very welcome. Just as
welcome, is the fact that the civilian secretariat must conduct quality
assessment of the Police Service, identify problem areas for early
interventions and help develop best practice models.

For South Africans who are punch-drunk from being attacked by criminals, it
is important that the civilian secretariat continues to recommend steps for
improved service delivery and police effectiveness. If this is done
satisfactorily, the public will endorse the secretariat.

If this fails, the public will have nowhere else to turn. So, the
secretariat is one of the important structures in our country. I see my
time has expired, Chair. What I want to say, which must be addressed by the
Minister, is that, funds permitting, the secretariat must be given more
powers, especially in the provinces. At the moment, there are limits. Cope
will support the Bill. Thank you very much. [Time expired.]

Mr R N CEBEKHULU: Chairperson, firstly, I must state that I am not a member
of this portfolio committee. The IFP’s member of the committee is Mr V B
Ndlovu, but I am standing in on his behalf and on behalf of the IFP. The
party supports this Bill.

The Civilian Secretariat for Police Service Bill is another landmark Bill
that seeks to entrench and enhance the supervision and oversight of our
Police Service. Our constitutional dispensation demands that the civilian
secretariat be established and, therefore, this Bill is an imperative
within our democracy.

The Police Service is not autonomous or above the law and must be held to
account for any actions which go beyond the limits of reasonable law
enforcement.

The controversial “shoot-to-kill” comments made by senior police personnel
must not be allowed to engender a culture within the Police Service which
sees police officers placing themselves above the law.

Corruption, which is currently rife at many of our police stations, must
also be addressed and stamped out as a matter of urgency, and the
establishment of the civilian secretariat will assist in this regard by
adding more muscle to the Independent Police Investigative Directorate.

In addition, the civilian secretariat has the very important role of
advising and supporting the Minister of Police in the exercise of his
powers and functions, and with seasoned professionals assuming the seats of
the secretariat’s three chief directors, we expect an overall improvement
in policing services within South Africa. The IFP fully supports the Bill.
I thank you. [Applause.]

Rev K R J MESHOE: Chairperson, the ACDP supports this Bill, as the
secretariat will function independently of the Police Service and report
directly to the Minister. This is unlike the current Secretariat for Safety
and Security, which is regulated in terms of the South African Police
Service Act, the Saps Act.

As one of the functions of the civilian secretariat is to monitor the
performance of the Police Service, I hereby request that the performance of
the police at the Hillbrow Police Station be prioritised and, specifically,
that the secretariat looks at the way the police deal with drug trafficking
in the area. The secretariat should also review the policy that restricts
police officers’ responsibilities to their prescribed areas of
jurisdiction.

The ACDP believes that the police should be empowered to arrest criminals
throughout the country so that they do not have a place to hide. What is
reported to have happened in Hillbrow a few days ago, where Hillbrow police
officers arrested police officers from Johannesburg while they were trying
to arrest drug dealers is totally unacceptable and should not be allowed to
happen again.

The Police Service should co-operate in order to stamp out crime throughout
the country. I thank you.

Mnr P J GROENEWALD: Agb Voorsitter, ek wil  vir  die  agb  Chikunga  sê  dat
Mafikeng ‘n bietjie lank gelede was. Die ANC behoort nie  so  te  sukkel  om
wetgewing deur te kry nie. Dis al bietjie langer as tien jaar.

Agb  Voorsitter,  die  VF  Plus  ondersteun   hierdie   wetgewing   en   die
wetsontwerp, maar ek wil vir die agb Minister sê dat  dit  een  ding  is  om
iets in die Wetboek te hê, maar dat dit ’n ander  ding  is  as  dit  by  die
praktyk kom. Kom ons vat die aspek wat lui  dat  die  sekretariaat  die  agb
Minister sal adviseer. Ek wil egter vir die  agb  Minister  sê  dat  daardie
advies eers werklik kragtig sal word as  hy  daardie  advies  volg.  Ek  wil
ongelukkig vir die agb Minister sê dat, as ek so in die  algemeen  kyk,  dit
nie altyd lyk of die agb Minister na die advies luister nie.

So, ek wil ’n beroep op die agb Minister doen. As hy die  advies  kry,  moet
hy daardie advies volg, want die advies is gewoonlik om die  Suid-Afrikaanse
Polisiediens te verbeter. Dan sal hierdie wetsontwerp ’n groot sukses  wees.
Ek dank u. (Translation of Afrikaans speech follows.)

[Mr P J GROENEWALD: Hon Chairperson, I want to tell the  hon  Chikunga  that
it has been a while since Mafikeng. The ANC should not  be  struggling  like
this to get a piece of legislation accepted. It is a  tad  longer  than  ten
years already.

Hon Chairperson, the FF Plus supports this legislation and this Bill, but  I
want to tell the hon Minister that it is one thing  to  place  something  on
the Statute Book, but that it is  quite  different  when  it  comes  to  the
practice of implementation. Let us  take  the  aspect  that  says  that  the
secretariat will advise the hon Minister. I, however, want to tell  the  hon
Minister that this advice will really only be powerful  if  he  follows  it.
Unfortunately I  have  to  tell  the  hon  Minister  that,  from  a  general
perspective, it does not always seem as if the hon Minister is listening  to
this advice.

I therefore want to make an appeal to  the  hon  Minister.  If  he  receives
advice he has to follow that advice, because the advice is usually  intended
to improve the South African Police Service. Then this Bill will be  a  huge
success. I thank you.]

Mrs I C DITSHETELO: Chair, this Bill is obviously long overdue, since the
South African Police Service Act predates the Constitution. For that reason
it is much appreciated. Civilian oversight is an inherent feature most
especially of the Police Service.

The foresight to have the secretariat reporting directly to the Minister is
a wise decision. We look forward to a Police Service that is accountable to
its civilians for its actions and hope that the secretariat will be
fearless in executing its evaluation and monitoring role over the Police
Service. The UCDP accepts the Bill. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN: Chairperson, the ANC’s 2009 election manifesto was very
clear about its intentions in the fight against crime and corruption, and
listed this as one of its five priority areas for the period through to
2014. It said the following, and I want to quote the following two
paragraphs: firstly, “our fight against crime will be a key priority to
ensure safer and more secure communities”; and, secondly, “crime is a major
national challenge, and the fight against crime and corruption needs to be
stepped up”.

The Bill which we are debating today helps strengthen the fight against
crime through the creation of a truly independent civilian secretariat.
Currently, the secretariat is regulated in terms of the South African
Police Service Act. Section 2 of Act 68 of 1995 will therefore be repealed.
To further enhance its independence, the civilian secretariat will be
financed from monies appropriated by Parliament.
The civilian secretariat will play an important role in monitoring the
performance of the SA Police Service and the utilisation of the budget by
the Police Service.

Each province, through the MEC, will be required to constitute a provincial
secretariat. Until now, this has not been a requirement; it has been a
choice of provinces. And, in fact, at the moment, only two provincial
secretariats exist. This Bill requires that a provincial secretariat be
established in every province within 18 months of the enactment of this
Act.

The Bill states that the head of the provincial secretariat may not be a
member or a former member of the SA Police Service. The reason for this is
to further strengthen the independence of the provincial secretariats - the
same as for the civilian secretariat.

The term of office of a provincial secretariat is five years, which may be
renewed for one additional term only. The functions of the provincial
secretariats include the monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of
policing polices and the evaluation and monitoring of police conduct in
each province. The provincial secretariats will be required to submit
reports to the MECs, the heads of the provincial departments and the
secretaries.

Although the provincial secretariats are appointed by the relevant MECs, in
consultation with the Minister of Police, they are not independent
institutions. They are required to work closely with the secretaries and
meet on a quarterly basis and ensure that there is alignment between the
provincial secretariats and the secretary in terms of annual strategic and
performance plans.

They also need to discuss the performance of the police in the provinces to
identify best practices, detect any failures and recommend steps to be
taken to prevent or correct such failures. Where a provincial secretariat
is not able to perform its functions properly or cannot fulfil its
obligations in terms of the Bill, the Minister, after consultation with the
relevant MEC, may instruct the civilian secretariat to intervene in the
affairs of a provincial secretariat. These measures will help to ensure
that we don’t allow a situation to develop in which provincial secretariats
become dysfunctional and there is no mechanism for intervention.

One of the important aspects of this Bill is that it ensures co-operation
between the civilian secretariat and the recently passed Independent Police
Investigative Directorate Bill, IPID. In particular, the civilian
secretariat will be responsible for monitoring the implementation by the SA
Police Service of recommendations which are made by IPID. It will have to
provide the Minister with regular reports on the steps taken by the SAPS to
ensure compliance. For the first time we will have a situation in which
recommendations of IPID, or the directorate of the SAPS, are monitored,
but, more importantly, the SAPS will now be held accountable. We expect the
SA Police Service to provide full co-operation in this regard.

Furthermore, the Bill requires that the SA Police Service provides its full
co-operation to the civilian secretariat and, where required, to the
provincial secretariats. This includes providing the civilian secretariat
with the information it will need to be able to effectively perform its
oversight function of the SA Police Service, as required in this Bill. The
SAPS will also be required to provide the civilian secretariat with the
necessary information and support so that it can monitor and evaluate the
compliance of the SAPS with the Domestic Violence Act of 1998. This is a
new function which is being allocated to the civilian secretariat. Until
now, this has been a function that was performed by the Independent
Complaints Directorate.

Placing the Domestic Violence Act under the watch of the civilian
secretariat will ensure that greater importance is placed on compliance by
the SAPS with regard to section 18 of the Domestic Violence Act.

We wish the soon-to-be-established civilian secretariat for the Police
Service well in its work. The ANC’s manifesto says that by working together
we can do more. Therefore, by working together, the civilian secretariat,
the SA Police Service and the Independent Police Investigative Directorate
can do more to bring about a Police Service that is efficient, effective
and free of corruption.

As I conclude, I would like to bid farewell to the hon Debbie Schäfer, who
has played a very constructive and, I think, important role in the work and
deliberations of the Portfolio Committee on Police since she came to
Parliament last year. I think it’s a great pity that the leadership of the
DA has decided to move her elsewhere. But maybe they need her capabilities
in another portfolio committee. I just want to say that I have always found
it strange that as soon as a member of the DA starts to perform well,
constructively and effectively, the DA suddenly moves them away.
[Interjections.]

As I conclude, perhaps I could also say to Premier Helen Zille of the
Western Cape that she said that she didn’t have many women to choose from
to fill positions in her provincial executive, but I want to say that I
think hon Debbie Schäfer would have been an ideal candidate to have in your
provincial executive. [Applause.] Chairperson, thanks very much. The ANC
supports this Bill. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF POLICE: Chairperson, this debate underpins a very
fundamental point which I think we need to note, that when we talk about
policing in South Africa, we still talk about community policing. That’s
the orientation, that’s the philosophical outlook, and we are committed to
that.

I will take advice, hon Groenewald, if it is sound advice. I can promise
you that. If I see that the advice is not going to help, I don’t think I’m
going to agree and take that advice. Thanks for your point. I take your
point.

Tshangisa, ngiyakuzwa baba, kulokhu okushoyo. [Tshangisa, I understand what
you are saying.]

We have emphasised the point of strengthening the secretariats in the
provinces. Regarding what the Rev Meshoe raised, I want to say that Gauteng
has a new police commissioner, Lieutenant ...

... uzokhwela phezu kwakhe ... [ ... he will deal with him ...]

... because he must respond to some of these things but, beyond that,
policy matters will be taken care of, as we raised earlier with you.

Nongalo, u “Shoot to Kill” – usehambile, oh nanguya akakahambi- cha awukho
u “Shoot to Kill” Baba, yinto yamaphepha le, ungabalaleli laba bantu
bakhuluma kakhulu; ngakho-ke ungahambi nabo. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[Nongalo, the hon member who spoke about “Shoot to Kill”” has gone - oh,
there he is. There is no instruction such as “Shoot to Kill”, hon member.
That is something to do with the media. Do not listen to the media because
they are talkative, so do not believe them.]

We do not have that; there is no such policy as “Shoot to Kill”. In
conclusion, thank you members of the portfolio committee. Thank you very
much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.


                         TRANSPORT LAWS REPEAL BILL


                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, colleagues, Members of Parliament,
the SA Law Reform Commission is mandated to revise the South African
Statute Book and to identify and recommend for repeal or amendment laws
that are inconsistent with the equality clause in the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa.

The SPEAKER: Order! Order, hon members! Order please. Continue, Minister.

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: In this regard, the commission conducted
research and established that there were 2 800 Acts on the Statute Book and
that 218 of these were administered by the Department of Transport. Of the
218 pieces of legislation identified as being statutes administered by the
Department of Transport, the commission and the department identified 63
Acts that may be repealed wholly, and 19 Acts that may be partially
repealed.

The Bill’s first schedule seeks to repeal some railway construction Acts
dating back to 1939. These Acts authorised the construction and equipment
of railway lines at certain places in the country. Having achieved the
purpose for which they were enacted, these Acts are now spent and can be
repealed.

Schedule 2 seeks to repeal Acts that no longer serve any purpose, for
example the Railways and Harbours Strike and Service Amendment Act of 1914.
For example, section 15 is the only remaining provision of the Railway
Expropriation Act of 1995, the other provisions having been repealed over
the years. The application of section 15 depends on the existence of a
provision in another Act, and that Act itself has been repealed. Thus,
section 15 can no longer be applied and the Acts in question can be
repealed.

The Portfolio Committee on Transport and the relevant stakeholders
discussed further Acts listed in Schedule 1 of the Bill and approved 47 of
those Acts as legislation that needed to be repealed totally.
Within Schedule 2 provisions that stand to be repealed have either become
obsolete or will become obsolete since the legislation they refer to stands
to be repealed by virtue of Schedule 1. For example, the application of
section 1 of the Railways and Harbours Service and Superannuation Fund Acts
Amendment Act of 1930, which stands to be replaced, is dependent on a
provision in another Act. Since that Act has already been repealed, the
said section serves no purpose and can be repealed.

Furthermore, the Portfolio Committee on Transport, having discussed this
Bill with the department and relevant stakeholders, has approved 14 Acts in
Schedule 2. These fall into the category of those Acts that need to be
repealed to a certain extent.

The Bill was published for comment in the Government Gazette in February
2009. Comments were received from Transnet, the Passenger Rail Agency of SA
and the Office of the Chief State Law Adviser.

The state law advisers and the Department of Transport are of the opinion
that this Bill must therefore be dealt with in accordance with the
procedure established by section 75 of the Constitution. This is because it
contains no provisions to which the procedure set out in section 74 or 76
of the Constitution applies.

Hon Chair, we therefore request that this House pass this Bill. I thank
you. [Applause.]
Ms N R BHENGU: Mr Chairperson, hon members, the Portfolio Committee on
Transport processed the Transport Laws Repeal Bill. All political parties
who are active in the Portfolio Committee on Transport adopted the Bill
with no reservations.

The Department of Transport came to brief the Portfolio Committee on
Transport on what this Bill sought to achieve. At the first briefing to the
Portfolio Committee on Transport, the department came unprepared and
presented the Portfolio Committee on Transport with a list of the transport
laws that this Bill would repeal without outlining the provisions of such
laws.

The Portfolio Committee on Transport found the failure to provide the
provisions of the said Acts by the officials of the department
unacceptable. This would have meant that members of the Portfolio Committee
on Transport was expected by the Department of Transport to discuss the
repealing of transport laws, the provisions of which the members would have
had no understanding of as some of these transport laws were passed by
previous parliaments and most of them during the apartheid era.

We commend the officials from the department who accepted this weakness and
committed to presenting to the Portfolio Committee on Transport the
provisions of the laws that this Bill seeks to repeal. That process was
followed by public hearings. We received only two submissions on the Bill
and held public hearings on them.
Transnet submitted that Parliament should not repeal the following Acts:
the Railway Construction Act, Act 57 of 1961; the Second Railway
Construction Act, Act 58 of 1963; the Railway Construction Act, Act 5 of
1965; and the Railway Construction Act, Act 17 of 1966. Transnet argued
that all these Acts referred to agreements concluded between the government
of the Republic of South Africa and its Railways and Harbours
Administration, hereinafter called “the Administration”.

The said Acts specifically empowered “the Administration” to give effect to
the respective agreements, a right that was ultimately transferred to
Transnet in terms of the Legal Succession to the South African Transport
Services Act, Act 9 of 1989.

All these agreements confer disposing rights on “the Administration” in
respect of the railway line that is the subject of the Act in question.
These disposing rights still appear to be in existence and their duration
may be summarised as follows: the Railway Construction Act, Act 57 of 1961,
expires in 2012; the Second Railway Construction Act, Act 58 of 1963,
expires in 2013; the Railway Construction Act, Act 5 of 1965, expires in
2015; and the Railway Construction Act, Act 17 of 1966, expires in 2016.

Transnet submitted that the repeal of the four above-mentioned Acts should
be delayed until the right in question has expired. The committee acceded
to Transnet’s submission.
A second submission was made by a member of the public from Melmoth, Mr
Bhekizenzo Ngobese. The Portfolio Committee on Transport commended Mr
Ngobese for his courage and viewed him as an example of public
participation in lawmaking. Mr Ngobese’s submission was, however, more
relevant to efforts to reduce the number of fatal accidents and the
congestion of roads through speed limits.

The Portfolio Committee on Transport then resolved to defer the discussion
on Mr Ngobese’s submission to a time when the committee would engage in
discussions on fatal accidents and the congestion of roads. The Portfolio
Committee on Transport adopted the Bill.

We recommend that the House pass the Transport Laws Repeal Bill. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr S B FARROW: Chair, as the Minister and the portfolio chair so
competently explained, the Bill before us repeals some 51 Acts and only
certain provisions of 14 Acts that required repealing. The Acts for repeal
were identified in terms of the SA Law Commission’s mandate to revise the
South African Statute Book with a view to recommending, in conjunction with
the Department of Transport, for repeal or amendment those Acts or
provisions of Acts that are inconsistent with the equality clause in the
Constitution, and are either redundant or obsolete. Many of these old laws
had connotations of the old apartheid regime and were identified as no
longer having legal effect.
The task could not have been all that easy considering that the Acts go
back to 1914 - actually, Minister, not 1936 - and are not always readily
available through electronic media. In many cases the old Acts had to be
sourced from parliamentary archives. The portfolio committee, to a certain
degree, had similar problems, because “taking the word” of officials and
the state law advisers for some of the Acts was clearly not the correct way
of doing diligent oversight. But, needless to say, we managed to work our
way through them.

Coupled to this was the limited response to the public hearings. The
portfolio committee chair mentioned that there was only one or two people
that came forward for comment since the Bill was gazetted some months
previously. The only real comments of any note came from Transnet. Their
subsequent interaction with the portfolio committee, as was mentioned, led
to four Railway Construction Acts previously being considered for repeal,
being excluded in this current Bill. The reason for their exclusion was
that these Acts still have disposing rights for a varying period ranging
from 2011 to 2016.

Under the circumstances, it was decided that these Acts should, therefore,
run their course and as they expired we would repeal them. It was
interesting to note that many of the removed Acts had supply links to
manufacturers that are still in existence today, such as the Highveld steel
company. One’s mind cannot but think of what connection and the real
purpose of those Acts were, way back then in the height of apartheid in
1960. But, more importantly, who benefited from these laws.

Repealing Acts of this nature does have its benefits as it requires one to
go into the Acts, and to assess their merits in retaining anything in them
or not. This is a bit like ensuring that one doesn’t throw the baby out
with the bath water. Fortunately, though, many of our current transport
laws have an overarching effect which ensures a certain amount of
safeguards to prevent any intended gaps occurring.

Whilst I have the podium I want to say that one of the concerns the DA has
is that we may be doing away with Acts which could in many ways help, as
they do, in administering our transport better. For instance, one of our
Acts, which was previously repealed, could ensure better control and
movement of goods now going by rail. Although this specific Act does not
appear in this repeal Bill, our research now suggests that we should
consider this Act. To this end, the DA will be submitting a Private
Member’s Bill to reintroduce applicable - and I point and stress applicable
- provisions in the Road Transportation Act, Act 74 of 1977. This is to
once more control and regulate the movement of certain goods by road with a
view to ensuring that where parallel rail services exist these goods will
in future be transported by rail.

The impact of the movement of heavy freight such as coal, iron ore, steel,
timber and similar bulk products by road, has had a devastating effect on
our roads, and the time has come for this practice to be properly policed.
We are not saying that we want to introduce the authoritarian and
dictatorial practices of the past through the old railway police, but
certain provisions in this Act did help in the preservation of our road
network by ensuring that road freighters first had to pass the scrutiny of
a transport board and have a permit issued only if they met certain
criteria. The DA has, in previous debates, actually mentioned to the
Minister and his predecessors to introduce such a Bill or even a regulation
for certain goods to go by rail, but so far that has fallen on deaf ears.

I trust that support will be given for this initiative when this Private
Member’s Bill is introduced in Parliament. This aside, the DA supports the
Transport Laws Repeal Bill and can’t wait to see the end of that. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr P D MBHELE: House Chair, if a department that is supposed to be
administering Acts of Parliament doesn’t quite know how many such Acts are
in force, then what about us in Parliament who are supposed to conduct
oversight?

Members of this House, I understand, have never been given a full list of
Acts administered by different departments. This defect needs to be
remedied and the Speaker should order all departments to oblige, otherwise
we will be operating in the dark. The Transport Laws Repeal Bill reveals to
us why this is so important.

As Parliament, we are forever engaged in making new laws because changing
circumstances overtake laws that were made in the past. Yet we allow laws
that are spent or have no practical utility or legal effect to stay on.
Inasmuch as we make laws, we should, on a regular basis, repeal laws that
are spent or laws that impede our society from making progress.

Laws are good when they are current and progressive. Laws are bad when they
hark back to a previous time and previous order, and stand in the way of
change and innovations. Who knows what greater progress we could have made
if we had only removed laws that are now obstacles in the path of progress?
The Department of Transport must, therefore, be commended for its spring-
cleaning and removal from the Statute Book of laws which are ghosts from
the past. We also need to be doing our own ghost busting.

According to the SA Law Commission, South Africa has 2 800 Acts on its
Statute Book. The Department of Transport was supposed to be administering
218 of these Acts. However, 51 of these 218 Acts, which is a staggering
23,5%, will now be repealed after today. That is an alarming statistic.
What if every department is sitting with laws, 20% of which are obsolete?
On top of that, another 14 Acts will be pruned, with certain provisions in
them being excised. The slimmer versions will make these laws more modern.

This exercise should be an eye-opener to all of us. There is a lot of
clutter on our Statute Book that must be removed. We have made a beginning,
and Cope requests that a full-scale cleanup in all departments be made. I
wish to submit that 2 000 Acts of Parliament will certainly be far better
than 2 800. The fact that 16 years have passed since the birth of our
democracy must indicate to us the urgency of properly cleaning up our laws.
There are also many ordinances in the provincial legislatures that continue
to live when they should have been remade into Acts of provincial
parliaments long ago. The Land Use Planning Ordinance, Lupo, is one such
ordinance.

A huge nightmare for our democracy, however, lies in the regulations that
accompany Acts of Parliament. While the cleaning up of the statutes is a
big step in the right direction, the regulations should never be left in
limbo. For ordinary citizens, it is the obscure regulations which are the
bane of their lives.

It is interesting to note that certain Acts have had a 50-year lifespan and
are being left out of the process we are engaged in to run their course
within the next six years. While this is perhaps the best option, all
things considered, government needs to be proactive in determining whether
any loopholes will arise come 2016 that would be detrimental to the state,
and take timely action.

The handover should be thoroughly prepared for, and also to prevent there
being any loopholes that would enable departmental officials to defraud the
state through collusion. Cope will, however, support the Transport Laws
Repeal Bill. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Chairperson, the IFP understands that the Transport Laws
Repeal Bill urgently requires simplification. In addition, all obsolete and
extremely primitive legislation also requires eradication. For instance,
there are currently 20 Railway Construction Acts which allow for the
construction of equipment at various places within our country. These laws
are often outdated and we believe that the industry must be broadened in
order for the greater part of our country to benefit. It is as necessary as
a dental root-canal procedure, but will hopefully be less painful.

The Bill seeks to repeal legislation which has been identified by the SA
Law Reform Commission as being inconsistent with the equality clause in the
Constitution or as being redundant and obsolete. I am sure we all agree
that legislation which is no longer of any practical import and utility has
no place in effective governance. Legislation which continues to have legal
effect even when the purpose for which it was enacted no longer exists, or
is being met by alternative means, must likewise be repealed.
Our rail system is in urgent need of modernisation. The IFP believes that
this is the most opportune time to consider wide-gauge railway lines, as
well as the manufacture of commuter-friendly coaches. In conclusion, the
IFP, therefore, supports the culling of all unnecessary, obsolete and
redundant laws because they impact negatively upon service delivery. I
thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you hon
members and members of the Portfolio Committee on Transport. I thank you
for the co-operative and constructive way in which we work. Thank you for
the comments. We also thank the members for supporting this Bill, and it
shall be dealt with accordingly.

Of course, we will be bringing forward other obsolete Acts that need to be
repealed that we still have on our Statute Book, such as the legislation on
the transportation of coloured people and so forth. Those Acts are still
going to be brought before this House. I thank you. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Bill read a second time.

The House adjourned at 17:06.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                          FRIDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Referral to Committees of papers tabled

    (1)     The following paper is referred to the Committee on the Auditor-
        General for consideration and report. The report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information is
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Office of the
             Auditor-General for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP229-2010].

    (2)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Tourism for consideration and report. The reports of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information are
        referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:
        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote 25 – Department of
             Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP181-2010].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of South African Tourism
             for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.

    (3)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Labour for consideration and report. The reports of the Independent
        Auditors and the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
             Labour – Vote No 15 for 2009-10, including the Reports of the
             Auditor-General on the 2009-10 Financial Statements and
             Performance Information of Vote No 15, the Sheltered Employment
             Factories and the National Skills Fund [RP129-2010].

        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the National Economic
             Development and Labour Council (Nedlac) for 2009-10, including
             the Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial
             Statements for 2009-10.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the Commission for
             Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) for 2009-10,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP84-2010].
        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the Compensation Fund
             for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the Unemployment
             Insurance Fund (UIF) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP134-2010].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of Productivity SA for
             2009-10, including the Report of the Independent Auditors on
             the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
             10 [RP132-2010].

    (4)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Independent Auditors and the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Department of
             Public Enterprises for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP201-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of Denel (Proprietary)
             Limited for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.

    (5)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Justice and Constitutional Development for consideration and
        report. The reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the South African Human
             Rights Commission (SAHRC) for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP167-2010].


          b) Report and Financial Statements of the Public Protector South
             Africa for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-General
             on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
             2009-10 [RP212-2010].


          c) Report and Financial Statements of the Special Investigating
             Unit (SIU) for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP 220-2010].


    (6)     The following papers are referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Independent Auditors and Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

          a) Report and Financial Statements of the Development Bank of
             Southern Africa (DBSA) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10, and the Report and
             Financial Statements of the DBSA Development Fund for 2009-10,
             including the Report of the Independent Auditors on the
             Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Financial and
             Fiscal Commission (FFC) for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP73-2010].

    (7)     The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Science and Technology for consideration and report. The report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information is referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for
        consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for
             Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) for 2009-10,
             including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
             Statements and Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP194-
             2010].


    (8)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Basic Education for consideration and report. The reports of the
        Auditor-General and Independent Auditors on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information are referred to the
        Committee on Public Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of the Council for Quality
             Assurance in General and Further Education and Training -
             Umalusi - for 2009-10, including the Report of the Independent
             Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the Education Labour
             Relations Council for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information of the Transformation Fund of the Education Labour
             Relations Council for 2009-10.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 13 – Department
             of Education for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10 [RP93-2010].


    (9)     The following papers are referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Water and Environmental Affairs for consideration and report. The
        reports of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 25 – Department
             of Environmental Affairs and Tourism for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10 [RP181-2010].


        (b)      Report and Financial Statements of the iSimangaliso
             Wetland Park for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             for 2009-10.

        (c)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             National Biodiversity Institute for 2009-10, including the
             Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
             Performance Information for 2009-10.


        (d)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             Weather Service for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP121-2010].


        (e)      Report and Financial Statements of the South African
             National Parks (SANparks) for 2009-10, including the Report of
             the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10 [RP208-2010].


        (f)      Report and Financial Statements of the Marine Living
             Resources Fund (MLRF) for 2009-10, including the Report of the
             Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
             Information for 2009-10.

    (10)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Higher Education and Training for consideration and report. The
        report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information are referred to the Committee on Public
        Accounts for consideration:

        (a)      Report and Financial Statements of Vote No 13 – Department
             of Education for 2009-10, including the Report of the Auditor-
             General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
             2009-10 [RP93-2010].

    (11)    The following paper is referred to the Standing Committee on
        Finance for consideration and to the Joint Committee on Ethics and
        Members’ Interest:

        (a)      Public Protector Report No 20 of 2010-11 on an
             investigation conducted in terms of section 3(1) and 4(1) of
             the Executive Members’ Ethics Act, 1998 (No 82 of 1998), the
             President’s comments thereon and action taken in regard to the
             report’s recommendations.

    (12)    The following paper is referred to the Portfolio Committee on
        Public Enterprises for consideration and to the Joint Committee on
        Ethics and Members’ Interest:

        (a)      Public Protector Report No 19 of 2010-11 on an
             investigation conducted in terms of section 3(1) and 4(1) of
             the Executive Members’ Ethics Act, 1998 (No 82 of 1998), the
             President’s comments thereon and action taken in regard to the
             report’s recommendations.

    (13)    The following paper is referred to the Joint Standing Committee
        on Defence for consideration and to the Portfolio Committee on
        Defence and Military Veterans:

          a) Letter from the President of the Republic, dated 7 July 2010,
             to the Speaker of the National Assembly, informing members of
             the Assembly of the extension of the employment of the SA
             National Defence Force for service in fulfillment of the
             international obligations of the Republic of South Africa
             towards the Democratic Republic of Congo.
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Police

    (a)     The Report of the Independent Complaints Directorate on
        Domestic Violence for the period July – December 2009, tabled in
        terms of section 18(5)(c) of the Domestic Violence Act, 1998 (Act
        No 116 of 1998).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

 1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Energy on the Amendments to
    Articles VI and XIV.A of the International Atomic Energy Agency
    Statute,  dated 7 September 2010:


       The Portfolio Committee on Energy, having considered the request for
       the ratification of the Amendments proposed to Articles VI and XIV.A
       of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Statute, referred
       to it, recommends that the House, in terms of section 231(2) of the
       Constitution, approves the said Amendments.

    Request to be considered.

CREDA INSERT - T100910e-insert 1 – PAGES 2719-2733
                          MONDAY, 13 SEPTEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Home Affairs


          a) Refugees Amendment Bill [B 30 – 2010] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 33478
             of 20 August 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Home
             Affairs of the National Assembly, as well as referral to the
             Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms of
             Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report of the Executive Officer of the Financial Services Board
        on the Road Accident Fund (RAF) for the period 1 April 2006 to 31
        March 2009.

   2. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Prosecuting
        Authority (NPA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010 [RP 87-2010].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of Legal Aid South Africa for
        2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
        44-2010].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the President’s Fund for
        2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on the
        Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP
        223-2010].


    (d)     Proclamation No R. 35 published in Government Gazette No 33425
        dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of proclamation, in terms of the
        Special Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No
        74 of 1996).


    (e)     Proclamation No R. 36 published in Government Gazette No 33425
        dated 30 July 2010: Referral of matters to existing Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
        1996).


    (f)     Proclamation No R. 37 published in Government Gazette No 33425
        dated 30 July 2010: Referral of matters to existing Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
        1996).


    (g)     Proclamation No R. 38 published in Government Gazette No 33425
        dated 30 July 2010: Referral of matters to existing Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
        1996).


    (h)     Proclamation No R. 41 published in Government Gazette No 33448
        dated 6 August 2010: Commencement of the Jurisdiction of Regional
        Courts Amendment Act, 2008 (Act No 31 of 2008).


     i) Proclamation No R. 42 published in Government Gazette No 33451
        dated 10 August 2010: Referral of matters to existing Special
        Investigating Unit and Special Tribunal, in terms of the Special
        Investigating Units and Special Tribunals Act, 1996 (Act No 74 of
        1996).


3.    The Minister of Trade and Industry
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 32 – Department of
        Trade and Industry for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information of Vote 32 for 2009-2010.


4.    The Minister of Transport

    a) Report of the Regulating Committee to the Airports Company of South
       Africa and Air Traffic and Navigation Services Company for 2009-
       2010.


                         TUESDAY, 14 SEPTEMBER 2010

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Speaker and the Chairperson

    (a)     Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) on A
        Gendered Analysis of Land Reform Policy and Implementation Outcome
        in South Africa, (2006 – 2008/09) - 5 May 2010 (Final Comprehensive
        Version).


    (b)     Report of the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) on A
        Gendered Review of South Africa’s Implementation of the Millennium
        Development Goals.

2.    The Minister of Trade and Industry
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Companies and
        Intellectual Property Registration Office (CIPRO) for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 174-2010].


COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

 1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training on
    the Skills Development Levies Amendment Bill [B 25 – 2010] (National
    Assembly – sec 75), dated 14 September 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training, having
      considered the subject of the Skills Development Levies Amendment Bill
      [B 25 – 2010] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and
      classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
      reports the Bill without amendments.

 2. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training on
    the Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 24 – 2010] (National
    Assembly – sec 75), dated 14 September 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training, having
      considered the subject of the Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill [B
      24 – 2010] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified
      by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
      with amendments [B 24A – 2010].

 3. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training on
    the Higher Education and Training Laws Amendment Bill [B 26 – 2010]
    (National Assembly – sec 76), dated 14 September 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training, having
      considered the subject of the Higher Education and Training Laws
      Amendment Bill [B 26 – 2010] (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to
      it and classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 76 Bill,
      reports the Bill with amendments [B 26A – 2010].

 4. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the Births and
    Deaths Registration Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2010] (National Assembly –
    sec 75), dated 8 September 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having considered the subject
      of the Births and Deaths Registration Amendment Bill [B 18 – 2010]
      (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
      Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill with
      amendments [B 18A – 2010].

 5. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs on the South African
    Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 17 – 2010] (National Assembly – sec 75),
    dated 7 September 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs, having considered the subject
      of the South African Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 17 – 2010]
      (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it and classified by the
      Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 bill, reports the Bill with
      amendments [B 17A – 2010].
 6. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
    Development on the Magistrates’ Courts Amendment Bill [B 23 – 2010]
    (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 14 September 2010:

      The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
      having considered the subject of the Magistrates’ Courts Amendment
      Bill [B 23 – 2010] (National Assembly – sec 75), referred to it, and
      classified by the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill,
      reports the Bill with an amendment [B 23A - 2010].


