---
title: 'National Assembly - 16 September 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-09-16
---

THURSDAY, 16 SEPTEMBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:04.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                       REMARKS MADE BY MRS D A SCHÄFER

                                  (Ruling)

The SPEAKER: Hon members, immediately after the debate on the International
Day of Democracy yesterday, the hon Deputy Minister of Justice and
Constitutional Development, Mr A C Nel, rose on a point of order.

He contended that the hon Mrs D A Schäfer had transgressed Rule 66 by
stating that the National Director of Public Prosecutions, Adv Menzi
Simelane, was unfit for office. Having now had an opportunity to study the
unrevised Hansard, I wish to rule as follows:
According to the Hansard transcript, hon Schäfer said:

   The ousting of Vusi Pikoli as the National Director of  Prosecutions  in
   favour of a man who has proven himself unfit  in  every  respect,  other
   than having the distinguished qualification  of  being  a  supporter  of
   Jacob Zuma, goes to show how  far  the  President  will  go  to  protect
   himself and his cronies from criminal charges.


Hon members, the purpose of Rule 66, a Rule made by this House, is to
protect the integrity and independence of judges and to prevent unwarranted
and unsubstantiated attacks on the honour and confidence of public office
bearers, whose removal from office is dependent on a decision of this
House.

If there are grounds for an investigation into the conduct of such office
bearers, this House has available the mechanism of a substantive motion.

Though the Deputy Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development only
mentioned the National Director of Public Prosecutions in his point of
order, Rule 66 also applies to the President of the Republic; both of them
were maligned by hon member Mrs Schäfer when she referred to the National
Director of Public Prosecutions’ competence and impugned the motives of the
President as being criminal.
These remarks are unacceptable, regrettable and should be withdrawn. Hon
member Schäfer, will you please withdraw the offensive remark.

Mrs D A SCHÄFER: Mr Speaker, I withdraw.

The SPEAKER: Thank you. We will now come to notices of motion. Does any
member ... [Interjections.]

Mr M S SHILOWA: Hon Speaker, I am not very good at numbers. I was very bad
in both Maths and Arithmetic. I just wanted to check whether or not you
think we have sufficient numbers for a quorum in order to be able to
proceed. I would want us to proceed.

The attention of Mr Speaker having been called to the absence of a quorum,
the bells were rung.

A quorum being present, business resumed.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Adv H C SCHMIDT: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the rehabilitation of the abandoned and ownerless
   mines, as well as the budget allocated to the Department of Mineral
   Resources to address this issue.
Ms L N MOSS: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move:

   That the House debates our efforts to escalate our commitment to the
   realisation of a greater contribution of alternative renewable sources.

Mr G G BOINAMO: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the lessons learnt from the way government
   handled the recent public sector strike and come up with recommendations
   of how government can better handle such strikes the next time they
   occur.

Mr M B GOQWANA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates creating awareness about organ donation.

Mrs A STEYN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That this House debates the impact of stock theft on the rural economy
   and come up with possible solutions to reduce the problem.

Mr M W RABOTAPI: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House –


  (1) Debates whether municipalities are efficiently and appropriately
       using funds to create work opportunities from the Expanded Public
       Works Programme;


  (2) and comes up with recommendations on how this sphere of government
       can improve the situation in this regard.

Mr M S SHILOWA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:


   That the House debates the economic policy proposals of Cosatu,
   especially their potential impact or influence on economic growth,
   poverty reduction, job creation and underdevelopment.

Mr H P MALULEKA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates the promotion and protection of indigenous
   languages.

[Applause.]
Mr A P VAN DER WESTHUIZEN: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the
next sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the future of public and private FET colleges,
   the programmes offered and the possibilities of increasing their
   enrolment figures and throughput rates.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the abuse of public funds for profiling party
   political leaders in all spheres of government in the print and
   electronic media.

Mr J SMALLE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the appropriate involvement of the state in the
   mining sector and what steps can be taken to improve regulation and
   create certainty in the sector.

Dr P J RABIE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:


   That the House debates what progress the Department of Economic
   Development has made since its establishment in 2009 and its role in
   relation to other departments in the economics cluster.

The SPEAKER: Does any other member wish to give notice of a motion? No? In
which case we move on to motions without notice. [Interjections.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Speaker, I am sorry for interrupting you. We are sitting here
at the back.

The SPEAKER: We have moved from notices of motion. Are you now on motions
without notice?

Mrs C DUDLEY: No, I just thought you took a while to notice me, that’s all.

The SPEAKER: I didn’t take a while, but you can go ahead. [Laughter.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:

   That the House debates the urgent need for the full-scale mobilisation
   of resources to address the circumstances that are resulting in the
   staggering statistics on child mortality.
The SPEAKER: Does any other member wish to give notice of a motion?

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to say nobody else wants to.
[Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon member. If you are satisfied, we are
satisfied too.

                      WORLD’S SHARKS FACING EXTINCTION

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr N SINGH: Speaker, on behalf of the IFP, I move without notice:

    That the House –

    (1)     notes that –


        (a)      according to scientists 30% of the world’s sharks are
             facing extinction ...


... and these are not the land sharks - those should have been extinguished
a long time ago!

             ... and that if this extinction does happen, the ocean’s
             ecosystems would be disturbed, leading to the loss of other
             fish stocks;


        (b)      notes that the biggest threat to sharks is shark finning
             and every year approximately 73 million sharks are killed for
             their fins;

        (c) further notes that Pew Environment Group is running a Global
             Shark Conservation campaign to highlight the plight of sharks;
             and

    (2)     calls upon South Africans to get involved in various shark
         conservation campaigns to help reduce and ultimately eliminate
         unsustainable activities that threaten the survival of sharks.

Agreed to.

                          ALBINISM AWARENESS MONTH


                             (Draft Resolution)


Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –
      1) notes that the month of September is Albinism Awareness Month,
         which is dedicated to highlighting the plight of persons living
         with the genetic condition of albinism, who as a result of this
         condition, are often the victims of muti-related violence and are
         the targets of discrimination, violence and neglect in parts of
         Eastern and Southern Africa;

      2) recognises that it is essential that more is done within this
         country to educate society about this condition, and in so doing
         finally dispel the popular myths and misconceptions about albinism
         which perpetuates discrimination and intolerance, thus undermining
         the values and rights enshrined within our Constitution;

      3) condemns the recent spate of violent and senseless attacks against
         persons living with this condition and also violence in all its
         forms; and

      4) calls upon the leaders of this country to seize the opportunity
         which Albinism Awareness Month presents to actively engage with and
         educate the general populace about this condition in order to
         create an integrated and harmonious society which reflects the
         values contained in the Constitution.

Agreed to.

                      WOMEN’S MONTH AND HERITAGE MONTH

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr H P MALULEKA: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House -

      1) notes the positive initiative of the Government, through the
         Department of Arts and Culture, in putting into prominence certain
         key activities that were part and parcel of Women’s Month and
         Heritage Month in 2010;

      2) further notes that the culmination of these activities has been,
         amongst others, the following:

           a) the Dulcie September Memorial Lecture at the University of
              the Western Cape on 19 August 2010 in honour of the gallant
              martyr;


            b) the commemoration of three outstanding women struggle heroes,
               Charlotte Maxeke, Lillian Ngoyi and Helen Joseph, whose
               resting places have been declared national monuments in
               recognition of their decisive role in the women’s movement
               and the struggle for the liberation of South Africa;

            c) the erection of the Sarah Baartman Centre of Remembrance
               Architectural Concept Design in Hankey in the Eastern Cape;

            d) the Tribute to Women Concert that was held at the State
               Theatre on 29 August 2010, honouring legendary women
               musicians, actresses, writers, dancers, women in the film
               industry, craft sector and visual arts, which was a
               resounding success; and

            e) the 2010 Heritage Day celebrations that will take place on 24
               September 2010 in Durban; and

      3) recognises the importance of South Africans of all races to attend
         national events in order to build social cohesion and further
         recognises the importance of celebrating South Africa’s living
         treasures and also honouring those that have departed, as a way of
         preserving South Africa’s heritage; and


      4) supports the need to encourage the youth of our country to learn
         about the history and contributions of our heroes and heroines and
         the drive by the ANC-led government to ensure that future
         generations learn from the past, as the wise African saying teaches
         us: ``Inyathi ibuzwa Kwabaphambili’’.

Agreed to.

  REPEAL OF THE BLACK ADMINISTRATION ACT AND AMENDMENT OF CERTAIN LAWS ACT,
                                NO 28 OF 2005

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C T FROLICK: Mr Speaker, I hereby move without notice:

   That the House –

  1) notes that –

           a) section 1(3) of the Repeal of the Black Administration Act
              and Amendment of Certain Laws Act, No 28 of 2005, provides
              for certain provisions of the Black Administration Act, No 38
              of 1927, to remain in force until 30 December 2010; and


           b) the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
              Development is proposing to introduce an amending Bill that
              will extend the date of application of these provisions to 30
              December 2012 for the purposes of obtaining greater public
              input and consensus on contentious issues and allowing
              traditional courts to continue functioning legally;

 2) therefore –

           a) instructs the Portfolio Committee on Justice and
              Constitutional Development to publish the full particulars of
              its legislative proposal in the Announcements, Tablings and
              Committee Reports forthwith; and


           b) notwithstanding the provisions of Rule 238(1), grants the
              committee permission to proceed with the proposed
              legislation.

Agreed to.

                          SUSPENSION OF RULE 253(1)

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr C T FROLICK: Hon Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move without notice:


   That the House suspends Rule 253(1), which provides inter alia that the
   debate on the Second Reading of a Bill may not commence before at least
   three working days have elapsed since the committee’s report was tabled,
   for the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate today on the
   following Bills:


      1) Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill [B 24B – 2010](National
         Assembly - sec 75);


      2) Skills Development Levies Amendment Bill [B 25 – 2010](National
         Assembly - sec 75);


      3) Higher Education and Training Laws Amendment Bill [B 26B -
         2010](National Assembly - sec 76);


      4) South African Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 17B – 2010](National
         Assembly - sec 75);


      5) Births and Deaths Registration Amendment Bill [B 18B –
         2010](National Assembly - sec 75); and

      6) Magistrates’ Courts Amendment Bill [B 23B – 2010] (National
         Assembly - sec 75).

Agreed to.

                       SUSPENSION OF JOINT RULE 220(2)

                             (Draft Resolution)


Mr C T FROLICK: Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Chief Whip of the Majority
Party, I move without notice:

   That the House, subject to the concurrence of the National Council of
   Provinces, for the purposes of conducting the Second Reading debate
   today on the Bills mentioned below, suspends Joint Rule 220(2), which
   requires that a translation of a Bill’s official text must be received
   by Parliament at least three days before the formal consideration of the
   Bill by the House in which it was introduced:


      1) Higher Education  Laws  Amendment  Bill  [B  24B  –  2010](National
         Assembly - sec 75);


      2) Skills Development Levies Amendment Bill  [B  25  –  2010](National
         Assembly - sec 75);


      3) Higher  Education  and  Training  Laws  Amendment  Bill  [B  26B  –
         2010](National Assembly - sec 76); and


      4) Births and Deaths  Registration  Amendment  Bill  [B  18B  –  2010]
         (National Assembly - sec 75).

Agreed to.

                 DEMOCRATIC ALLIANCE PAYS FOR MEDIA COVERAGE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L T LANDERS (ANC): Mr Speaker, Premier Helen Zille and the DA have
always projected themselves as being beyond reproach. The DA often preaches
how well they are governing the City of Cape Town and the Western Cape
province. Of late the DA has also made loud and strident noises about media
freedom.

However, the DA’s hypocrisy has been exposed. For the second time this
year, the DA has demonstrated how taxpayer’s money should be wasted. Last
week, shortly after the DA had slammed the SABC for offering the Western
Cape Provincial Government a paid opportunity to showcase itself on its
Interface programme, Premier Helen Zille admitted to squandering taxpayers’
money ... [Interjections.] ...

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members, order!

Mr L T LANDERS (ANC): ... on her monthly hour-long slot on Heart 104.9FM
radio. Premier Zille and Mayor Dan Plato signed a three-year contract with
the radio station. The bill for this radio deal is split between the City
and the province of the Western Cape. What this means is that the
taxpayer’s money is being used for DA branding and advertising.

Premier Zille has tried to justify this by saying that a tender process was
followed to pay for this overpriced hour-long DA advertisement, but
allegations persist that proper tender procurement procedures were not
followed. Moreover, Premier Zille has failed to explain why she saw fit to
keep this radio deal a secret.

Earlier this year ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

                   FIGHTING CORRUPTION IN THE WESTERN CAPE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms A M DREYER (DA): Mr Speaker, in the Western Cape, DA leader and Premier
Helen Zille tackled corruption head-on ... [Interjections.]

... and placed open and clean government at the very heart of her
administration.

We saw the results, namely a full, clean sweep audit for the provincial
government - a first nationally. In sharp contrast to this, the Zuma
administration keeps pledging to root out corruption, but what happens in
reality? The Special Investigating Unit identified 96 000 civil servants
who stole welfare money from the poor.

Fifteen thousand civil servants were found guilty of fraud. Has the
government dismissed them? No! Has the government discharged one of the 900
policemen convicted of fraud? No!

At the level of local government, the situation is the same. In the
Kungwini Local Municipality, the ex-municipal manager, Joe Gomba, was found
guilty of fraud and suspended. The KPMG forensic report recommended that he
be charged. Guess what? Two years later, no charges have been laid. He is
still on full pay and the municipality is bankrupt. The message of the
collapsing ANC government is clear: Cadres, you may steal the people’s
money, nothing will happen to you.

The ANC’s alliance partner, Cosatu, agrees, saying that in the past three
years, the ANC has not lifted a finger to fight corruption in government.
Corruption is getting out of control. A powerful, predatory elite is
draining South Africa. The ANC ... [Interjections.] [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The SPEAKER: Order, order hon members, order!

Mr J B SIBANYONI: On a point of order, Speaker: I object to the hon member
saying Gomba is still the municipal manager of Kungwini. It is my
constituency; he is no longer a member of that municipality.

The SPEAKER: That’s not a point of order; it might be a point of
information.

              INSTITUTIONALISATION OF CORRUPTION IN GOVERNMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D A KGANARE (Cope): Mr Speaker, in this country corruption has now
become institutionalised; we are being bombarded daily ... [Interjections.]

Ms F I CHOHAN: Mr Speaker, the hon Sibanyoni has pointed out that the House
is being misled on a critical fact and I really urge that you perhaps
consider asking the hon member who made that statement to withdraw it.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, that was not a point of order!

Mr D A KGANARE (Cope): Mr Speaker, as I was saying, in this country today,
corruption has become institutionalised under the ANC. We are being
bombarded with information about premiers, Ministers, mayors, government
officials and even the police being involved in corruption daily, and
nobody is prepared to do anything about it.

The President and other Ministers keep telling us about their stand against
corruption, but nothing happens. We are now being made to understand that
the Minister of Communications is trying to micro-manage the SABC board,
which has clearly decided to make Morning Live the propaganda machinery of
the ANC.

Today, President Zuma is in Kroonstad, where a doctor at the Boitumelo
Hospital has been awarded a tender for R4,6 million, without going through
tender procedures, to examine 500 patients for eye problems during
weekends. This doctor brings three nurses from Sebokeng to examine these
patients every weekend.

In the same province, when people ask about this they are told that it is a
political directive. In the same province, the MEC for co-
operative governance and human settlements gets a report about
investigations with conclusive evidence that petrol cards for cars that are
not running are being used for dubious transactions in the Ngwathe
Municipality. This involves Parys, Koppies and Edenville.

Despite this report having been received by the MEC in August 2009, nothing
has happened. Instead, the policeman who was involved in the investigation
and about to make arrests in respect of this matter was removed from the
case and immediately transferred elsewhere. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

              ZIMBABWEANS IN SOUTH AFRICA TO APPLY FOR PERMITS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P PETERSEN-MADUNA (ANC): Speaker, the ANC welcomes the announcement made
by Home Affairs about issuing Zimbabweans with relevant South African
permits for business, study and work. The process will commence on 20
September and the permits will be issued through all Home Affairs offices
in all nine provinces.

Furthermore, the permits that will be issued to all qualifying Zimbabwean
nationals will be available free of charge.

This comes after the department announced that all Zimbabwean immigrants
have to apply for relevant documents and register their status in the
country as the special dispensation-allowing Zimbabweans crossing into
South Africa the right to live, work, attend education facilities and
access basic health care for a period of six months-was coming to an end.
The special dispensation will come to an end on 21 December. About 213
officials will be deployed at headquarters and in provinces, where
dedicated queues have been established to facilitate the process.

A track-and-trace system will also be put in place to ensure that
applicants are informed of the status of their applications via SMSs. The
department also plans to introduce a call centre.

We urge all Zimbabwean nationals to take full advantage of the opportunity
to regulate their stay and to comply with South Africa’s immigration laws.
Thank you.

Mr B M KOMPHELA:  Speaker, it is not true that the President is in
Kroonstad. So if ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, please take you seat. [Interjections.] Order, hon
members!

 CONGRATULATIONS TO SADESMO ON ITS SUCCESS IN SRC ELECTIONS AT UNIVERSITY OF
                               THE FREE STATE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Speaker, for three consecutive days I have noted
that, each time I rise to speak, there is a point of order!

The IFP would like to congratulate the South African Democratic Students’
Movement, Sadesmo, on their success in the SRC elections at the University
of the Free State. With the final results in, Sadesmo received 837 votes,
winning over 45% of the total votes, and obtaining 5 seats on the SRC
structure.

The IFP wishes these young leaders well, and hopes they become instruments
of change and improvement within the University of the Free State’s SRC
structure by flying the IFP flag high and leading by example.

This, once again, debunks the myth that the youth of the IFP is dead and
nonexistent on campuses or nationally. Thank you.

        CONDEMNATION OF DISRUPTION OF MATRIC EXAMINATIONS BY STRIKERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S Z NTAPANE (UDM): Speaker, the UDM condemns in the strongest possible
terms the current disruption of matric examinations across the country. It
must be noted that these illegal, irresponsible and violent disruptions are
orchestrated by an organisation that is aligned to the ruling party.

Once more we have ANC alliance partners disrupting a school programme that
has suffered this year from a protracted violent strike by teachers. It is
especially frustrating that the nonsensical and unreasonable demands are
supposedly being made out of a concern for this year’s matrics, whereas, in
actual fact, these hypocrites are further undermining learners who are
already at a disadvantage.

The ANC’s inability to keep its alliance partners from trashing the country
makes a mockery of the so-called mass democratic movement. There is nothing
democratic or constitutional about the violence ...

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Speaker, on a point of order: The
Congress of South African Students, Cosas, is not an ally of the ANC.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, please take your seat. [Laughter.] Hon members,
order! Hon members, I want to say this and I don’t want to repeat it again:
The Chair does not get involved in points of information or points of
debate.

If members want to disagree or agree, they may use their time slot or the
time slot of their party to do so, but they should not use the floor to
make points of no consequence. Continue, hon member. [Interjections.] Hon
members, order!

Mr S Z NTAPANE (UDM): Thank you, Speaker. There is nothing democratic or
constitutional about the violence and coercion that accompanies this
tripartite alliance-fuelled protests. The person who styles himself or
herself as a leader, but then goes into a school and prevents a matric
learner from writing an exam, is nothing but a criminal and a thug.

Whenever we have debates in this House about the youth, everybody,
including the ANC, professes great concern for the youth. But where is the
state now to protect the youth from these criminals and thugs who are
stealing their education? Thank you.

                 SALGA SEMINAR ON HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr S L TSENOLI (ANC): Speaker, the ANC congratulates the South African
Local Government Association, Salga, for properly convening a three-day
seminar on human resource management early last week.

In the oversight work that we do, this is the one area that needs the most
attention if municipalities are to focus successfully on meeting their
constitutional obligation, namely to provide democratic and accountable
government for local communities; to ensure the provision of services to
communities in a sustainable manner; to promote social and economic
development and a safe and healthy environment; and to encourage the
involvement of communities and community organisations in the affairs of
local government.

This is what the ANC fought for, promotes and would like to see taking
shape.

  CONFLICT OF INTEREST IN WORLD BANK AND AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK LOANS TO
                                SOUTH AFRICA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L W GREYLING (ID): Speaker, in March of this year I wrote to the
President of the World Bank asking him not to grant the loan to South
Africa unless the ANC, in the form of Chancellor House, divests its shares
in Hitachi Power Africa.

The World Bank tacitly recognised this massive conflict of interest, but
disingenuously avoided the controversy by claiming that their loan would
not be used for the controversial boiler contracts.

As I vehemently disagree with their logic, I have today written the same
letter to the African Development Bank. I am doing so because their US$2
billion loan to South Africa, which was made last year will most certainly
be used to fuel this conflict of interest, which is in contravention of
their framework for preventing and combating fraud and corruption.

The ID will continue to use all the means at its disposal to ensure that
the ANC is not allowed to swell their coffers through unethical means.

The ANC may deem my party’s actions unpatriotic, but to paraphrase a famous
politician, it is not the letters I write that are unpatriotic, but rather
the fact that the ruling party is determined to profit from government
contracts that is patently unpatriotic.

Thank you. [Applause.]

            ANC YOUTH LEAGUE PRESIDENT BREAKS PROMISE TO LEARNERS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M M SWATHE (DA): Speaker, many children who are born into poverty in the
peripheral rural areas of our country, find it difficult to improve their
chances in life. I read in the newspaper last year that the ANC Youth
League president had promised 200 pairs of shoes to learners of Makanyu
Primary School, outside of Thohoyandou.

He failed to keep that promise to these children who walk to school
barefooted everyday. Julius Malema was happy to use the school as a
platform for his political campaigning, but did not follow through with the
promises. We are grateful that there are many responsible and caring South
Africans who came to the rescue of these children.
Two days ago, working with the DA, the Bobs for Good Foundation which was
founded by former Springbok, Bob Skinstad, donated 284 pairs of shoes to
the learners at the school. The joy on the faces of these children, when
they received the shoes, was humbling. Their expectations of obtaining
these shoes had been met.

Malema’s broken promises clearly show that he cannot be a role model for
our youth. He is an irresponsible leader who plays on the emotions of some
of the most vulnerable people, while he continues to live lavishly through
dodgy tender deals. Thank you. [Applause.]

              GOVERNMENT’S COMMITMENT TO IMPROVING HEALTH CARE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs N F MATHIBELA (ANC): Hon Speaker, the ANC-led government is committed
to improving the quality standards for both public and private health
sectors. This means, amongst other things, the provision of adequate
numbers of workers at all levels of the health care system, including
recruitment, training and filling of vacant posts.

As such, the North West province has, between April and August this year,
succeeded in employing 630 health care professionals to fill the vacant
posts. The employed staff included 84 nursing assistants, 30 staff nurses,
19 medical officers, 42 medical specialists, 30 emergency care workers, 23
professional nurses, 39 emergency care assistants and 102 student nurses,
as well as dieticians and pharmacists.

This resulted in the improvement in access to quality health care, and the
reduction of long queues in the province’s public hospitals and clinics. I
thank you.

            IMPACT OF PUBLIC SERVICE STRIKE ON FINAL MATRIC EXAMS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N SINGH (IFP): Hon Speaker, the Public Service strike reached its fourth
week, with no resolution reached by the government and the unions. A 21-day
suspension was put in place, beginning on 6 September, to give wage talks a
chance.

The Minister of Basic Education, hon Angie Motshekga, said last week that
it is the schools’ prerogative whether or not to cancel the September
holidays, and to use it to catch up on school work. This might work.

However, if you calculate 21 days from 6 September 2010, the 21-day
suspension period ends on 5 October, and the vacation period ends on 4
October. If a resolution is not reached within these 21 days, our children
would be back to square one.
We cannot have another strike starting in October, when final exams would
be beginning nationally in November. We need a more solid and concrete plan
from the Department of Education, which will ensure safe and protected
writing centres, where not even Cosas can interfere with our children’s
vital final exams.

The Department of Education must produce a solid, indisputable and mutually
acceptable solution before the future of our children is completely
compromised. Thank you.

    GOVERNMENT’S FAILURE TO CONTROL UNRULY BEHAVIOUR OF COSAS AND PREVENT
                          DISRUPTIONS IN EDUCATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M S SHILOWA (Cope): Hon Speaker, Cope condemns, in the strongest terms
possible, the unruly behaviour of Cosas in a number of provinces, as well
as the paralysis displayed by the Department of Basic Education to end the
protest. The threat by Cosas to make the country ungovernable if the
prelims are not scrapped, is irresponsible in the extreme.

Already, one 17-year-old pupil, who was protesting, was allegedly shot by
the police and has died. Many other learners have been physically
assaulted, intimidated and pulled out of their exam rooms.
The demand by the protesting pupils that they be given free marks is
preposterous to say the least. Our education is already in a parlous state.
Acceding to the protestors’ demand would simply destroy education.

Firstly, we want to know why the Minister is not proactively engaging Cosas
on the one hand, and the unions on the other. Secondly, more importantly,
why did the Minister send junior officials to meet with Cosas. Lastly, we
have previously pointed out that the government’s handling of the strike
has been inept and at times provocative.

We therefore urge government to sit around the negotiating table with all
relevant role-players and find a resolution in the interest of the quality
of education. Thank you.

                     FIFA’S SOCCER DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S R TSEBE (ANC): Speaker, the ANC welcomes the kick-off of the second
phase of the Grassroots Football programme funded by the world football
governing body, Fifa. Aspirant footballers between the ages of 6 and 12 in
Mangaung/Bloemfontein are set to nurture and develop their skills through a
football programme funded by Fifa in the area.
The first phase of the programme was launched earlier this year in Tshwane
and Mafikeng as part of the 2010 Fifa World Cup legacy. The first two
phases of this programme have been a great success. Tshwane introduced
1 385 kids to football within three hours, which was a world record.

We wish this initiative well and look forward to the programme being rolled
out to the rest of the country. Football development among young kids is
good for the future of football in the country. I thank you. [Applause.]

                        PROTECTING NDUMO GAME RESERVE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G R MORGAN (DA): Speaker, the destruction of the Ndumo Game Reserve in
KwaZulu-Natal is ongoing and relentless. This reserve may not be well known
to the members of this House, but it is the closest thing that we have to
our own Okavango Delta, encompassing the confluence of the Usuthu and
Pongola Rivers. It is certainly worth protecting.

Two local communities lodged land claims against almost 1 300 hectares of
the park in the 1990s, and the claim was settled in early 2000. Title to
the land was restored to the communities on condition that the land
remained a protected conservation area. There were also cash payouts.

However, in 2008, the eastern boundary to the park was removed, and members
of the community began to clear the bush for farming. This is undoubtedly a
difficult and sensitive situation, as members of this community are poor
and need to sustain themselves. As an interim response, the KwaZulu-Natal
government allocated a small section of the park for farming, but since
then, the area has not been demarcated and the daily destruction of the
riverine forest continues.

While the KwaZulu-Natal government promises to build a new fence, its
wildlife officials appear powerless to stop further incursions into Ndumo.
It is time for national government to lean on the provincial government,
considering that Ndumo’s problems are affecting the success of a three-
nation conservation initiative that includes Mozambique and Swaziland.

The logical solution would be to establish additional farming areas outside
the park with the assistance of the departments of agriculture and rural
development. Whatever happens, national government needs to offer its
assistance. The KwaZulu-Natal government has fiddled while Ndumo burns. I
thank you. [Applause.]

                     PROVISION OF ELECTRICITY IN MUSINA
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs N M TWALA (ANC): Speaker, the ANC believes in electricity for all, and
it is committed to accelerating a sustainable electrification programme.
Hence, 594 out of 885 households in Extensions 9 and 10 at Sihlalangenkane
in the Limpopo border town of Musina received electricity during the first
phase of the project this year.

The remaining 300 homes also stand to benefit, as the second phase of the
R2,1 million electrification project started on Friday, 3 September 2010.
These households are expected to have their electricity by November this
year.

The ANC-led government will ensure that all people have the right to access
basic government services irrespective of where they live, and commends the
partnership of the Musina Local Municipality and the Vhembe District
Municipality for the funding to realise this project. I thank you.

                 DEMOCRATIC ALLIANCE PAYS FOR MEDIA COVERAGE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Speaker, the hon Landers was absolutely
right to draw the attention of the House to the hypocrisy of the Premier of
Western Cape and the Mayor of the City of Cape Town in spending ratepayers
and taxpayers’ money on booking ... [Interjections.] ... programmes on
radio stations.

The SPEAKER: Order, order!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: The first hypocrisy in this was that
there was no disclosure of this matter until it was revealed publicly. The
fall-back position was that this was just government speaking, that the
Premier, when she was a mayor, was just speaking to the public as
government. But the hypocrisy of this and the thin veneer that this is
hiding have been exposed once again by the DA member, because they are
standing here telling us all about the wonderful service delivery by the DA
here in the Western Cape and by the City of Cape Town. This pulls the
carpet precisely from underneath their explanation that Premier Zille is
giving that this not about party politics, but just about government
delivery.

However, let us talk about government delivery. What is actually happening,
for instance, in the City of Cape Town under DA leadership? One of the most
pernicious things has just happened below the radar screen. The City has
introduced what is called “special rates areas”. Privileged areas like
Pinelands-where I live-if they agree to pay extra rates, are able to get
extra services on top of what they get as normal services from the City.

In other words, what the City of Cape Town is perpetuating is massive
redistribution once more in favour of the rich and privileged - and
basically the whites. In the olden days, which these members like to forget
about, we used to say that the majority of English-speaking whites, in
particular, when they were overseas, they liked to criticise apartheid
mildly. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members. Order.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: When they came back home, they would vote
for the predecessor of the DA, the PFP, but in their hearts they thanked
God that the apartheid regime was still in place. And that spirit still
prevails today. [Applause.]

                     FIFA’S SOCCER DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
          GOVERNMENT’S FAILURE TO CONTROL UNRULY BEHAVIOUR OF COSAS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Hon Speaker, there have been three
statements in relation to Cosas and one in relation to football and the
Fifa-backed initiative.

I will firstly deal with the Fifa-backed initiative and endorse the
excitement that the department feels in relation to this initiative.  I
would also like to draw the attention of the hon Speaker and the House to
the fact that one of the heritage projects from which we derived benefit,
as the Department of Basic Education in collaboration with the Departments
of Sport and Recreation and Arts and Culture, was the one in which more
than 6 000 of our schools participated in the football initiative through a
tournament that provided opportunities for the under-18s and under-16s boys
and girls and for special learners in three different categories.

The level of participation meant that more than 200 000 of our learners
were able to play football as part of the legacy and initiative related to
the Fifa event that took place in our country.

With regard to Cosas, Cabinet pronounced very strongly that Cosas should
indeed speak to the educational authorities and that it certainly has no
authority or right to enter schools and disrupt examinations.

The Minister of Basic Education had been very clear and stated quite
unequivocally that we were not going to postpone the preliminary
examinations. She further stated that it would be preposterous or
ludicrous, as hon Shilowa says, to expect free marks to be awarded to these
learners. The statement by the Minister was clear in what it announced.

The hon members should also take into account that these incidents didn’t
occur throughout the country, but only occurred in three provinces. The
department, in collaboration with the SA Police Service, immediately
responded to the challenges that we were faced with in those schools to
ensure that the security of the learners was safeguarded. Furthermore, it
was made clear that this delinquency would be dealt with using the full
might of the law. Indeed, that is what is going to occur.

With regard to the issue of the recovery plan, this had started long before
the industrial action. We, as the department were aware, that the Fifa
World Cup would result in extended holidays.

Indeed, all nine provinces are taking steps to ensure that they provide for
initiatives, which include Saturday classes and in some instances Saturday
and Sunday classes, as well as additional tuition and resource materials
for the learners. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Deputy Minister, your time has expired.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Thank you, Speaker, I just want to
draw your attention to the fact that there were actually three statements
in the process. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon Deputy Minister, may I say your time has expired.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF BASIC EDUCATION: Speaker, I respect the authority of
the Chair. Thank you. [Applause.]
                 SALGA SEMINAR ON HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER FOR CO-OPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS: Mr
Speaker, the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
wants to share entirely the sentiments expressed by hon Tsenoli. In fact,
the South African Local Government Association, Salga, held a highly
successful human resources management conference. It followed after a
conference held in 2003.

The main aim of the conference was to ensure that the Public Service and
the local administration become professional. They drew attention to
problems that are consistent with what we mentioned in the State of Local
Government report.

In particular, they are concerned about the way people are
appointed. They recognise the high turnover in municipalities in respect of
senior managers. They are also concerned about ensuring that the scarcity
of skills is attended to by drawing in people who are currently deployed in
the national and provincial spheres as administrators and public servants.

In fact, they are also interested to see that, before this very Parliament,
there is a Bill that, I understand, they identify with. This is the
Municipal Systems Amendment Bill, which seeks to professionalise the Public
Service at the local government administration level.

Also, of course, these decisions have been taken and strategies have been
adopted. It is not for Salga alone to address these issues. All three
spheres of government, not least this Parliament, need to work with them in
order to implement those resolutions that they have adopted. I thank you.

              INSTITUTIONALISATION OF CORRUPTION IN GOVERNMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: Speaker, hon Kganare alleges, without
elaborating and without citing an instance, that I am micromanaging the
SABC. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Order!

The MINISTER OF COMMUNICATIONS: He does not provide a shred of evidence,
and does not provide one instance of proof. He also speaks about this
micromanagement in the context of corruption. I don’t know where the two
link up.

I don’t know whether he has seen me once or several times at the SABC. I
don’t have offices at the SABC. I go to the SABC to attend meetings that I
have either called or to which I have been invited by the SABC board. In
this instance, I went to the SABC because there was a problem I wanted to
attend to.

Everything that I have done with the SABC was done in accordance with the
law. My relations with the SABC are governed by articles of association.
These articles of association define the relationship between me and the
SABC.

If hon Kganare is talking about my call for the SABC board to reconsider
the appointment of the Group Chief Executive Officer, it is within my
ambit. I have done so in accordance with those articles. [Applause.]

I don’t know whether he wants me to step aside or fold my arms when I see
anarchy descending on the SABC. I will not. As Minister, I am responsible
for the SABC. This statement that he has made is really just sheer bluster
- nothing more than bluster - because he is not correct. [Applause.]

              ZIMBABWEANS IN SOUTH AFRICA TO APPLY FOR PERMITS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Speaker, I just want to welcome the statement
by hon Maduna on the Zimbabwean dispensation and want to stress that, like
all South Africans, citizens of other countries, who live in South Africa,
should be documented and registered and their stay regularised.

We should also remind the House that this was supposed to have been done
between April 2009 and April 2010, but we have extended the deadline to
December just to make sure that nobody misses out.

Of course, the success of this depends on the co-operation of the
Zimbabweans themselves, in terms of them making sure that they get their
documents and apply for the relevant permits so that they don’t miss the
deadline. Thank you.

                 DEMOCRATIC ALLIANCE PAYS FOR MEDIA COVERAGE
            ANC YOUTH LEAGUE PRESIDENT BREAKS PROMISE TO LEARNERS
    GOVERNMENT’S FAILURE TO CONTROL UNRULY BEHAVIOUR OF COSAS AND PREVENT
                          DISRUPTIONS IN EDUCATION

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Speaker, I just want to agree with hon
Cronin that, in fact, Premier Zille has abused millions of rands of public
and taxpayers’ funds on her personal campaign to boost her image and that
of the DA. I also want ...
Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: There have been occasions in
the past when the DA has, for example, used statement time as an
opportunity to have more than one statement on the same subject, and we
have been ruled out of order.

Now, we are having the ANC’s Minister standing up and repeating virtually
what has been said already. We have already had this input on this
particular statement. [Interjections.] I call upon you, sir, to indicate
that it is not proper.

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Order! Hon Minister Xingwana, you cannot
reflect on the integrity of a Premier in this House, so I would like you to
withdraw that comment. You cannot reflect on their integrity. Order, hon
members!

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Speaker, I don’t know if it was about the
integrity, but I just wanted to highlight the fact that funds were not used
properly. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker ...

The SPEAKER: Hon members, order! Hon Minister, please withdraw.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: I withdraw, Speaker, but taxpayers’ funds
were not used properly. I also want ... [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, on a point of order ...
The SPEAKER: Take your seat, hon Minister.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I have drawn your attention to the fact that this
matter has been responded to by the Minister already today. Is it proper
that another Minister stands up and talks about the same point? We, as a
political party, cannot do that, sir. Why should the Ministers be able to
have two opportunities on the same matter?

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: When you’ve
made a ruling in the House that a member should withdraw his or her
statement, is it acceptable to withdraw the statement and then qualify the
withdrawal?

The SPEAKER: The comments were withdrawn, hon member. Hon members, order!
You may continue, hon Minister. We cannot prescribe the response of the
Minister, except when it is out of order.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Thank you, Speaker. The president of the
Youth League must be commended for actually highlighting the predicament of
the learners in that school to the extent that he was able to expose their
situation, and they were able to get sponsorships for those poor learners.
I think we should commend him for doing that. [Applause.] Lastly, I want to
say to the deputy president of the Congress of South African Students,
Cosas – of Cope, sorry. [Laughter.] Well, I get confused. I no longer know
who is president or deputy president! [Interjections.] I don’t know who the
court has voted for. [Interjections.] I wanted to say to the president or
deputy president that ...

Mrs J D KILIAN: Mr Speaker, on a point of order ...

The SPEAKER: Hon Minister, take your seat. There is a point of order.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Mr Speaker, I would like you to rule on the following: I am
referring to Rule 105, and thereafter to responses by Ministers. The Rule
states that -

   At the conclusion of statements by members, a Minister present may be
  given an opportunity to respond, for not more than two minutes, to any
  statement directed to that Minister or made in respect of that Minister’s
  portfolio.

With respect, Speaker, I do not see any reference to Cosas in the portfolio
of the Minister of Arts and Culture. Thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Speaker, I would draw the member’s
attention ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order!
The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: ... draw the member’s attention
again to Rule 105 and indicate that there is no qualification. A member may
make a statement on any matter. There aren’t statements directed at
particular portfolios, so there is a misalignment. Perhaps the hon member
should lead a process of changing the Rules. The Minister can respond to
any of the statements. [Applause.]

Mrs J D KILIAN: Speaker, just in response to that, I beg to differ.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I don’t want a debate on this point.

Mrs J D KILIAN: I would like to have your ruling on it, sir.

The SPEAKER: I do not want a debate on this point. I would like the hon
Minister to continue and conclude. [Interjections.] Order, hon members!

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Speaker, I just wanted to commend the
Minister of Basic Education for standing firmly on this issue.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, there is another point of order.

Mr M S SHILOWA: Speaker, may I just suggest that you consider the point
raised by hon Kilian and indicate on another day what your ruling is.
The SPEAKER: Hon member, please take your seat. I will look at the Hansard
and come back to that point.

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: I would just like to advise the deputy
president of Cope that Cosas are juniors and therefore I don’t see why the
Minister of Basic Education should not get juniors to deal with them,
because I don’t understand why the Minister should send seniors, as he was
saying, to meet with Cosas. Thank you, Speaker. [Applause.]

                    FUTURE OF PEBBLE BED MODULAR REACTOR

                                 (Statement)

The MINISTER OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES: Mr Speaker, hon members of the House, I
would like to thank you for the opportunity to brief the House on a very
difficult matter concerning the future of the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor,
PBMR, project.

Without going into too much detail right now, after careful deliberation,
analysis, review and being mindful of the fiscal constraints in these hard
economic times, government has had to make a decision to no longer invest
in this project. As a consequence, the scale and size of the company is
being drastically reduced to a handful of people, with the focus being on
the retention of its intellectual property and certain skills, and the
preservation of its assets.

At the outset, let me emphasise that the decisions taken by government in
this regard have not been taken lightly, neither are we unmindful of the
regrettably big impact that these decisions will have on the future careers
and livelihoods of PBMR employees - this has been uppermost in our minds.

We have also not lost sight of the significant investment already made by
government in this project. This includes the impressive scientific
advances already achieved in pioneering this particular form of nuclear
technology. We have had to counterbalance these weighty considerations
against the following sobering realities.

The PBMR has still not been able to secure an anchor customer or another
investment partner. Further investment in the project could well be in
excess of an additional R30 billion.

The project has been consistently missing deadlines, with the construction
of the first demonstration model delayed further and further into the
future.

The opportunity afforded to PBMR to participate in the USA’s Next
Generation Nuclear Plant, NGNP, programme as part of the Westinghouse
consortium, was lost in May this year when Westinghouse withdrew from that
consortium.

Should South Africa embark on a nuclear build programme in the near future,
it will not be using Pebble Bed technology, which is a Generation IV
technology, that is, a technology that is still primarily in the research
and design phase, but would have to consider options in Generations II and
III.

Finally, the severity of the current economic downturn and the strain that
it has placed on the fiscus, as well as the nature and scale of
government’s current developmental priorities, has forced government to
reprioritise its spending obligations and therefore, of necessity, to make
certain tough decisions - this being one of them.

With these considerations in mind, government commissioned an independent,
high-level review of the project. An interdepartmental task team was set up
under the direction of an interministerial committee. It was to carefully
consider and evaluate various options available, and to solicit the
requisite professional advice and opinion as and when it was deemed
necessary.

Government made an initial decision to downsize the company by 75%, based
on these extensive deliberations. This would have still allowed it to
operate for up to three years. It would continue to service its commitments
to the Westinghouse NGNP consortium in the event that the NGNP bid were
successful.

The company then embarked on a section 189 process, which prescribes in the
Labour Relations Act that if any company is considering downsizing, they
have to immediately inform employees and embark on a section 189 process.
The company then embarked on such a process and approximately 600 employees
have already left the employ of the company in terms of these prescribed
procedures.

In May this year, a further blow was dealt to the project when Westinghouse
withdrew participation in the NGNP programme, and Cabinet has now approved
the following further recommendations that were placed before it.

The PBMR will be placed in a care and maintenance mode to protect its
intellectual property and assets.

Several employees will be identified and retained to undertake this work
unless the results of a capability audit, to be performed by the Department
of Science and Technology, recommends otherwise.

There will be ongoing retrenchment of the remaining staff, and this process
is taking place as we are sitting here in the House.

The Fuel Development Laboratory, FDL, on the SA Nuclear Energy Corporation,
Necsa, premises - one of the important assets built by this programme -
will be decommissioned under the auspices of Necsa. The Helium Test
Facility, HTF, also on the Necsa premises will be mothballed.

This will be done according to the strict requirements for decommissioning
nuclear capability. The HTF facility at North-West University will only be
mothballed should the university not wish to continue with it.

A key nuclear skills development and retention programme will be
established and funding will be provided subject to a skills evaluation
process by the Department of Science and Technology.

Let me say that the conditions under which we are operating, where no
funding was made available to the PBMR in this year’s budget, have meant
that we’ve had to work under very tight constrains. It would have been
wonderful if we had been able to retain every single nuclear scientist that
worked on this project.

These skills, however, are highly mobile, and many of these people have
been absorbed elsewhere. Eskom, Sasol and a number of private and
international companies have recruited these people. But, we do know that
should government take the final decision to embark on a nuclear programme,
these people will be absorbed at that stage.

What we are focusing on is a number of young, trained nuclear scientists
who would still require further upgrading and training. These are the ones
who for have been identified for inclusion in a further nuclear skills
development programme. The Departments of Higher Education Training, and
Energy will seek to ensure that the nuclear graduate programmes at
universities, such as the North-West University, are maintained and
supported.

What is important is that Cabinet has decided that a retrospective review
of the PBMR project, which will most likely include an audit, will be done.
This will also assist us in capturing the lessons learnt from such an
undertaking on what might have gone wrong, and what might have gone right.
We still need to identify any outstanding cause of action that should be
undertaken, with a particular focus on the corporate governance aspects of
this project.

It is important that a number of observations be made with regard to the
project. A total of R9,244 billion has been invested over the last decade,
with the South African government having contributed an amount of
approximately R7 billion or 80,3% of that amount. Eskom contributed 8,8%,
but then withdrew from that project, with Westinghouse and the Industrial
Development Corporation, IDC, accounting for 4,9% each.

Major work on the project started with a detailed feasibility study in the
year 2000, and a significant milestone in the project was reached in 2003
with the National Nuclear Regulator, NNR, reporting a positive view on the
possibility of the licensing of that project.

Around 2005, the PBMR’s focus shifted to work needed for the licensing of a
demonstration power plant and the detailed design work required for
manufacturing long-lead items of the plant for the PBMR.

At about the same time, government identified the potential of a successful
PBMR programme to enable an advanced manufacturing industry based on home-
grown intellectual property that would be globally competitive. It approved
a significant amount of funding for that project. Government’s funding was
intended to ensure the continuation of the project, whilst providing a firm
foundation for the acquisition of additional private sector investment into
the project and an anchor customer.

It was originally envisaged that Eskom would be the PBMR’s anchor customer,
with a possible purchase of a further 24 reactors, as part of the country’s
expansion of its electricity generation capacity. This would meet the
increasing electricity demand with the first demonstration PBMR to be
constructed on the Koeberg Nuclear Power Station site.

Let me say that the PBMR is a baby reactor, and can at the most yield 400
megawatts of power. If you look at something like Kusile, which provides 4
600 megawatts, these reactors can be efficiently placed across the country.
These are tiny reactors; that was the attraction of such a programme.

Furthermore, the technology associated with the PBMR is very inviting
because it is said that the PBMR can never go into meltdown. Because of the
small scale of the reactor, plus the notion that it is very safe
technology, government then embarked on this.

However, between 2005 and 2009, it became increasingly clear that based on
the direct-cycle electricity design, the PBMR’s potential investor and
customer market was severely restricted; and it was unable to acquire
either. Thus government has been constrained to make decisions about the
future of the project.

It is absolutely clear from all the high-level reviews that have been
undertaken that there is no doubt about the validity of the technology
itself. The main feature of the PBMR, as I have said, is that its safety
features are inherent in the physics of the design. This is as opposed to
the add-on engineered safety features, as are found in current light water
reactor nuclear plants.
In the original PBMR design, the system is a so-called direct-cycle system
where the reactor coolant, which is helium in our case, passes through the
turbo generator plant without an intermediate system such as a boiler. This
arrangement promised greater thermal efficiency and safety, hence its
attractiveness as a future nuclear generation technology.

Both the United States and China are actively engaged in further developing
this technology, with South Africa earning a reputation as being at the
cutting edge of these developments. Indeed, China made several visits to
this country to engage with our scientists. This is a remarkable
achievement for a developing country and something of which we can be
justifiably proud.

Through this programme, we were able to retain and consolidate the existing
nuclear skills and capabilities that had been developed during the
apartheid era. Most importantly, we sponsored the training of a new
generation of nuclear scientists and technicians.

Some of our universities have definitely benefited from this investment and
are able to offer courses related to nuclear research and training that
would not have been possible without such an investment. This has been
achieved in an era where the trend internationally was not to invest in
developing nuclear skills.

This trend has now been reversed with the advent of the commitments made to
reduce carbon emissions and many countries are now reviewing their nuclear
policies. Because South Africa has been steadily investing in nuclear
capability over the last decade, we are well positioned to embark on a
nuclear build should that be required.

Obviously, in closing down the PBMR project, there has been a leakage of
skills, which is regrettable but unavoidable, but we do envisage the
further up-skilling and training of a younger generation of scientists and
technicians who have benefitted from our investments in the PBMR.

Let us say that, when we are estimating whether government is making the
correct decision, we do need to take into consideration what will happen if
we do not close down the project.

The decision on the future of the PBMR has been a difficult one to make.
It’s been a complex process, and especially because it affects the
livelihood of so many people and so many of our young scientists who were
really learning from this project. Had there been any other viable options,
we would have certainly considered them.

May I thank everyone who had to embark on this long and difficult journey,
including my fellow Ministers, the board, and other participants in this
process, and the trade unions, for all the hard work and support that has
gone into this initiative. It is much appreciated, and I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr P VAN DALEN: Madam Chair, the Minister of Public Enterprises has today
announced the downscaling or the effective closure of this controversial
money-guzzling enterprise, which, after 10 years, has not yielded any
significant breakthrough and for all intents and purposes was an exercise
in futility. To say the least, this can be regarded as fruitless and
wasteful expenditure.

The Pebble Bed Modular Reactor, PBMR, was established in 1999, and
Parliament was told that for an investment of R2 billion, the PBMR had the
intention to develop, market and build a high-temperature reactor that
would produce 400mW of power. We were also told that about four reactors
would be needed to generate the equivalent of the power that Koeberg
generates.

This plan was changed, and we were then told that it would now only produce
165mW, and we would need 10 reactors to generate the same power as Koeberg,
at a cost of about R30 billion each. You can do the math it would be
R300 billion for all 10 reactors. Compare this to a coal-fired power
station that can generate 4 600mW and costs R125 billion a fraction of the
cost.

For many years, the DA has been calling for its closure. The R10 billion it
has cost the taxpayer would have been better spent on building 200 000 much-
needed RDP houses, which would have gone a long way in addressing the
housing shortage that currently exists.

The Minister tells us that the intellectual property is secured for South
Africa and the future. This is not altogether true, as the knowledge that
has been developed is worth little, if anything, if the critical mass of
scientists to interpret it does not exist.

I am told that the critical mass of informed scientists working for the
PBMR company has already resigned and opted for more lucrative positions
overseas. Nothing stops them from applying there what they have learned
here for the benefit of whomever is their new employer.

The investment of Westinghouse, a US-based company, must be recognised. The
questions that will arise is: What will this mean in terms of the
intellectual property rights? Is government going to buy their share, as
they would surely have as much claim to the intellectual property that they
co-funded?

Dit is dus met ’n hartseer gevoel dat ek hier staan en moet vra: Was die
kool die sous werd of is dit net goed en nog ’n voorbeeld van hoe die staat
geld mors en dan maar net weer verwag van die belastingbetaler om sy gordel
stywer te trek en meer belasting vir sy gemors te betaal?

Dit is waarom die gewone man in die straat wat vir ’n salaris werk en
belasting betaal, glo dat die regering baie geld het en dat die koevert nog
lank nie leeg is nie. Daar is nie tekens van te min geld as dit by die
leiers van ons land kom nie en as Ministers glo dat hulle net met duur
motors die arm mense kan bedien.

Selfs die werkers in die Parlement is in opstand aangesien hulle
eerstehands sien hoe daar deur die leiers met die geld gemors word. Die DA
is van mening dat openbare ondernemings wat nie hul mandaat vervul nie,
uitgefaseer moet word om die las op die belastingbetaler te verlig. Ek dank
u. [Applous.] (Translation of Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[It is therefore with a feeling of sadness that I have to ask: Was the game
worth the candle, or is it just stuff and another example of how government
is wasting money and then simply expecting the taxpayer to once again
tighten the belt and pay more tax for its mess?

This is why the man in the street, who works for a salary and pays tax,
believes that government has a lot of money and the envelope is far from
empty. There are no signs of a shortage of money when it comes to the
leaders of our country and when Ministers believe that they can only serve
the poor when they drive expensive cars.

Even the workers in Parliament are in rebellion as they have first-hand
experience of how money is wasted by the leaders. The DA is of the opinion
that public enterprises that are not fulfilling their mandates should be
phased out in order to relieve the burden on the taxpayer. Thank you.
[Applause.]]

Mr M A NHANHA: Chairperson, members of the executive and hon members of the
fourth democratic Parliament, when Cope first came into this House, we took
a conscious decision to say that we shall be a patriotic opposition, and I
promise to be exactly that.

Hon Minister, ngesiXhosa undiqhokr’ amadolwana. [... in isiXhosa one would
say you’ve taken the words out of my mouth.] You have actually been able to
read what I wanted to say, and you have responded to some of the issues
that Cope wanted to raise. Thank you very much.

Colleagues, can I say that as Cope, we welcome the announcement by the
Minister that the curtain has finally fallen on the PBMR and that the show
is over. In this House, I have on numerous occasions heard members calling
for alternative energy, and reference has been made to nuclear in this
regard. The decision to terminate the nuclear weapons programme in the
early 1990s, was met with much applause by the rest of the world, and now
the PBMR leaves a bitter taste in my mouth.

With hindsight, I cannot help but to think about the scientists and experts
in the various fields of nuclear who have been lost in the past and will
continue to be lost going forward.

The fact that no other country has successfully used the technology should
have made us pause rather than leap in as we did. In trying to be at the
forefront of nuclear technology, we now have to put ourselves at the back.

China, of course, is in a different financial league to us, but the Chinese
are attempting to create a prototype called HTR-10. For these reasons, the
PBMR team should interact with the Tsinghua University in Beijing so that
some of the scientists can continue to interrogate this technology for
future use. I thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr E J LUCAS: Chairperson, I am pleased that the Minister has taken into
account the human capital invested in this programme and the amount of
unemployment that will be created by the project’s sudden termination. At
its inception, it was projected that 57 000 people would be employed.

The Ministry of Energy, the state and the country, for that matter, can ill
afford such turnarounds in policy decisions, especially when we are already
so far down the road. Besides the unemployment that is going to be created
by this decision, the loss of money – taxpayers’ money – is going to be
enormous.

As recently as October 2007, the then Minister of Finance, hon Trevor
Manuel, brought before this House a special Adjustments Appropriation Bill,
which was approved, wherein an additional amount of R1,8 billion was
transferred to the PBMR project for operational expenses, bringing the
total transfer that was being spent on this project by government since
1999 to R8,8 billion.

Notwithstanding these calamities, we are further burdened by the prospect
of having no direction now in terms of our future energy sources.

We urge the Minister and her department to be absolutely certain before
they commit to the next energy route that this country is going to follow.
I thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr L W GREYLING: All I can say today is vindication, vindication, and
vindication! For six years in this House, I have been objecting every year
to the absurd amounts of money that the government has seen fit to throw
away on the PBMR.

An amount of R9 billion of taxpayers’ money has been thrown at this
project, even though it was clear from the international panel of
economists way back in 1999 that this project would never be economically
viable.

I was ridiculed for my stance from that side of the House, but today it is
clear that this was a momentous waste of government’s resources. That money
could have been far better used to position South Africa as a leader in
solar energy.

The ID therefore calls for a complete and independent forensic audit so
that we can know the full extent of wastage that occurred on this misguided
project. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: House Chairperson, the confirmation that the Pebble Bed
Modular Reactor, PMBR, will be downsized and its operations will be reduced
to a level that allows for the active preservation of its intellectual
property and assets was expected, in view of reports that 75% of the
project staff had already been dismissed.

We are sad to hear that no measures are in place to ensure the skills of
those who are retrenched are not lost to our economy.

The ACDP would not like to see a further R30 billion spent on this failed
project, but a staggering R10 billion has been spent with nothing
substantial to show for it – a waste. Much still needs to be explained:
things like conflicts of interests; accounting for taxpayers’ money spent;
and the rehabilitation of PBMR staff. We hope this will not be swept under
the carpet in the downsizing of this project.

Hon Minister, where to after 2013? What is the plan? A lot of money has
been and continues to be spent. What do the people have to show for it? Are
you attempting in this instance to justify the original decision for the
excessive spending or are we about to investigate why the decision was
taken in the first place? Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr M R SONTO: Chairperson, the ANC supports the decision by government to
downsize the PBMR. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please!

Mr M R SONTO: We acknowledge the fact that this was by no means an easy
decision to make; yet we should equally recognise that a decision to the
contrary would have been worse for the entity, its employees and the
country as a whole.

It’s a fact that large investments have been injected into this project but
with the good intentions that it would secure additional investments and a
customer for the product. Even though it has not yielded any of the two, we
must acknowledge the fact that because of this initiative, South Africa was
noticed in the world of the nuclear fraternity.
The ANC understands how painful it is to shed jobs, especially in the
current economic climate. We find ourselves in that climate and we are not
happy that workers should be losing jobs. We are confident, however, that
government has considered all available options and has settled on the best
possible outcome.

We believe that it is good for government to continue pioneering innovative
and technologically sound projects, with due diligence as a precursor. In
areas where an audit is required, be it financial or technical, we think
that government should provide the necessary guidance too.

As the ANC we want to acknowledge the fact that parties have welcomed the
decision by the Minister. One would realise that other opposition parties
would oppose for the sake of opposition, but we want to thank those who
play their opposition role as parties that are part of governance. The ANC
supports government’s decision, once again, to rationalise or downsize this
PBMR. I thank you. [Applause.]

                    HIGHER EDUCATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                  SKILLS DEVELOPMENT LEVIES AMENDMENT BILL
              HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)
The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Chairperson, hon members and
comrades, it gives me great pleasure to introduce the Higher Education Laws
Amendment Bill, the Skills Development Levies Amendment Bill and the Higher
Education and Training Laws Amendment Bill to this honourable House.

These legislative amendments further enable the transfer of functions
vested previously with the former Department of Education, and with the
Departments of Labour and Basic Education, to the Department of Higher
Education and Training.

In the past 16 months, since the establishment of the Department of Higher
Education and Training, we have made great strides in laying the foundation
for a truly comprehensive and differentiated post-school system, conjoining
the education and training sectors.

In 1994, we inherited the outcomes of a deliberate policy aimed at the
underdevelopment of our people. Education performance still replicates
patterns of poverty and privilege. The patterns of unequal educational
outcomes are endlessly repeated through occupational inequalities from one
generation to another.

Nevertheless, this ANC led-government of 16 years has made great efforts in
denting many of these problems. This must be seen as another step in
building upon some of those achievements and seeking to overcome
bottlenecks.
In the coming months, we need to make far-reaching changes to improve the
provision of post-school opportunities for the youth in particular but for
adults too. We also intend to accelerate our efforts in dealing with some
of the fundamental challenges in the system including skills bottlenecks,
especially in respect of priority and scarce skills; low participation
rates; distortions in shape, size and distribution of access to post-school
education and training; and quality and inefficiency challenges.

To address these and other impediments to our economic and social goals, we
require significant policy and legislative changes and improvements.

Therefore, this amended legislation before the House will remove some of
the difficulties and hurdles in the way of policy development.

The transformation and expansion of the Higher Education and Training
landscape will have a direct bearing on government’s overall mission for
economic growth and development, especially for the benefit of the workers
and the poor of our country.

My performance agreement with the President based on Outcome 5 of
Government’s Programme of Action, “A skilled and capable workforce to
support an inclusive growth path”, sets the agenda for the work of my
department. Hon members, this outcome requires a major redesign of how
government and its partners have been operating in the area of human
resources development.

To guide our work, the human resources development strategy, which is in
its final draft, will soon be launched by the Deputy President. Regarding
the work of my department specifically, we have begun the process of
drafting a Green Paper on Higher Education and Training, which will require
a broader, long-term view of the post-schooling system we wish to create.

The year 2010 has been momentous for my department in respect of the
regimen of stakeholder partnerships we have created. In April, we held a
landmark Stakeholder Summit on Higher Education Transformation, which
brought together a spectrum of the higher education community in order to
confront the challenges in the university sector.

Earlier this month, we held two extremely successful dialogues: the Further
Education and Training, FET, College Summit and the National Skills Summit.
The FET College Summit was a thorough engagement among stakeholders on how
to stabilise the sector and make colleges pillars of the skills development
revolution in our country.

We set a process in place for action in the immediate, medium and long-term
to support FET colleges to function as high-quality institutions that can
respond to national education and training challenges.

Last week’s National Skills Summit saw government and our social partners
in organised labour, business, representative community structures,
professional bodies, research, education and training institutions, and
skills development intermediaries resolving to work together to effect a
skills revolution in our country.

The discussions and final declaration set out a detailed map to tackle the
skills challenges, from second-chance learning and adult education to high-
level research and innovation. Chairperson, today, I table a copy of the
declaration for the information of members.

The outcomes of all the three summits will form the basis of the Green
Paper that is aimed at surveying the postschool education and training
landscape, and setting out the policy and legislative changes needed to
support our strategic objectives.

I wish to thank the chairperson, Comrade Marius Fransman, and all the
members of the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training for the
sterling work they have done in holding public hearings and also
interrogating these Bills. We will continue to work with them in relation
to the extensive work required to create an articulated system, which is
able to embrace those who are unable to access learning and skills
opportunities, as well as to bridge the divides between institutions of
learning and the workplace.

Kafushane nje le mithetho eyisichibiyelo esiyenzayo lapha, eyokwenza ukuthi
sakhe isisekelo esiqinile ukuthi izingane zakithi zikwazi ukuthola imfundo
yokuqhubekela phambili emva kwesikole. Siyabonga kakhulu. [In short, these
laws that we are amending here are to ensure that we lay a strong
foundation so that our children will be able to get postschool education.
We thank you very much.]

Even though hon Mike Ellis was busy in conversation throughout my input
here this afternoon, Chairperson, I thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr M L FRANSMAN: Hon Chairperson, hon members, Ministers, Deputy Ministers,
ladies and gentlemen, the portfolio committee welcomes the introduction of
these three Bills which we are discussing as one in this debate and,
obviously, proposing their adoption in this Assembly of our people.

I have to thank various institutions and structures that were part of this
process, which did not necessarily only start when the portfolio committee
dealt with it. The process began during the transition from the Department
of Labour to the Department of Higher Education and Training via the
Department of Education.
There, the Basic Education portfolio committee had to deal with and engage
on certain issues concerning the Higher Education and Training committee.
So, we want to thank all those institutions and structures of Parliament
that had a preliminary engagement on these respective processes.

The portfolio committee has engaged on this particular matter since August
this year. At the beginning of the debate, we really had a tussle between
how deep we should go and the fact that this is a technical piece of
legislation. We had to decide between working on it more substantially or
dealing with the technicalities only.

There was also another question that the portfolio committee had to deal
with, and that was with regard to public hearings. Currently, there is a
convention that if the changes are extremely technical, one does not really
require a public hearing process in an expanded way. However, we
deliberated on this matter and the portfolio committee agreed that it is
important to give input to the public on this issue.

Die voorleggings wat ons gekry het, was grotendeels te doen met
ondersteuning vir hierdie drie wetsontwerpe. Ons het een of twee
voorleggings gekry wat basies aangedui het dat hulle voel kwessies moet
baie meer in diepte aangespreek word. In ondersteuning van wat die Minister
nou ook gesê het, het ons besluit dat daar ’n Groenskrif-proses sal wees.
Ons sal daardie voorleggings binne daardie proses akkommodeer, waar daar
baie meer deeglike gesprekvoering oor die kwessie moet wees. (Translation
of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[The submissions we received mostly had to do with support for these three
Bills. We received one or two submissions in which it was indicated that
they believe issues should be addressed more thoroughly. In support of what
the Minister has also just said, we have decided to follow a Green Paper
process. We shall accommodate those submissions within that process, where
there has to be more in-depth discussion about the issue.]

I want to thank all the political parties that participated in the
portfolio committee process, and all the parties that have confirmed these
amendments. I would also like to thank hon James, who has now moved from
Higher Education and Training to another portfolio committee, for his input
and engagement in our committee. I wish him well.

Essentially, the mandate to change this legislative process came from the
January 8 Statement, and I would like to read from that. Page 15 in the
January 8 Statement of 2010 reads as follows:

   The process of creating a single postschool and training system for the
   youth and adults is now under way. Through such a system, the ANC
   government aims to respond to the requirements of the economy, rural
   development challenges, the need to develop an informed and critical
   citizenry, and maximum co-operation amongst the components of the
   learning delivery system at colleges, universities, workplaces and work
   training centres.

The January 8 Statement continues by saying:

   Through such an integrated system, the ANC government will significantly
   increase access to postschool education and training. In addition, there
   shall be an effective co-ordination between the Seta system and
   education and training institutions, particularly FET colleges and
   universities of technology.

So what we are seeing, hon members, is that that which the January 8
Statement calls an “underway process” – which is based on our Polokwane
resolutions – has been transformed, and has gone to the state.  We are now
seeing the implementation of that initial “underway process” speaking to
legislative changes.

In terms of the respective Bills, therefore, essentially, we had to look at
definitional changes in the Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill. We also
had to address critical aspects that caused confusion in the Higher
Education and Training system as a result of the transfer of the Skills
Development Act.

So Parliament and the Department of Higher Education and Training would go
out either on oversight visits or to the summits that the Minister has
spoken about. There would be times when people would not be clear on
matters, because they are looking at the law and still seeing definitions
that are not relevant in their current context. Therefore we had to bring
this before Parliament.

The amendments also seek to avoid confusion in respect of qualifications
offered by private institutions, and to confirm their qualifications on the
National Qualifications Framework, the NQF.

The Higher Education and Training Laws Amendment Bill seeks to amend
certain definitions of the Adult Basic Education and Training Act, No 52 of
2000, and to make provision for the employment and employers of educators
at public centres by inserting provisions in the said Act. So, we had to
look at those things and at the process and powers, functions, and the
monitoring and evaluation of adult education and training.

Regarding the issue of international private providers, there was one
submission that we found within the context of the public hearings, where
the private providers felt very strongly that the insertion of certain
wording will, in fact, make it a very bureaucratic process. From their
point of view, it can delay quality education with regard to the
registration of their qualifications.
We debated this matter, because they also indicated, hon Minister, that if
they were not to get their way, they would even consider taking the matter
to court. We looked at the matter, and it is quite clear to us that it is,
indeed, a separate issue. The insertion of the wording within the draft
legislation will not necessarily affect it.

We must have registration at our South African Qualifications Authority as
well as the National Qualifications Framework. We must have those issues
presented there otherwise we would not know what types of qualifications
are, at times, being offered to our citizens. And then we could find faulty
qualifications or inferior presentations towards qualifications. So, that
was a very real issue.

Another issue that the committee debated and had to deal with was that some
of the members were concerned about the removal of the word “basic” from
the title “basic education and training” resulting in the term “adult
education and training”. This could lead to adults who want a very basic
education feeling that they would not be given the support they need.

However, it was clarified with the department that basic education for
adults is addressed by the Kha Ri Gude Mass Literacy campaign, which is a
function of the Basic Education Department. Therefore there is a co-
operative environment between basic education and adults in the context of
basic education, in addition to what the Minister has termed postliteracy
education, which, to a larger degree, addresses the issue of skilling
processes.

So, those were some of the issues that we had to deal with and debate.
Generally, the process was followed properly. We also had a divergence of
opinions, but through the portfolio and public hearing processes we were
able to make certain amendments that strengthen the definitional changes,
and not necessarily just pass it as is.

So, with that, we, as the portfolio committee, obviously want to present
these three respective Bills for adoption by the Assembly. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): I just want to appeal to the
members in that corner on my far left, who are still talking.

Xa sihleka asihleki ngathi sisemfuleni. [When we laugh, we shouldn’t laugh
just anyhow.]

This is the National Assembly!

Dr W G JAMES: House Chair, hon members, the legislative proposals before
this House must be considered against the bigger picture of education and
skills development in our country.

South African businesses say that they can’t grow faster because job
seekers lack the necessary skills. Their educational backgrounds are weak,
and the private sector struggles to find the talent they need just to
survive.

In a globally competitive environment, our education system makes it
impossible for industries to thrive and prosper. We face an education
crisis that has produced a comprehensive skills shortage, especially of
intermediate and high-end skills.

In response to this, the government has created a system of 23 Sector
Education and Training Authorities, called Setas, which are supposed to do
the following things: to develop and implement a skills development plan
for its sectors; to cater for the training of new entrants to the labour
market; to be responsible for quality control; to pay out development
grants; and, finally, to report to the Minister.

Supported by a 1% National Skills Development Levy on businesses earning
more than R500 000 per year, Setas enjoy an annual operating budget of
about R8,5 billion. But, after 10 years of the Seta system, we have an even
less skilled workforce than when we started the system. So, the question
is: What is the problem?

First of all, Setas rely on bureaucrats, rather than employers to identify
the skills that businesses need, resulting in training structures that are
unresponsive to the ever-changing environment of the market.

Secondly, many Setas are wasteful, inefficient bureaucracies that work
better at dispensing patronage than encouraging skills.

Thirdly, many are characterised by spectacular financial mismanagement, as
budgets are routinely underspent or siphoned off in irregular expenditures.

Fourthly, small businesses find the required paperwork onerous, and
therefore opt out of the system because it wastes their time.

Most importantly, Setas fail to empower learners, as many do not complete
their training courses. They require remedial education that the training
does not always address. As a result, businesses have to retrain employees
anyway.

So, what is the answer to our skills shortage? We propose that we scrap
most of the Setas, save for some very good performers, and rather focus on
our neglected Further Education and Training colleges, the FET colleges. By
connecting them with learners and private industries, these institutions
can respond meaningfully to employers and to the needs of learners.

Currently, South Africa’s 50 FET colleges enrol an estimated 125 000
students, and I must point out that there is no agreement on the number of
students, because there is no mathematical formula developed yet to arrive
at a notion of a full-time equivalent student. So this means 125 000
students out of an eligible 2,8 million unemployed young people, between
the ages of 18 and 24!

And I want to say that we get stuck on the numbers, but the magnitude of
wastage is captured in this notion of 2,8 million unemployed, breathing
South Africans who are struggling to find purpose in life by virtue of the
system. So, what we need is about 1,5 million of these young people
attending FET colleges – and we agree across all parties that it must be so
– so that they can enhance their otherwise weak educational legacies.

These institutions, FET colleges, serve three purposes – very important
ones: to give students a second chance to complete matric – particularly
those referred to as “dropouts”, which I don’t think is a very good word to
use; to give theoretical training to students who need to complete
apprenticeships required by employers; and, thirdly, to offer postschool
qualifications, certification and training through specialised courses.

This year, our government has committed R3,7 billion for FET colleges, but
as we know, it is not nearly enough. We need to triple the amount and
direct more of our unskilled young people to them. If FET colleges received
the same commitment such as Setas and the underspent National Skills Fund,
they could deliver mass skills training in a much more substantial way than
our current system does.

One reason why FET colleges have thus far had spotty records as training
institutions is because they are accountable to Setas, rather than to the
industry. By working with industries directly, they could make sure that
their training measures are suitable for the outcomes that learners and
businesses require.

Businesses are best positioned to understand industry trends. By working
hand in glove with FET colleges, they can achieve their goals more
effectively.

In cases where FET colleges do not offer appropriate training, businesses
should be incentivised to develop in-house or industry-wide training
programmes. They could do this alone, or in conjunction with other industry
actors, at a common training facility.

The government’s role is to act as a facilitator, not the controlling
agent. We should establish an independent national human resource
development commission to advise us on best practices and policies. Beyond
that, we need to do our part in creating outstanding FET colleges so that
learners and businesses can benefit from them.

With this in mind, the DA supports the Skills Development Levies Amendment
Bill, for it simply transfers the responsibility for skills development
from the Labour Minister to the Higher Education and Training Minister. And
please note this is a departure for the DA to support the skills levy.

Secondly, we support the Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill with the
comment, which I would like to put across very strongly, that unless
greater efficiencies are introduced in the speed with which the SA
Qualifications Authority, SAQA, and the National Qualifications Framework
operate, the Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill would be unenforceable.

Thirdly, after due consideration, the DA, however, does not support the
Higher Education and Training Laws Amendment Bill, because it was never
published in the Government Gazette for comment. Most of the important
players in the Further Education and Training sector have not seen it.

Furthermore, the Bill creates management structures that make the provinces
still responsible for the colleges, but where the Minister simply reserves
the authority to direct these, prior to having the necessary changes made
to Schedule 4 of the Constitution and to the Further Education and Training
Colleges Act. We believe that this is a sleight of hand and should, as
such, be opposed. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Ms N Y VUKUZA-LINDA: Madam Speaker, hon Ministers, hon members, the three
Bills before the House today are the product of submissions by the
Department of Higher Education and Training. They are the product of robust
interactions with relevant stakeholders and those concerned. They are the
product of rigorous engagement and negotiations amongst us, as the members
of the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education and Training.

As Cope, it is our understanding that the amendments proposed today are of
a technical nature, whose primary purpose is to align the existing
legislation to the new education dispensation that came about as a result
of the former Department of Education splitting into the Departments of
Basic Education, and Higher Education and Training, respectively.

We further understand the value of such amendments to be that of a
facilitative and an enabling nature, so that the department can get down to
doing its work. It is after such value has been unlocked through the
passing of these amendments that we will demand accountability. That will
be the point at which we’ll go into more in-depth discussions.

I must admit, however, Minister, that the amendments do carry within them
temptations and inferences of a policy nature. This is something that I
will resist to engage right now, in the light of my understanding of what
today is about. Suffice it to say that we, as Cope, are looking forward to
that time when you, Minister, realise a more integrated postschooling
system, established through a similar process with policies.

The amendment of these Acts seems an opportune time to create space for
such a process to occur. Cope therefore supports the Bills. Thank you.
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon Member. Hon G S
Radebe. I am informed that the hon member is making his maiden speech.
[Applause.]

Mr G S RADEBE: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, hon members,
distinguished guests, we say thanks for all the submission made by the
different institutions, organisations and individuals. They show a
commitment to education and the developmental state.

Chairperson, we are fortunate to be debating this very important
legislation today in a month where we honour one of the revolutionaries,
Comrade Steve Biko. He was clear about the importance of education and its
role in liberating the minds of the oppressed. I have no doubt that if he
was still alive he would be in the forefront of pushing for this
legislation to advance the interests of the young people of South Africa.

Sihlalo, ngitsandza kutsi ngiphakamise tibongo ngalendzima lengaka
leseyentiwe Litiko Letemfundvo Lephakeme Nekuceceshwa kwemakhono. Loku
kusikhombisa kutsi sinendzima lenkhulu lekumele siyidlale kulommango
wakitsi. Sihalalisela Nendvuna Nzimande ngemsebenti wakhe lawentile
ekuphatseni lelitiko. Phela kusungula litiko ulisuse phansi ngumsebenti
lomkhulu kakhulu lekumele natsi simsekele kuze akwati kuphumelela.

Ngiko nje sibonga nakuMengameli Zuma ngekutsi ehlukanise lamatiko abe
mabili. Kuyabonakala kutsi loku abekwentela kutsi engete emandla Etindvuna
kuze tikwati kubeka temfundvo embili. (Translation of Siswati paragraphs
follows.)

[Chairperson, I would like to express a word of gratitude to the Department
of Higher Education and Training for the role it has played. This serves as
an indication that we have a greater role to play in our community. We also
congratulate Minister Nzimande for his work in heading this department. To
establish a department from scratch, is an enormous task that requires from
us to support him in order for him to succeed.

That is the reason why we also want to thank President Zuma for dividing
this department into two. It is obvious that he did this in order to
empower Ministers to prioritise education.]

The technical legislative amendment proves that the Department of Higher
Education and Training is really taking a step forward as a new department.

Chairperson, considering the public hearing, we still have a long way to go
in interacting with our community to ensure that communities are more
engaged around the issues of higher education.

As we received the submissions, we found that other institutions provide
relevant educational services, but were not aligning their services with
the South African Qualifications Authority. Other institutions feel
excluded as they have tried many times to register with the South African
Qualifications Authority and could not meet the minimum requirement
standards.

This shows that it is highly important that all institutions should align
themselves with the Department of Higher Education and Training policies as
there will be no special amendment for one individual, or any other private
provider. The Department of Higher Education and Training, however, should
create an environment that will suit everybody who meets the minimum
requirements.

The suggestion that the amendment to the Act may have the effect of
isolating South African higher education from the rest of the world, and
that the amendments unreasonably impact on the relationships between local
and international providers of higher education to the detriment of South
Africans, cannot be correct and shows the bias of certain individuals who
have got their self–interest in mind.

We cannot make Bills that will suit certain individuals, private providers
or international institutions. We must provide Bills that would be able to
respond to our economical needs. All those who want to participate must do
so within the terms and conditions of the Department of Higher Education
and Training. We cannot allow colonisers to continue colonising us in our
own freedom. We are free and not “dom”! [stupid] [Applause.]

Hon Chairperson, it is true that unregistered institutions under the
Companies Act, No 61 of 1973, are problematic. The Department of Higher
Education and Training should strengthen its monitoring tools to avoid
corrupt activities.

Phela bafundzi, Ndvuna, betama ngawo onkhe emandla kutsi etikhatsini
letinyenti bahambe bayewubhalisa etikhungweni letiphakeme. Kodvwa inkinga
labahlangana nayo ngulokutsi batfola tikhungo letingakabhaliswa
ngalokusemtsetfweni. Loko kwenta kutsi bafundzi batikhandze sebalahlekelwe
timali tabo kanye nesikhatsi sabo. Ngiko nje siphakamisa lendlela yekutsi
litiko lakho kufanele libuke indlela lencono yekutsi kubukelwe bafundzi
kuze bangatikhandzi sebasetinkingeni. (Translation of Siswati paragraph
follows.)

[Indeed, Minister, learners try by all means to go and register at
institutions of higher learning most of the times. However, the problem
that they encounter at these institutions is that such institutions are not
legally registered. This causes learners to loose their money and time.
That is the reason we propose that your department finds a better way to
cater for the learners in order for them not to find themselves in such
problems.]

The submission by the Independent Institute of Education, IIE; Adult
Learning Network, ALN; and Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages,
Tesol, confirms our understanding that the amendments are indeed long
overdue. Umalusi even emphasised the importance of the effort to create
coherence in the Adult and Further Education and Training systems.

It is that understanding that made Umalusi anticipate that this newly
created stability will reflect in the adult education success rate in
future. We hope that the Green Paper will also reflect on these matters and
be able to respond to your promises, Minister.

It is because of that understanding that the ANC, as the ruling party,
decided to prioritise education as the key to transforming economic growth
in our country.

We must also take note that all that is happening now is the result of the
apartheid regime that continued to emphasise that we must have Bantu
Education, which oppressed us. The ANC is prepared and is going to ensure
that it addresses the imbalances of the past. It is very important that hon
James must understand that Setas are the answer to the skills shortages in
our country. [Interjections.]
Again, it is very important that people should be able to use their
conscience in using public funds. I would have liked hon Zille to have
diverted R2 million to improving the shortage of skills and promoting
skills development within our country.

It is very unfortunate that the opposition, like the DA, could come here
today pretending not to support the Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill,
whereas when we were at the hearing they gave the view that they supported
all these Bills. Today they pretend to have a platform from which to speak
lies. It is very much unfortunate that they supported all these Bills, but
today they come and differ with all these Bills. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order! Hon member, there is a
point of order.

Mr M J ELLIS: Chairperson, on a point of order, the hon member at the
podium said that the DA speaks lies and that certainly is unparliamentary.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, can you withdraw the
word “lies”. It is unparliamentary.

Mr G S RADEBE: I withdraw, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you. [Interjections.] You
can sit down, hon member.

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chairperson, on another point of order: I think that
the hon member should understand that when he makes his maiden speech, it
should not be provocative. [Interjections.] In fact, it should be quite
nice. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order! Hon Ellis, please take your
seat.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Chairperson, on a point of
order, is it parliamentary for a member who has a habit of calling others
liars to then protest when this thing is returned to him?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Minister, the member withdrew
that yesterday, and also the hon member who was requested to withdraw has
done so. Continue, hon member.

Prof B TUROK: Chairperson, on a point of order, does the Rule not limit the
number of points of order that a member can make?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Turok, in fact, you are out of
order. [Laughter.] Continue, hon member.

Mr G S RADEBE: Chairperson, I just want to state that the Portfolio
Committee on Higher Education made all the support possible to ensure that
the system of education becomes a success in this country. We should not
come here and take a political stance by claiming that we don’t support
anything and yet we do support it. It is very important to make it clear
that the skills summit also made sure that it is going to address some of
the imbalances of the past.

Hon Minister, as the portfolio committee we want to guarantee that we will
support you in ensuring that you prioritise the issues of education. On
that note, Chairperson, thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Sihlalo ohloniphekileyo ... [Hon Chairperson ...] ... I
just want to give the hon Minister the assurance that the IFP does support
these three pieces of legislation. [Applause.] The functions that you are
expected to perform are old and well known. They are skills development,
FET colleges, and the National Student Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS.

Yet, in the tradition of Charles Dickens, we have great expectations. On
the basis of those great expectations, the IFP will request the hon
Minister to look at the following issues.

Firstly, we would like the hon Minister to reduce the gap between
legislation and implementation – in other words, between theory and
practice. Our legislation is top drawer, but our implementation thereof
leaves a great deal to be desired. In other words, we must go beyond the
dialogues and the summits to which the Minister has referred.

Secondly, we would like the Minister to look at the problem of the FET
colleges. We believe that the programmes of FET colleges are just not
providing the types of skills our economy requires. There also seems to be
a mindset attached to FET colleges that such institutions are inferior to
universities. This must be addressed because it is not doing our programme
or our learners any good.

Thirdly, we request the Minister to conduct an audit of the teaching staff
at FET colleges and centres, because we believe that certain FET training
centres have either unqualified educators or badly qualified educators.
This is more serious as it hinders the delivery of quality education to FET
learners and detracts from the country’s skills base.

Fourthly – and we would like to raise this point for future policy
considerations even though it is not directly linked to this debate - we
would like to have a more concise definition of the term “educator”. In
fact, the IFP wants to be consistent here because, during the debate on the
principal Act, we did object to this wide and unlimited definition of the
term “educator” to include everybody and anybody.
Ngiyabonga dadewethu. [Thank you, madam.] [Time expired.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Madam Chairperson, the ACDP has understood the purpose of the
amendments as being primarily to align existing legislation with the new
education dispensation that came about when the former department of
education was split into the Departments of Basic Education and Higher
Education and Training. We welcome efforts to create coherence in the Adult
Education and FET systems and hope that amendments addressing the
appointment of educators will facilitate greater stability and that this
will impact positively on the adult education success rate in future.

Concerns do however remain with regard to clauses which could have the
effect of isolating South African higher education from the rest of the
world, and of unreasonably impacting on the relationship between local and
international providers of higher education, to the detriment of South
Africans.

The ACDP fully supports the department’s commitment to protecting South
African students from questionable providers, substandard qualifications,
and misleading practices. However, in our opinion, this can be addressed
successfully using existing laws and does not require further restrictions.

The rigorous process in place for overseas higher education providers who
wish to provide higher education in this country does limit the activities
of low quality or unscrupulous providers, both local and foreign, but it
also discourages the presence of high-quality providers.

The ACDP will support these Bills, but appeals to the Minister to closely
monitor and consider possible amendments to make sure we are not preventing
good quality, legitimate providers from operating within our country.

We also wish this department every success in the challenging days and
years ahead. Thank you.

USIHLALO WENDLU (Nkk M N Oliphant): Malungu ahloniphekile sengizonibiza
ngamagama ngoba anivumi ukuthula futhi lowo engizombiza ngegama uzoma
ngomlenze owodwa kuze kuphume le Ndlu. [Uhleko.] (Translation of isiZulu
paragraph follows.)

[The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, I will be forced to
call you by your names now because you do not want to keep quiet and the
one whose name I will call out should stand on one foot until the House
adjourns. [Laughter.]]

Ms N GINA: Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon Members of
Parliament, I greet you all. Firstly, let me comment on the technical
amendments that have been proposed by the Minister and the Department of
Higher Education and Training. As the portfolio committee, we have
discussed the amendments and we have all agreed on them.

Ngqongqoshe angiphinde ngibonge ukuthi uhulumeni okhona oholwa
nguKhongolose lapha eNingizimu Afrika, ubone kufanele ukuthi ama-Setas noma
konke okuphathelene nokuthuthukiswa kwamakhono akubuyise phansi koMnyango
wakho weMfundo ePhakeme kanye nokuQeqesha. Njengoba ezeMfundo sezibekwe
phambili zaba ngezinye zezinto thina njengeNingizimu Afrika okufanele
ukuthi sizibeke phambili sazi ukuthi ziphezulu eqhulwini. Ngalokho-ke
siyazi futhi siyabona ukuthi eMnyangweni wakho indaba yama-Seta ithathelwa
phezulu; sivela engqungutheleni lapho sibonile umhlahlandlela wokuthi ama-
Seta azosebenza kahle kangakani ukuze akwazi ukubhekana nemibuzo esibhekene
nayo njengesizwe mayelana nokuswelakala kwamakhono eNingizimu Afrika.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Hon Minister, let me thank the current South African ANC-led government
again for putting the Setas or everything that has to do with skills
development under your department, the Department of Higher Education and
Training, as education is one of the key priorities which we, as South
Africans, need to deal with seriously. In that way, we realise that in your
department, the issue of the Setas is taken seriously as we just returned
from a conference where we have seen Setas’ guidelines that are an
indication of the manner in which Setas will operate to address the skills
shortage, which is our main concern as South Africans.]

Really, we need to commend our ANC-led government for that. When we were
debating the issues concerning the technical amendments that had been made,
in our portfolio committee meeting, one of the hottest debates that we had
was around the whole issue of an educator. We debated on how to define an
educator. Who do we call an educator? Can anybody just stand in front of
learners, impart knowledge and be called an educator? Will we then be proud
to say that that person is an educator?

That was a hot debate and we felt that, as the ANC – since we have
prioritised education – we need to explain the kind of educator we envisage
for this country. Minister, through your Department, we need to ensure that
educator training is intensified. As the portfolio committee, we have
agreed that it is vital to have, in all the public sectors, appropriately
qualified educators that will perform their duties as expected.

However, before we can understand exactly what an educator is, it is
important for us, as a country, to understand what kind of education we
need. If we don’t understand what kind of education we need as a country,
it will be difficult for us to define an educator.

Firstly, we must be able to understand the roles of an educator. The United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, Unesco, defines
education as a means to empower children and adults alike to become active
participants in the transformation of their societies.

It further says that learning should focus on the values, attitudes, and
behaviours that enable individuals to learn to live together in a world
characterised by diversity and pluralism. Again, education is defined as
preparing children and adults for what lies ahead in their lives: a society
characterised by development, economic prosperity, political justice, and
stability.

The ANC-led government fully agrees with this definition, and we know that
when we talk about education, we talk about a life-long process and not
merely academic success. Therefore, we as the ANC prioritise education and
we want to ensure that we fulfil such definitions in respect of the kind of
education system the country envisages.

Once again, it is very important to explain what kind of educator we
envisage for this country. The term “educator” can be defined as all those
persons who teach or educate other persons, or who provide professional
services at any public school, Further Education and Training, FET,
institution or departmental office.

The term is open and broad and this is what the ANC envisages in order to
ensure that we get quality education through the right kind of people and
education system.

Minister, we will support you and ensure that educator training is
prioritised in this country. We believe once the educator training is
relevant and provides the necessary skills to educators, the national
question of skills shortages on any level or in a sector will be addressed
in this country.

Ngiyakholwa kakhulu Ngqongqoshe ukuthi iphepha leli esililindele ukuthi
liphume, i-Green Paper, uyokwazi ngazo zonke izindlela ukuthi kulona
kukwazi ukuphenduleka zonke lezi zinto esesizibalile ngaphezulu.
Njengokuthi imfundo yethu lapha eNingizmu Afrika sifisa ime kanjani ukuze
wonke umuntu okhiqizwa yimfundo yethu yalapha eMzansi izwe lethu lithuthuke
ngaye. Ngaphambi kwakho konke futhi siyafisa ukuthi kwenzeke ukuthi lolu
shintsho olungaka olwenzekile engazathi kungaba nendlela yokuthi
lufinyelele kubo bonke abantu ababambe iqhaza kwezemfundo, ukuze sikwazi
ukubona impumelelo nakho konke okuhlosile ngoshinstho olwenzekile sazi
nokuthi kuyaphumelela.

UNGQONGQOSHE WEMFUNDO EPHAKEME KANYE NOKUQEQESHA: Ngiyabonga Sihlalo.
Ngicela ukuqale ngibonge kuwo wonke amalungu ngokweseka lezi zichibiyelo
esizenza namhlanje kanye nakuwo wonke amaqembu aseka lokhu esikwenzayo.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I really believe that the much anticipated paper – the Green Paper on
educator training - will be out soon and that it will be able to address
all the concerns that we have already stated above. The above concerns
include what we wish our education structure here in South Africa to look
like, in order for it to enable everyone who is its product to contribute
to the development of this country. And above all, we also wish to see
everyone, who is involved in education, accessing this change in order for
us to see progress in everything you were aiming to achieve because we also
need to know if it is a success.

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Thank you, Chairperson.
Firstly, I would like to thank all the members for supporting the
amendments that we were debating today and all the parties that supported
what we were doing today.]

I want to take this opportunity to thank the department for all the work
that they have put into these amendments. However, my Marxism tells me that
a party like the DA is striving to be the class representative of the
propertied classes. If that is what it is trying to do, it is a very bad
class representative. I don’t understand for a moment how the DA can
support ... [Interjections.]

Mr M WATERS: How’s the BMW?

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: I will give you a lift.
[Laughter.] I don’t understand how the DA, through their representative,
could support these three Bills in the portfolio committee this very week,
but today somebody else, who represents the DA, is saying that they don’t
support one of the Bills.

Secondly, through the Chair to hon Ellis, that is why other vanguard
parties that represent other classes are better vanguard classes.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Mike Ellis, on Wednesday you
promised in the Chief Whips’ Forum that you will ensure that your members
are quiet; otherwise you will be disqualified, as you know. [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, it is not really a point of order. I just want
to say that we will behave ourselves as long as the hon Minister behaves
himself. When he provokes us, it is very difficult for us not to respond.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): The Minister is responding to the
issues that we have raised during the debate. Could we give him an ear,
please?

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Chairperson, I am not
misbehaving. I am merely stating facts. Here is another fact: We had an FET
summit with the presence of, amongst others, employers. We had a skills
summit, again with the presence of the employers, and we all agreed on the
necessity for Sector Education and Training Authorities, Setas. Everyone
agreed. We said that if we are to improve the functionality of the FET
colleges, we need to get the Setas to facilitate the placement of college
students and graduates in the workplace and that the Setas are important.
The declaration that I have submitted here today, contains exactly that.

None of the employers said that they don’t want the Setas. None of the
other stakeholders said that, so who are you speaking for? That is the
question because they are the stakeholders. You pay the price for not
taking the opportunity when we invite you to engage with us. You don’t come
and therefore you don’t understand what is happening out there.

Because we are an activist government that is on the ground, we are able to
understand better than you what the people are saying. Also, I am worried
that there is complete confusion here in understanding not only the
relationship, but also the distinction between the Setas and FET colleges.
You cannot close down the Setas and assume FET colleges must do that. They
perform two different functions.

Setas are intermediaries and FET colleges deliver programmes. To actually
have the link that the DA claims it wants between a college and a
workplace, the Setas are important. If Setas have problems, you don’t cut
them off; you deal with the problems as we are dealing with the problems of
the Setas in this Department. We have identified what the problems are and
we have a plan in place - not in theory – to deal with this.

We accept the challenge that has been put before us. I must say that I
don’t understand the opposition to this one Bill or the problem that it was
not published in the gazette. All three Bills were not published in the
gazette.

Why do you only pick up on one; for a wrong reason? The three of them were
not published because they are dealing with technical changes. It,
therefore, means that it is a continuation of grandstanding. Even though
you are an opposition party, you must be principled in your opposition,
rather than being opportunistic. [Applause.]

I understand that the opposition will try everything to discredit
government. I suppose that is all they are paid to do, but at least they
should be principled about it. Don’t have this kind of opportunism that
doesn’t take us anywhere.

Bab’ uMpontshane noMam’ uVukuza ... [Hon Mpontshane and hon Vukuza] ...
thank you for your proposals. We will take the issues you are raising
seriously. We will continue the debate on the difference between a teacher
and an educator.

Kodwa-ke kukhona amanye amagama angasemnandi kahle, asuke asikhumbuze
izinsuku ezimbi njengokuthi ungumhloli nje uyabona. Asikhumbuza leziya
zinsuku ezindala ababefika kungafanele ... [But there are some titles that
are no longer pleasant these days, because they remind us of the bad old
days – titles like school inspectors. These titles remind us of the past
where these inspectors would just come unannounced ...]

Mr M J ELLIS: Madam Chair, on a point of order: This must be the longest
three minutes in the recorded history of this Parliament. I suspect that
the hon Minister’s time has expired.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon Ellis, there were three
minutes that were added and I am looking at the clock and the Minister
still has twenty-eight seconds to finish. Even if there was no time
allocation, there were 10 minutes and five seconds left for this debate. As
the Chairperson, I have the discretion to add minutes as and when I like.
[Applause.]

Njengoba eshilo-ke amanye amalungu, siyabonga ukuthi sizosebenzisana kule
ndima engelula kodwa ngokubambisana sizokwazi ukwenza zonke izinto
esizifunayo. [As the other members have already said, I am grateful that we
are going to work together on this task, which is not so easy though, but
with co-operation we will be able to do all the things that we want to do.]

The MINISTER OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND TRAINING: Hon Ellis, I feel sorry for
you because you are feeling ... [Interjections.] I don’t even know what
words to use. Let me liberate you for now until next time. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Higher Education Laws Amendment Bill read a second time.

Skills Development Levies Amendment Bill read a second time.

Higher Education and Training Laws Amendment Bill read a second time
(Democratic Alliance dissenting).

                  SOUTH AFRICAN CITIZENSHIP AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, hon Ministers and members, it is
befitting that we introduce the South African Citizenship Amendment Bill
against the background of the country’s national heritage celebration of
all her people, black and white.

The Constitution of the Republic states that there is a common South
African citizenship; that all citizens are equally entitled to the rights,
privileges and benefits of citizenship; are equally subject to the duties
and responsibilities of citizenship; and that national legislation must
provide for the acquisition, loss and restoration of citizenship.

The main objective of the Citizenship Amendment Bill is to amend provisions
of the South African Citizenship Act. In this regard, the Bill will, among
other things, ensure that a child born to a South African parent inside or
outside the country is a South African by birth, as long as the child is
registered according to the South African law. A child born of non-South
African parents but adopted by South African parents is a citizen by
descent.

A child born of non-South African parents in South Africa and who lives in
South Africa until the age of 18 years, may apply for naturalisation.
Whilst that child is a minor, it should retain the citizenship of its
parents.

A child born in the Republic of South Africa that has no claim to any other
citizenship will be given South African citizenship in accordance with
international law and practice.

Another important amendment is the requirement that foreign nationals who
have acquired the status of permanent residents and who wish to obtain a
certificate of naturalisation must have been resident in the country for
five years instead of four years.

In terms of dual citizenship, a foreign national who wants to acquire South
African citizenship and whose country of origin does not permit dual
citizenship, would have to renounce their original citizenship before they
get South African citizenship. This is a principle of reciprocity because
it is not tenable for you to be a dual citizen of countries where one
country does not allow dual citizenship. That is the situation we have now
and we want to correct that.

The Bill also provides for the withdrawal of citizenship; with the
exception of citizenship by birth because if you’re a citizen by birth, it
is your birthright and nobody can take it away. So withdrawal of
citizenship refers to citizenship by naturalisation. In the case where a
citizen participates in a war under another country’s flag whilst the South
Africa law has stated that it is against that war, such person will lose
his or her their citizenship. [Applause.]

The Bill also makes provision for stiffer penalties against those who are
implicated in the fraudulent acquisition of South African citizenship and
identity theft. This is important because at the moment the courts take
identity theft very lightly. Nobody goes to jail for identity theft and yet
it causes so much grief and harm, both to individuals and the country.

I would like to thank the portfolio committee and its chair, hon Ben
Martins, for dealing with this amending Bill expeditiously and efficiently.
I hope that the House will give its full support to this Amending Bill as
part of reclaiming and protecting our common heritage. Thank you.
[Applause.]

Mrs D MATHEBE: Hon Speaker, hon members, in general, this amending Bill
must be commended for its progressiveness, humaneness, and simplification
of the law as well as for being relevant and in line with current
developments.

It is progressive because, among other things, it cures the notion of
secondary citizenship that was implicitly created by citizenship by descent
as provided for by the principal Act.

As black South Africans we know how cruel and undignified it is to be
regarded as a secondary citizen in one’s own country. The less I talk about
apartheid and its consequences for South Africans, and black South Africans
in particular, the better, so this progressiveness must indeed be
commended.

The Bill is also humane because it recognises that the reference to human
beings as aliens is unnecessary and derogatory. An alien is something that
is indescribable as it is something which does not belong to this world.
This can be likened to the Sesotho word “kgokgo”, and this “kgokgo” is
often referred to when we want to frighten children. It is really scary.

A typical example of the Bill’s simplification is contained in the new
section 5(1)(c). Before this amendment, section 5(1)(c) in the principal
Act read, as follows:

   The Minister may, upon application in the prescribed form, grant a
   certificate of naturalisation as a South African citizen to any alien
   who satisfies the Minister that he or she is ordinarily resident in the
   Republic and that he or she has been so resident for a continuous period
   of not less than one year immediately preceding the date of his or her
   application, and that he or she has, in addition, been resident in the
   Republic for a further period of not less than four years during the
   eight years immediately preceding the date of his or her application.

Speaker, I am sure you’ll agree with me that this subsection is long enough
to cause confusion. But that is not all. The different timeframes
stipulated therein add to this confusion. Firstly, there is a reference to
one year. Then there are references to four years and also eight years.

The interpretation of these timeframes has, in many instances, led to
miscalculations of the period and ultimately granting citizenship by
naturalisation too early.
Now, the amendment talks of only one timeframe - five years. It is as
simple as that. This will make the calculations as easy as it can be.

These plausible developments are in line with the ANC’s aim of making the
lives of our people better and it does not get better than in the form of
citizenship.

The moral vision contained in the 1923 ANC Bill of Rights says that the
right to be a full human being in South Africa includes the right to full
and equal citizenship without discrimination on the basis of race, class or
creed; and the right to full and equitable participation in the economic
growth and development of the country.

Citizenship also goes with the infinite feeling and advantage of belonging;
it attaches a high emotional value to being a citizen. It is not easy to
get a sense of belonging to a country unless one is a citizen thereof,
whether by birth or adoption.

Citizenship was equated by Virginia Leary, a distinguished American human
rights lawyer and activist, with connoting —

   ... a bundle of rights which involve, primarily, political participation
   in the life of the community, the right to vote, and the right to
   receive certain protection from the community, as well as obligations.
Citizenship status, therefore, carries with it both rights and
responsibilities. That is why the right to citizenship is entrenched in our
Bill of Rights in the Constitution. Section 20 of the Constitution provides
that “no citizen may be deprived of citizenship.” However, one must note
the use of the word “may”. This presupposes meeting some requirements in
the Republic, otherwise one can lose his or her citizenship.

Therefore matters of citizenship should not be treated lightly. That is why
the declaration of allegiance is required from a foreign national who
applies for and is granted South African citizenship. That is why there
must be clear and unambiguous laws that regulate all aspects of
citizenship.

All these are catered for by the language used in this Bill. In addition to
the deletion of the word alien, Latin terms like mutatis mutandis are also
removed in section 10. This is a progressive move since Latin phrases like
this are difficult to comprehend, especially if one is not a lawyer. This
reminds me of one court interpreter who had difficulty in interpreting this
term and ended up saying mutatis mutandis means ... ma uthanda noma
ungathandi. [Uhleko.][... whether you like it or not. [Laughter.]]

We already have enough difficulty with English; we don’t need to compound
the difficulty by using Latin phrases as well. So this move must really be
commended. However, I realised that, in section 17 of the principal Act,
the phrase prima facie still appears. As such, I will recommend that it be
dealt with the same way as mutatis mutandis.

Having said this, I however have a small concern that I would like to
raise. This is under the definitions of the word marriage. Marriage is
defined to include civil marriage, customary marriage as well as civil
union. I would have liked this definition to be extended to include the
phrase “married shall have a corresponding meaning”, just for good or near
accurate measure.

This is more so because the civil union, in terms of the Civil Union Act,
No 17 of 2006, is not necessarily a marriage. The Act allows such a union
to be solemnised either as a marriage or civil partnership. I would
therefore suggest that section 1(a)(3)(a) of the amendment include the
words “civil union” between the words “customary marriage” and “a marriage
concluded in terms of the laws of a foreign country”. This, again, is for
good or near accurate measure.

However, these concerns are not a train smash as the objectives of the Bill
could and will still be realised, regardless.

Ke rata gape go leboga mma wa rena, Mma Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, ka go šoma
le rena gabotse sehlopheng sa rena sa go ithuta. Re re a re tšweleng pele
ka lenaneo la dipoelo leo o re filego lona. [I would also like to thank our
mother, Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, for co-operating with us in our learning
team. We have to continue with the outcomes programme that you gave to us.]

The ANC therefore supports this amending Bill. [Applause.]

Mr M MNQASELA: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Minister and members, the
Bill has brought about some significant changes which we supported so
keenly in the committee. Its intentions are good; it is purpose driven.
However, there are serious concerns that make this Bill unattractive. The
DA has made profound contributions and some positive changes, which were
ignored by the committee and the department.

Submissions by the public, for example, the Lawyers for Human Rights, the
Law Society of South Africa and others, were ignored during the process of
public hearings. This would have advised them to try to mitigate some of
the challenges that make this Bill a very unconstitutional one. These
include, but are not limited to, the provision that any child born of a
parent or parents, who are not South Africans, cannot become a legitimate
citizen until he or she is 18 years old - I will explain this hon Minister.
This is in complete contradiction to the Constitution of the country.

We have proposed the qualifying threshold to either be 17 or 16 years of
age, otherwise this becomes discriminatory. A child born in South Africa,
whether it’s a foreigner or a local, automatically becomes part of society.
Those children who are born by foreigners become friends with locals. They
go to the same preschool, primary school and, eventually, to the same
secondary or high school.

Why must this child be treated differently from other children? This does
not assist our endeavour to integrate our communities. This Bill is in
contempt of section 10, 11 and 20 of the Constitution of the Republic of
South Africa, and that is Act 108 of 1996.

Ukukhumbuza wena ke, mhlekazi, ngemvume yakho Sihlalo, sinoMgaqo-siseko
ekufuneka ukhusele wonke umntu okweli lizwe. [To remind, you sir, through
you, Chair, we have a Constitution that is supposed to protect everyone who
is in this country.]

This clause is also in conflict with sections 20, 28 and 29 of the
Constitution of the Republic. It is also in conflict with the Births and
Deaths Registration Act and the Children’s Act. [Interjections.]

The most problematic of them all is the proposal that any South African
citizen shall cease to be a South African citizen if he or she engages in a
war under the flag of a country that the government of the Republic does
not support.

I want to clarify one thing here, Minister. You said that South Africans
will not be affected, but those who obtain their citizenship through
naturalisation would be affected. In fact, section 6(1) of this Bill speaks
to all people. It is only on the appeals that those who are South African
can appeal, but those who are naturalised lose their citizenship
completely. That must be corrected.

Does the South African government officially support any wars? Do we have a
list of wars that we support or not? At what stage is the support or
otherwise proclaimed? How will the general public know that such wars are
being supported or not by the Republic? Chefs, nurses, doctors, security
personnel, who work anywhere else in the world, are in danger if this
Parliament passes this Bill.

I do not know why this Act should belong to Home Affairs in any case. This
matter could be addressed by the Prohibition of Mercenary Activities and
Regulation of Certain Activities in Country of Armed Conflict Act, Act 27
of 2006.

If this Bill goes through as is, it will render citizens stateless because
some have renounced their citizenship of the countries where they come from
by choice, because they want to be South Africans. Why should we continue
to suppress and penalise them for choosing this country? [Interjections.]

We have sought some legal opinion and it has advised that this Bill is
unconstitutional. [Interjections.] This negates the good work that Home
Affairs does, and further entrenches the laws of the dark days of
apartheid. To mitigate such a notion, the Minister must take my advice and
withdraw clause 6 of the proposed Amending Bill. Clause 6 of the principal
Act should rather take precedence so that ...

... singalungisi lo mhlathi, uhlale ulola hlobo ululo ... ndiyakucenga,
Mphathiswa. [Kwaphela ixesha.] [Kwaqhwatywa.] [... we do not amend this
clause and leave it as it is. I appeal to you, Minister.] [Time expired.]
[Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Before I call the next speaker, hon
members, I understand the fatigue, but the way you drown out speakers is
not really fair, please. I do understand that we all want to get out of
here.

Mr G P D MACKENZIE: Chairperson, at the outset of the Second Reading
debate, Cope would like to express its serious concern about the
constitutionality of section 6 of the South African Citizenship Amendment
Bill.

It would appear that section 6 is in conflict with section 20 of the
Constitution which stipulates that, and I quote:

   No citizen may be deprived of citizenship.


This makes citizenship an inalienable right, therefore, Cope calls on the
President to meet his constitutional responsibility and use section 79,
Assent to Bills, of the Constitution of South Africa to send it back to the
National Assembly for correction or to the Constitutional Court for a
decision.

He should not assent to it and sign the Bill until he has such a decision.
Should the President fail to do this, then Cope will have no option but to
abstain from voting.

However, the remainder of the Bill addresses issues such as husband, wife
and spouse. Couples married by customary or foreign laws are now
recognised. Defining a major as one who is 18 years old and not 21 years
old will mean that younger people will have to take up adult responsibility
much earlier than before.

The Bill also addresses the issue of people giving birth in transit on a
ship or plane. The place of birth of such a child will be determined by
where in the world the carrier is registered. A woman giving birth, for
example, to a child on her way to Cuba in a Russian aeroplane would
register the child as having been born in Russia.

Foreigners who receive exemption from visa requirements and who are granted
the unconditional right to entry for an unspecified period in terms of 10
(a) of the Immigration Act and section 31(3) (a) or (c) of the same Act,
will be able to take up permanent residency in South Africa because they
would have been determined to have been lawfully admitted to the Republic.

As such, children born to a married couple where at least one parent had
been lawfully admitted to South Africa will be regarded as South African
citizens. The converse will also apply.

The Bill gives powers to the Minister to recognise both customary marriages
as well as marriages concluded in terms of the laws of a foreign country,
provided that the Minister is satisfied with the information documented by
both partners. Where the Minister is not satisfied she can call for further
information.

The issue of naturalisation is also dealt with in detail. Under exceptional
circumstances the Minister may grant a certificate of naturalisation to an
applicant who does not comply with subsection 1 (c) relating to residence
in South Africa. We will have to keep a watchful eye on this.

A bit of tightening up of the principal Act occurs in section 7 of the
Bill. Persons deprived of citizenship under this section or section 9, will
have to surrender their certificates or face possible imprisonment for up
to five years and possibly a fine.

However, corrupt officials will always find ways of using these provisions
in ways not intended by Parliament. The Minister should be alert to these
challenges and should set monitoring systems in place to guard against
fraud. I thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, hon Minister, I must admit that my caucus
has been disadvantaged in the sense that our member who serves on the
committee is out of the country; he is in Kenya.

This morning, while compiling the speech for this debate, we were under the
impression that the withdrawal of citizenship applies to all categories of
citizens. In that sense, we were going to object.

After your explanation, hon Minister, that this withdrawal of citizenship
only applies to those who got their citizenship through naturalisation, I
think that’s a fair argument. [Applause.]

Standing where I am, I want to differentiate between what we say in ...
abomsinsi wokuzimilela nalaba bokufika.[... regard to the citizens and the
foreigners.]

In terms of the old adage you should not really bite the hand that feeds
you or that has fed you. For this reason, I had to quickly consult my
seniors to ask what stand we are going to take as I will be standing at the
podium. We are not going to oppose this Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms P PETERSEN-MADUNA: Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers and hon
members, sometimes I get so disappointed to hear a DA member pretending he
is not one of the committee members and also that he is not a citizen of
this country. The DA members at times behave as if they are refugees.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, please!

Ms P PETERSEN-MADUNA: All we are asking is that you bring solutions instead
of arguments and that you do not speak as if you are not on the committee.

The Strategy and Tactics of the ANC states that South Africa has entered
its second decade of freedom with the strengthening of democracy and
acceleration of the programme to improve the quality of life of all the
people. Steadily, the dark night of white minority political domination is
receding into a distant memory. Yet we are only at the beginning of a long
journey to a truly united, democratic and prosperous South Africa in which
the value of all citizens is measured by their humanity, without regard to
race, gender and social status.

The Freedom Charter’s assertion that South Africa belongs to all who live
in it, black and white, came out of a conscious realisation that the
apartheid oligarchy was gradually depriving the majority of the people of
their citizenship rights. The effect of the now abolished Group Areas Act,
and similar draconian laws, was to push Africans to 13% of the land
according to their ethnic groups.

In essence, this meant that African people had the status of foreigners in
87% of the land; and to ensure monitoring of their movements, Africans had
to carry the “dompas” everywhere they went. Failure to carry the “dompas”
and special work permit resulted in imprisonment, flogging, or labour
indenture.

As the ANC, we do not take the right to South African citizenship lightly.
In it, we behold the gushing blood of the victims of the Sharpeville
massacre. In the right to South African citizenship, we behold Comrade
Charlotte Maxeke, who led a women’s march against the carrying of
oppressive pseudo-identity documents in our motherland.

Hon members, the new democratic dispensation does not seek to limit access
to citizenship for legitimate and patriotic South African people, but to
regulate how citizenship is acquired, kept and lost. Citizenship comes with
rights, responsibilities and obligations. In this regard, it is expected of
every citizen that he or she complies with the laws of our country.

However, some people can obstinately engage at an international level in
activities that compromise the Republic, like wars which the Republic does
not support. The Republic has been compromised in recent times by citizens
who engage in wars not supported by the Republic and, in extreme cases, by
mercenary activities. [Interjections.]

Just shut up and listen!

Chairperson, our Constitution provides that no right is absolute ...
[Interjections.]

Ms A M DREYER: On a point of order, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): What’s the point of order?

Ms A M DREYER: Is it parliamentary for the member to say that we must shut
up? [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon members, please let’s be civil
about some of the things. I don’t have to say it’s unparliamentary, but
let’s be civil about how we address each other. Continue, hon member.

Ms P PETERSEN-MADUNA: Thank you, Chairperson. Our Constitution provides
that no right is absolute and thus every right is subject to limitations in
an open society based on human rights, equality and freedom - if it is
reasonable and justifiable to do so.

In this regard, it can be argued that those who are on the international
stage engaging in wars that are not in the interest of the Republic and
thus not supported by it, do not deserve to keep their citizenship, whether
it is citizenship by birth, descent or naturalisation.

This is even more so with citizenship by naturalisation, as the person
would have first been a foreigner, but through complying with the requisite
prescriptions, was accorded citizenship by naturalisation. Such a person
would, on a balance of probabilities, be a security risk and the state
cannot be bound to rewarding him or her with the status of citizenship by
naturalisation.

The principal Act requires, among other things, that the applicant for
naturalisation should have been a resident of the Republic; be of good
character; have adequate knowledge of the responsibilities and privileges
of South African citizenship; be a husband or widower of a South African
citizen, or a wife or widow of a South African citizen; and make a
declaration of allegiance.

Hon members, the Bill further adds that the applicant should be a citizen
of the country that allows dual citizenship and where dual citizenship is
not allowed, the applicant should renounce the citizenship of that country.

Immediately before the 1994 and the demise of apartheid, there was an
exodus of a number of South African citizens to other parts of the world.
Some of them have returned to South Africa whilst keeping their passports
and extending their citizenship of the countries they had emigrated from.

This situation tends to be dubious in terms of the allegiance of such
people to the South African flag. It is important that those who desire
citizenship in different parts of the globe be tested for allegiance. To
subject dual citizens to the acid test of the requirement to renounce
citizenship, where dual citizenship is not permissible, is bound to reveal
the true allegiance of the dual citizen.

The Bill creates a new category of citizenship by naturalisation by
providing that a child born in the Republic of parents who are not South
African citizens, or who have not been admitted into the Republic for
permanent residence, qualifies to apply for South African citizenship upon
becoming a major if he or she has lived in the Republic from the date of
his or her birth to the date of becoming a major.

In keeping with the imperative to treat the interests of a child as being
of paramount importance, children falling within this category shall, even
if their parents have not been admitted into South African citizenship,
have an opportunity to become naturalised South African citizens, provided
that their births have been registered in accordance with the Births and
Deaths Registration Amendment Act, No 1 of 2002.

A child whose parents’ nationality is known and is born in South Africa, is
different from a foundling whose parents are not known and who could not
have adduced evidence to prove that he or she was born in the Republic. It
would be erroneous to naturalise foundlings with the presumption that they
were born in South Africa. This would open government up to acts of human
trafficking with the view to naturalising children in order to gain access
to the South African social security system through them.

It could also happen that some non-nationals, who are already in South
Africa illegally, would manipulate the system to ensure a better future for
their children, whom they brought with from their countries, by helping
them to apply for citizenship through naturalisation as if they were
foundlings.

Given the socioeconomic instability obtaining in most of our neighbouring
countries, how they have pushed the immigration envelope, and how the
Children’s Act defines “child”, it is not unthinkable to imagine that many
would come to South Africa at a relatively mature age and apply for
citizenship by naturalisation. This would mean that in the next five years
our population would have grown drastically not because of organic
processes, but because children from other countries would have reached the
age of majority and as citizens would be eligible to compete for scarce
resources with citizens who in fact were born in South Africa.

A burden would be put on our fiscus, and we would be unable to meet the
obligations we have to our people because the more services are rendered,
the more the demand would increase. The more houses we build, the more we
would have to build; and even if we demolish informal settlements
constantly, they would invariably mushroom.

Hon members, the ANC’s manifesto identifies income, inequality, and extreme
poverty as challenges that face our nation in the current conjuncture. In
this regard, many of our people continue to live in abject poverty and the
income gap between the highest and the lowest paid continues to widen
unabated ... [Interjections.]

Ms A M DREYER: On a point of order, Chairperson.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, just wait a bit.

Ms A M DREYER: Chairperson, on a point of order: Can I draw your attention
to paragraph 62 in the Rules of Parliament that states that a member shall
as far as possible refrain from reading his or her speech ...
[Interjections.]

But he or she may refresh his or her memory by referring to notes. The
member has been reading her speech throughout.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, that is not a point of
order really. I am aware of that Rule, but there has been a convention in
this House that members will read speeches and we haven’t ruled that out.
It’s a convention, and I am aware of it.  Continue, hon member.

Ms P PETERSEN-MADUNA: The ANC has always prosecuted the struggle for
national and economic emancipation and it is even at this time, more so
than ever before, that our people still look to the ANC for leadership,
guidance and support. That is exactly that we are doing.

Therefore, it is a fundamental imperative that South African citizenship be
guarded with extreme caution and eyes like a hawk, so as to enable our
government, in general, and the Planning Commission, in particular, to
successfully plan our collective development to catapult us into the future
our people yearn for. It should, however, not be inferred that we do not
recognise the contribution that legitimate immigrants have made and
continue to make in the interests of our beloved country and our people,
united in our diversity.

We continue in our role as a disciplined force of the left to promote
progressive internationalism and to ensure that peace and friendship
abound. I am convinced that together, we can definitely do more. I thank
you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson, I’d like to thank the ANC for
supporting the Bill. I also just want to emphasise that, indeed, it is
important to pay attention to language, including references to gender, and
also not to call people “aliens” as the law presently does. There are all
the other things they’ve said, but I won’t go into that.

I just want to clarify a few things, particularly for the DA, and maybe for
Cope too. First of all, I don’t understand when hon Mnqasela says that they
don’t support the part that says that a child who is born in South Africa
and lives in South Africa until he reaches his majority has an option of
becoming a South African citizen. Because at the moment there’s nowhere we
say unless it is 14 years or 16 years of age that we won’t support it.

Why is it 18 years old? Eighteen years is the legal age of majority in this
country. There must be logic in what we say. That’s the reason why we chose
18 years, but that is not there in our law at the moment, so we are
enabling those children to have that choice.

The second thing is that the Department of Home Affairs is the custodian of
citizenship laws in the country. That is why it is under Home Affairs - I
don’t know what he wants it to be under. Let me just explain: If you get
naturalisation and you then go to war and fight under a different flag,
when this country has said, for whatever reasons, that it is against that
war, it would mean you have made a choice. So why should we not take away
your citizenship? I don’t understand that argument.

We wrote the Constitution and I don’t understand why it is
unconstitutional, but if it has to be tested, really, we are not talking
about your birthright, we are talking about somebody who is naturalised,
who makes a choice and goes and carries a gun under the  flag of another
country. That’s what we are talking about and that must be made very clear
because we mustn’t cause confusion.

I just want to clarify this for the DA because I don’t want any
misunderstandings. Today you’ve been a bit destructive. I thought you were
the DA, Democratic Alliance not “destructive agency”. Thank you.
[Applause.] [Laughter.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I propose that
the question stands over.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): I didn’t hear, hon member.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, I move that the question
stands over.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Deputy Chief Whip, can you
explain, please?

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Chairperson, in terms of the Rules,
201 members are needed in order to pass a Bill.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): The reason is the quorum? Hon
members, please bear with us. In terms of Rule 76, Decision of Questions
Postponed, the Chair can use his own discretion to allow the question to be
postponed. I so do. [Applause.]. Thank you, hon Ellis, for understanding.

Debate concluded.

Decision of Question postponed.

                BIRTHS AND DEATHS REGISTRATION AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Chairperson and hon members, I am indeed
privileged to introduce the Births and Deaths Registration Amendment Bill
for the consideration of this House. Let me again thank the portfolio
committee and its chair for their hard work and co-operation.
It is only correct that we recognise that births and deaths are cardinal
stages in the life cycle of any human being. Birth is indeed an embodiment
of all that is new, developing and representing the future. Therefore, it
is important that we take care of our children as the late Oliver Reginald
Tambo once said that a nation that does not care for its children has no
future.

It became necessary for us as a department to make these amendments as they
identified some gaps and weaknesses in the legislation. I just want to
quickly spell them out. The Bill seeks to streamline the procedures
relating to the following.

Who should register the birth of a child other than the parents? This
includes the next of kin or a legal guardian, but not a paid agent. At the
moment, we have lots of paid agents going around registering children and
causing some problems. The amendment also streamlines the issue of by whom
and how orphans and abandoned children should be registered, because there
are lots of problems around that. We want to simplify that process.

When a child or an adult’s surname is changed, which procedures should be
followed? This is especially important in our culture, where some children
are born in an environment wherein their mothers are not married, and they
end up using their mothers’ surnames, and later on they want to change it.
We want to make sure that it is not as difficult as it is now.

We have noticed a trend and would like to correct it, where parents
register a child and later come back to inform us that the father was not
the real one and they want to register the second one as the real father.
As the department, we are saying that we will take your word when you come
to us for the first time; but the second time round, you have to proof
paternity if you are going to change the surname. We think that is fair
enough because we can’t tell who the real father is.

The birth registration has to be done within 30 days. When you come after
30 days, it would then be considered as a late registration of birth. We
would like to just streamline the processes that govern that. There are
sensitivities around the registration of adopted children. We would like to
make sure that the children and the parents who are adopting them are
protected.

We also want to amend and outline procedures for persons who want to change
their sex status at a later stage; when they were born as one sex,
registered as that, and later want to change to the opposite sex. We want
to make sure that there are procedures for doing that.

We also want to register all undertakers, because they register deaths.
Sometimes there are problems and you find that the undertaker was not
registered and they cannot be found anywhere. We want to make sure that
they are registered and that they are able to register deaths. That does
not take away the rights of the parents or relatives also to register a
death.

Lastly, we are changing the penalties in the Bill. Otherwise, I hope the
members will support the Bill. I thank you. [Applause.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon Minister, you are correct, that
was your Bill.

Mr M MNQASELA: House Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, and
members, the Bill deals precisely with issues which have been identified as
creating blockages in recognition of the rights of the greater posterity of
our citizenry. However, I suggested some significant changes in the
portfolio committee without success. The department ignored the process of
public submissions on the Bill, which could have been of assistance.

House Chair, if I could look at the whole process here, this kind of
situation paints a quintessentially middle-class picture, and it is simply
not how the majority of South Africans live.

Children often live with relatives, their fathers are often absent, and
their mothers are often sick. The scourge of HIV and Aids has led to a
plethora of unconventional family settings in South Africa. These families
are equally worthy of respect and a chance to provide the best life for the
children in their care.

The process of legislating to suit the middle class, by setting
requirements that only the middle class is likely to meet, will amount to
failure on the part of the government. Our legislation must serve and
protect our people, not the other way around. Our people should not be
oppressed by our legislation.

Hon members, in practice, as your own constituents will undoubtedly tell
you, there are countless adults who have never had identity documents, and
who have many children who were never registered at birth. Therefore, to
use a parent’s appearance on the Population Register and/or ID as a
requirement for registering a child, blatantly ignores the reality in our
country, especially in villages in our native land.

Clause 4(a) and (b) and clause 6 are wholly unsuitable for the majority of
people in the South African society. These clauses arrogantly presume that
all South African children are born into conventional family units, where
no one is sick; the child’s primary caregivers are his or her biological
mother and father; the mother and father are married; and that the mother,
father and child are living together.

Inyaniso yile yokuba akunjalo ke, ngoba nangoku kule Ndlu, baninzi abazali
abahlala bodwa engekho amaqabane abo. [The truth is that it is not like
that, because even in this House, there are many parents who stay alone,
without their spouses.]

Speaker, this picture is far removed from the reality on the ground. The
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child of 1989 is an
agreement by the governments of the world stating what rights children
should have. It covers rights on just about everything and applies to
everyone under the age of 18 years.

Bearing in mind that 1989 marked the 30th anniversary of the Declaration of
the Rights of the Child and the 10th anniversary of the International Year
of a Child, article 2 says:


  States Parties shall respect and ensure the rights set forth in the
  present convention to each child within their jurisdiction without
  discrimination of any kind, irrespective of the child or his or her
  parents or legal guardian’s race, colour, sex, language, religion,
  political or . . .  other opinion, national, ethnic or social origin,
  property, disability, birth or other status.


Article 6 says:


  States Parties recognize that every child has the inherent right to life.



Therefore, that is an inalienable right. I recently helped the 36-year-old
...

... uMama uNokwanda waseQonce, ongazange abenasazisi nesatifiketi sokuzalwa
oko wazalwa. Mna ndizodibana naye apha e-Crossroads, kula ngingqi yam
yovoto, mna ke, njengamntu usebenzayo. Ndithe xa ndifika ndancedwa
ngamagosa phaya njengokuba sasincedisana, Sihlalo. Siye sahamba-hamba ke
sizama ukulungisa loo nto, ngelingeni saphumelela ke kuba kukho mna.
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)

[... Mrs Nokwanda from King William’s Town, who never had an identity
document and a birth certificate ever since she was born.  I, as a person
who does her job, met her in Crossroads, in my constituency. Chairperson,
when I arrived there, I worked with the officials as we normally do. We
went around trying to solve this and at last we succeeded because of my
presence.]

She has never seen the door of a classroom. Her three children are
subjected to the same treatment. This Bill paints a melancholy picture of
this Parliament albeit the prudent principle that it has set out to serve -
you are saying that you are an activist Parliament.

Sections 28 and 29 of the Constitution recognise the rights of children to
life, shelter, name, nationality and the right to education. To allow only
the social workers to administer the birth information of a displaced or
orphaned child, places a burden on the already squeezed resources, because
the country is reeling under a shortage of more than 40 000 social workers,
as we speak. You must accredit those organisations that are currently
working with children.

Ndithetha ngoomama abahlala begade abantwana phaya kwezaa ndawo sihlala
kuzo, ezilokishini nasezilalini kwenzeka loo nto yabantu abakhulisa
abantwana abangengobabo. Thina sinokuncedisa bona ke, ngoba kaloku bahleli
begade aba bantwana. Thina singabalawula, sibanike iziqinisekiso kulo
msebenzi bawenzayo. Enkosi. [Ixesha liphelile.] (Translation of isiXhosa
paragraph follows.)

[I am talking about women who are guardians in our communities, in
townships and villages, and this is what is happening where you find people
who are taking care of children who are not even theirs.  We can assist
them, because they are looking after these children.  We can monitor, and
give them guardianship certificates for what they are doing.  Thank you.
[Time expired.]]

Mr G P D MACKENZIE: Chairperson, this Bill is long overdue. Children in
particular are experiencing serious problems without the provisions we are
now making. Firstly, we are very pleased that the term “biometrics” now
enters into the definition section. This opens up a variety of
technological ways of identifying an individual.

Clause 2 amends section 7 of the principal Act. The director-general is now
authorised to supplement as well as rectify particulars incorrectly
reflected in documents. This has to happen in consultation with the
affected individuals.

In the case of any child born alive, parents or prescribed persons must
register the child within 30 days. Officials should ask traditional
authorities, midwives, clinics and those staffing maternity wards to help
meet this requirement.

A very positive aspect of this Bill appears in clause 1, which amends
section 11 of the principal Act. This Bill allows parents who conceived a
child out of wedlock to amend the registration if they marry at any future
point while the child is still a minor. This will have such a beneficial
impact on the child. While it is a small measure, it has the potential to
build families.

The Bill is also very progressive in another regard. The director-general
can register abandoned or orphaned children. If and when the parents of an
abandoned child are found, the Director-General can amend the registration.

Individuals who lack a forename or a surname can now apply to correct that.
Often parents give children forenames that bring misery on them. Now such
an individual, either through his parents, or if he is of age, can remedy
this and ask for an alteration of his or her forename.

The alteration of a surname is a little more complicated. The individual
has to have a particularly good motivation to do so.

I have a word of caution, however, for the department. It may come under
enormous pressure to rectify a mountain of changing particulars. I
sincerely trust that the department will have the personnel and the
technical capacity to process alterations swiftly and efficiently. A
careful process of auditing must exist to protect the integrity of the
system.

In life we have births and deaths, and funeral undertakers see death as
business. Some, therefore, tend not to comply with legal requirements. Now
any funeral undertaker who wants to register deaths can apply for
registration and a designation number. Such an undertaker will have to
comply with a number of legal requirements. The department has to monitor
this rigorously right from the start.

Remoteness of location denies rural communities access to a variety of
government services. For this very reason, many children are not born in
hospitals because people live too far from them. This makes the
registration process even more difficult. These are important concerns that
we need to deal with urgently. Cope supports this Bill. [Applause.]

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Chairperson, once again I am the carbon copy of my
colleague who is absent. During our caucus this morning, we ran through the
clauses of this Bill and I have very strict instructions from my caucus to
read the last two lines of what my colleague had prepared, and it reads:

   This amending Bill constitutes a comprehensive revision of the Act and
   is fully supported by the IFP.


Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M M MAUNYE: Ke a leboha, Modula Setulo. [Thank you, Chairperson.] Hon
Ministers, Deputy Ministers, comrades, and hon members, the late former
president of the ANC, Comrade Oliver Reginald Tambo, once said, and I
quote:

   A country, a movement, a person that does not value its youth, does not
   deserve its future.

In so saying he was reflecting on the caring spirit that has characterised
the ANC throughout the years, and has been carried through to date as it
creates a caring, national democratic society.

The Strategy and Tactics documents of the ANC further say, and I quote:

   Among the most vulnerable in society are children, and a national
   democratic society should ensure their protection and continuous
   advancement.

Birth registration is the official recording of a child’s birth by the
state. It is a permanent and official record of a child’s existence, and is
the first point of contact between a child and the state. It is the first
and fundamental right in and of itself, and it is a door to other rights
providing a measure of protection against age-related exploitation and
abuse.

The securing of children’s right to nationality will allow them to get a
passport, open a bank account, obtain credit, vote and secure employment.
It helps to ensure access to basic services including immunisation,
healthcare and school enrolment at the right stage.

In a recent survey conducted by government, the following obstacles to
birth registration were identified, among other things: ignorance of the
importance of birth registration, resulting in a failure to claim the right
to an identity; lack of information and mobilisation of children and youth
to claim their right to citizenship; and late registration that sometimes
leads to illegal immigrants obtaining identification documents
fraudulently.

Some parents do not have ID documents to register their children, partly
due to access issues, lack of knowledge, their illegal status in the
country, or tribal customs relating to the naming of children.

In her NCOP budget speech on 15 April 2010, the hon Minister of Home
Affairs, Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, stated, and I quote:

   The National Population Register Campaign’s key objective is to protect
   and secure the National Population Register and the entry point to the
   register will be at birth. Hence, in this regard, we commit to the
   following: The registration of every childbirth within 30 days of
   delivery; the issuing of identity documents to every South African
   child, 16 years and above; and the eradication of the late registration
   of births by December 2010.

The current legislative mandate for notification and registration of births
is contained in the Births and Deaths Registration Act of 1992, whose
administration is vested in the Director-General of Home Affairs, who, in
terms of the Act, is also the custodian of all birth records in South
Africa.

In terms of the Act, a birth must be reported to the department by the
parents or guardian within 30 days of the child’s date of birth. However,
what is problematic about the Act is that it allows parents and guardians,
in the event of being unable to register the birth themselves, to request a
third person to do so on their behalf.

This provision opens the gap for agents to actively participate in birth
registration, thus resulting in an inability to conduct verification
processes. In some cases it also leads to false registration. The amending
Bill seeks to secure the foregoing mischief by providing that the person
giving notice of birth of a child must be one of the parents of the child,
or any of the parents prescribed.

The Act provides for different levels of late registration, and these are:
after 30 days, but before one year; after one year, but less than 15 years;
and birth notified after 15 years. Despite the fact that the longer the
delay of registration, the higher the requirements of documentary proof of
parentage, place of birth, and age, this provision has opened the
legislation to abuse. Noncitizens have used it to acquire citizenship
fraudulently and citizens have used it to entitle themselves to benefits to
which they are not entitled. This situation has compromised the integrity
of our National Population Register, NPR.

The Bill lays the basis for the restoration of the NPR’s integrity and
limits late registration of birth into one category, namely 31 days and
above. It also provides for stringent requirements in the regulations.

One of the internal challenges that South Africa has suffered post-
democracy is the rapid spread of HIV/Aids to pandemic levels. The scourge
has hit our beloved country hard in rural and peri-urban areas. As a
result, it has, in some cases, wiped out parents and guardians and left
children with no parents.

A new type of household, termed “a child-headed household”, has emerged
because of the intensity and extent of this phenomenon. The children living
under such conditions have to depend upon each other for survival, with the
elder one playing the role of parent or guardian to his or her younger
siblings.

However, such children are often excluded from government social security
services, like the child support grant, as their birth remains unregistered
for want of parents or guardians.

In some cases, these children are exploited by rogue elements who register
them as being in their foster care for the purpose of gaining access to
foster care grants that they then use for their narrow, selfish ends. Such
persons, like scavengers, prey on the vulnerable who cannot be protected
but for timely state intervention.

The principal Act only provides for the notice of birth of an abandoned
child to be made by a social worker or authorised officer, where any parent
of the child cannot be traced. However, it does not provide for the
registration of orphaned children and thus discriminates against parentless
children.

It can thus be inferred that orphan children suffer twice. Firstly, from
untimely alienation from parental protection and support, and, secondly,
from being denied their constitutional right to state support through being
barred from registering their birth, and consequently from receiving birth
certificates and ID documents. Such socioeconomic exclusion is, to all
intents and purposes, without any legitimate basis, bar being without
parents.

A caring society cannot continue on a trajectory that punishes children for
being born and left without parents. It is in that line that we commend
this amending Bill before this House as it provides for the registration of
orphaned children, thus ensuring that child-headed families get assistance
to register their births.

Passing the legislation will thus change the situation of the orphaned
children, some of whom, as we sit here in Parliament today deciding their
fate, are huddled in shacks and low-cost houses, wondering where their next
meal will come from.

In fact, some of them stay for days without home-cooked meals. Many of
these orphans depend on meals they receive once a day from school feeding
schemes during school days. They arrive at schools with empty stomachs and
have difficulty in concentrating on their school work.

The Bill further protects such children from being preyed upon by wolves in
sheep’s clothing, by providing that a social worker should assist child-
headed families with registration. The Bill undertakes to close this
lacuna. Furthermore, it provides for conclusive proof of paternity in cases
where an amendment of a birth registration of a child born of unmarried
parents, who then marry each other after registration of his or her birth,
is applied for in a prescribed manner.

Equally as important as birth registration, is death registration, which
marks the termination of the legal personality of a natural person. The
death certificate provides prima facie proof that a death has occurred and
thus enables the estate of the deceased person to be divided according to
the laws of succession.

The death certificate as prima facie evidence of death also activates
insurance companies to release funeral policy funds. In the case of a
marriage, it frees the spouse to enter into another marriage without being
open to being accused of bigamy. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order, order!

Mrs M M MAUNYE: It is therefore vital that the process of death
registration be regulated and its integrity assured. Such a process, if not
properly regulated and its integrity assured, could be open to abuse and
could, in extreme cases, lead to serious social conflicts.

The Act did not have a provision for the designation of funeral undertakers
for purposes of engaging in the activities relating to the registration of
deaths. However, the Bill does make this provision and thus ensures that
not all funeral undertakers are involved in the registration of deaths, but
only those who comply with the prescribed requirements.

The Convention of the Rights of the Child, article 7, states, and I quote:

   The child shall be registered immediately after birth and shall have the
   right, from birth, to a name, the right to acquire a nationality and, as
   far as possible, the right to know and be cared for by his or her
   parents.

A birth record is a statement of facts concerning an individual. It is a
permanent legal record. Throughout life a person uses his or her
certificate to prove age, parentage and citizenship. Not to register a
child is to deny that child its citizenship rights enshrined in the
Constitution.

To compromise the integrity of the National Population Register, is to risk
national security. To build a caring society, we need to have a reliable
database to enable us to plan development and effect the necessary social
interventions.

Children are our tomorrow; let us treat them like the precious treasures
they are.

Bagaetsho, dilo tse dingwe di tshwana le kgomo ya mošate, o a e gapa, o
molato, o a e tlogela, o molato. Ke bona e kete Molao o o tlile go thusa
bana ba rona, segolo bogolo jang ba ba tlhokang ba ba tshwanetseng ba
kwadisiwe jaaka re utlwile fa DA e re bana ba tshwanetse go kwadisiwa ke
mongwe le mongwe, fela re a itse gore go le gontsi bonweenwee bo kana kang
mo nageng e ya rona e. Fa re tlogela gore bana ba kwadisiwe ke mongwe le
mongwe re tla nna le bana ba le ba kae mo Aforika Borwa ba re tla bong re
sa itse gore ba tswa kae, ba kwadisitswe ke bomang le gore ke bana ba bo
mang.

Molao o, o fedisa dilo tse di ntseng jalo, gore go nne le batho ba ba tla
kwadisang bana ka tsela e e latelwang mo Molaong, e seng re tsee mongwe le
mongwe fela gore e nne ena yo o kwadisang ngwana fa a tsholwa mo
lefatsheng.

Re a itse gore bana ba rona ba sotlega go le kana kang. Tshotlego ya bana e
itsiwe ke rona rotlhe. Motlotlegi Mnqasela, o ka seka wa re ruta tshotlego
ya bana mo malatsing a gompieno. Re a itse gore bana ba sotlega go le kana
kang. Ke ka moo re tsayang matsapa a makanakana a go siamisa Melao e, gore
e thuse bana mmogo le batsadi mo nageng e ya rona. Ke a leboga. [Legofi.]
(Translation of Setswana paragraphs follows.)

[Some things are difficult to deal with. It seems that this Act will be of
help to our children, especially those who need to be registered – as the
DA has already mentioned that these children must be registered by anyone
despite the corruption that is experienced in our country. If we allow
anyone to register those children, how many children will we have without
knowing who their parents are.

This Act brings such things to an end; there should be appointed people who
register these children in relation to the Act, not just anyone.

We all know the sufferings experienced by our children. Hon Mnqasela, you
do not have to teach us about the sufferings endured by our children – we
all know. This is the reason why we are taking effort to rectify these Acts
so that they can help both the children and the parents in our country. I
thank you. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS:  Hon Chair, I would like to thank the ANC for
the support and everything they have said. I would also like to thank the
hon MacKenzie for interpreting the Bill correctly, and assure him that we
are taking his cautions seriously. I would also like to thank hon
Mpontshane and the IFP for their support.
Hhayi-ke umhlonishwa uMnqasela ngimuncamile. [Uhleko.] [Well, I give up on
hon Mnqasela. [Laughter.]]

He pretends not to understand the Bill, but he understands it. I now
realise that he always says the opposite of what is the fact.
[Interjections.] He says that this Bill will help the middle class.

This Bill is not for the middle class. That is why we are saying we want to
streamline the registration of children who are orphans. [Interjections].
No, social workers will be involved where children are in a home.
Otherwise, we will regulate how orphaned children, who are not in homes,
are dealt with.

But the reality of hon Mnqasela’s input is to protect the paid agents
because it’s that middle class that pays agents to register their children.
[Interjections.] That is what we are doing away with, which is what he
wants to maintain. That’s all, that’s all. [Interjections.]

When we say anyone can register, we know that people are paid. They go with
forms this big. Our people who have used public transport and come from far
are delayed because they come with these piles of forms, having been paid
by middle class parents to go and register their children. That we don’t
want and we are going to do away with it. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): That concludes the debate. Are
there any objections to the Births and Deaths Registration Amendment Bill
being read a second time? No objections.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, on a point of order: I am not at all sure, sir,
how we can agree to it. There may be no objections to it but there isn’t a
quorum in the House to vote this afternoon, as we have already heard from
the hon Deputy Chief Whip of the Majority Party, who appealed to you
earlier not to take the matter further.

I believe that the same precedent has to happen this afternoon and you will
have to use the same Rule and use your discretion in making sure that this
stands over to another parliamentary day.
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, you are correct, if we
don’t have a quorum, then the question stands over.

Decision of Question postponed.

                     MAGISTRATES’ COURTS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Mr J B SIBANYONI: Sihlalo, ngithokoze kuwo woke amalunga aHloniphekileko
wePalamende. Sihlalo, ngiyabona sele iphaphela phasi nelanga
seleliyokutjhinga. Ngizakuba mfitjhani khulu. [Chairperson, I would like to
thank all hon Members of Parliament. Chairperson, I can see that we are
running out of time. I will be very brief.]

I’m dealing here with the Magistrates’ Court Amendment Bill No 23 of 2010.
I’m doing this on behalf of the chairperson of the Justice portfolio
committee, Advocate Ngaoko Ramathlodi.

The purpose or the aim of this Bill is to amend the Magistrates’ Courts
Act, No 32 of 1944. I must point out that these clauses were part of the
Judicial Matters Amendment Bill, but they were taken away or extracted from
that Bill in order to process it as speedily as possible.

The reason for doing this is that there are only three amendments that are
relevant. These three amendments are intended to facilitate the
Jurisdiction of Regional Courts Amendment Act, No 31 of 2008.

I must also point out that the new Act has as its intention to give civil
jurisdiction to Regional Courts in the sense that the jurisdiction of the
Regional Courts is now up to R300 000. It gives these courts jurisdiction
to handle family-related matters such as divorce, guardianship and custody
over minor children. Previously, the divorce courts were regulated by the
Administration Amendment Act of 1929, which dealt with matters of black
persons.

Briefly, the aim of clause 1 and 2 relates to abolishing the requirements
of a person in possession of an LLB degree to be appointed as a Regional
Court magistrate. There are reasons for that. Firstly, the current LLB
degree is unlike the previous one, which was a postgraduate qualification.

It is now a junior degree for which people can register with a matric.
Also, the Regional Court magistrates can be regarded as junior judges.
[Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon members, please, order! Let’s
converse very softly. Please!

Mr J B SIBANYONI: This Bill will give them the opportunity that when they
are appointed it is done in the same way as when judges are appointed in
terms of section 174 (1) of the Constitution. Currently the legislation
says a person should have either an LLB degree, pass the Public Service
Senior Law Examination or an examination deemed by the Minister to be
equivalent to that.

Further, the second clause only deals with the list the Magistrates’
Commission should keep from which they can appoint people to be magistrates
in the Regional Courts. There would be a name for such a list.

Lastly, clause 4 intends to amend the Bill so that the Minister can use his
discretion to appoint or authorise people who can serve court processes,
summons, subpoenas and the like because there are companies which are
given, by the Magistrates’ Court, an authority to serve court processes.
Now the Minister will be in a position to put conditions for such people to
be appointed, make a declaration, and publish it in the Government Gazette.


May I take this opportunity to thank the committee, both the ruling party
as well as the opposition because there was agreement when this Bill was
finalised. The report was adopted by the committee.

I would also like to thank the Department of Justice and Constitutional
Development represented here by hon De Lange. I also want to thank another
Mr De Lange, one of the officials who has been working on this Bill. I must
say he must pass my regards to Mr J B Skosana, who was also working
seriously with the jurisdiction of Regional Courts, which is now in full
swing. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the previous
chairperson when this Bill was started, hon Yunus Carrim.

The ANC supports the Bill and asks the House to adopt it. [Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Thank you, hon member, there is no
list of speakers. Are there any objections to the Bill being read a second
time? No objections, and I will have to go back to the question of the
quorum. [Interjections.]

An HON MEMBER: Chairperson, yes. That is the issue that we wanted to raise.
We ask for the decision to stand over.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): The question will then stand over.

Decision of Question postponed.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I’m sorry, sir, on a point of order. I think one
can tolerate a fair amount of jocularity, face-pulling and so on across the
floor. I do want to say that there is an hon member of the ANC sitting at
the back who was pulling absolutely rude faces and making very rude
gestures. Sir, I believe that she does need to have the discipline
instilled in this House to make sure that she doesn’t behave like this in
the future.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, please continue. Hon
Ellis, that is not a point of order.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, if it’s not a point of order, are you saying
that we can gesticulate at each other the whole time and make rude signs?
What would happen to this Parliament; does it become a joke?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Could hon Ellis demonstrate to me
what was ... [Laughter.]

Mr M J ELLIS: Sir, I will do so with pleasure and you can decide whether
you believe this. [Laughter.] Is it right? I think it’s shocking behaviour
in this House. [Laughter.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon members, I can only ask that we
refrain from this kind of gesture, please. Even if I say withdraw the
gesture, what are you going to do? Hon member, continue, please.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Chairman, I want to say to hon Blade Ndzimande that he
must remember that I am the man with the stick at this present time.
[Laughter.] If he continues to point and make funny faces at me, I will go
over there and hit him with my crutch.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Well, this is the latitude we give
to the senior members of this House!

   AMENDMENTS TO ARTICLES VI AND XIV.A OF THE STATUTE OF THE INTERNATIONAL
                            ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY

                   (Consideration of Request for Approval)

Mrs E THABETHE: Chairperson, Ministers in the House, Deputy Ministers, hon
members, the amendments to articles 6 and 14 of the statute of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, IAEA, stands to benefit countries of
the South, particularly, Africa. These amendments will increase Africa’s
participation in the IAEA board of governors; the voice of our continent
will be strengthened.

Article 6 in particular seeks to do the following: firstly, to expand the
composition of the board of governors from the current composition of 35 to
43 members; secondly, to set out a list of possible criteria to be taken
into account when the board designates members; and, thirdly, to provide
for each member state to be included in the regional or aerial group
determined by the agency.
This will result in the implementation of a carefully crafted, long-sought
solution to issues associated with the representation of members of the
board of governors, and contribute largely towards enhancing the
effectiveness and efficiency of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

Furthermore, article 14 seeks to change the programme and budget processes
to be biannual rather that annual as is currently the case.

It also seeks to ensure that the IAEA budgeting is in line with the
virtually universal practice amongst United Nations organisations. This
will ensure that there is only one programme budget document and one
appropriate resolution covering the whole two years.

Article 14(a) also seeks to ensure better facilitation of the programme
planning and increase flexibility in programme implementation. That will
enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the programme delivery. As a
country, we have been steadfast in supporting proportional representation
of member states on the board of governors, and we believe that the
expansion of the board is in the right direction, especially for the
African region consolidating its representatives and making sure that the
board of governors ensures greater proportional representation of the
entire region.

This amendment will also be of benefit to the region, again to make sure
that the decision-making body can be enlarged and that we can then benefit.
I urge the House to support this amendment based on the recommendation by
the meeting of the Portfolio Committee on Energy on 7 September.

Everyone supported this because they were just straightforward. We believe
that through what we have discussed earlier on, we will be able to get
skills from some of the scientists in respect of the nuclear industry. I
hope that the House will ratify these amendments. I thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Amendments to Articles VI and XIV.A of the Statute of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, IAEA, approved.

 AMENDMENTS TO THE CONVENTION ON PROHIBITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF
     CERTAIN CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS WHICH MAY BE DEEMED TO BE EXCESSIVELY
                 INJURIOUS OR TO HAVE INDISCRIMINATE EFFECTS

 AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY AND ITS MEMBER STATES, OF THE ONE
   PART, AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, OF THE OTHER
     PART, AMENDING THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE, DEVELOPMENT AND CO-OPERATION

                  (Consideration of Requests for Approval)

Ms K R MAGAU: Chair, on behalf of the Portfolio Committee on International
Relations, I place before the House a request to amend provisions or
restrictions of certain conventional weapons that are deemed to be
injurious or have an indiscriminate effect in terms of section 231(2) of
the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa.

The committee has unanimously agreed to these amendments and we therefore
table them for approval by the House. We will, after approval of the
amendments by the House, be a proud signatory to these conventions and this
will further advance our efforts to ensure a peaceful world. We would like
to urge countries that have not done so, to do so.

We would like to take this opportunity to also place before the House the
request of the portfolio committee to do the same on the revisions in the
Trade, Development and Co-operation Agreement between South Africa and the
European Union.

On this one, we would like to place on record that all the parties have
agreed to the set amendments. Therefore, I put the request of the committee
before the House. Thank you. [Applause.]

There was no debate.

Amendments to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the use of
Certain Conventional Weapons which may be deemed to be excessively
injurious or to have indiscriminate effects, approved.

Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of
the one part, and the Government of the Republic of South Africa, of
the other part, amending the Agreement on Trade, Development and Co-
operation, approved.

The House adjourned at 18:13.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) Social Assistance Amendment Bill [B 5B – 2010] – Act No 5 of 2010
         (assented to and signed by President on 15 September 2010).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Financial Intelligence
        Centre for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General
        on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for 2009-
        2010 [RP 240-2010].

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Accounting Standards
        Board for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Independent
        Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance Information
        for 2009-2010 [RP 206-2010].

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent Regulatory
        Board for Auditors for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 207-2010].

2.    The Minister of Health

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Health
        Laboratory Service for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.

3.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development
    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Department of Justice
        and Constitutional Development for 2009-2010, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 219-2010].

    (b)     Report on Monies in Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2009-
        2010, including the Report of the Auditor-General on Monies in
        Trust kept in the Guardian’s Fund for 2009-2010 [RP 237-2010].

4.    The Minister of Science and Technology


    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Africa Institute of
        South Africa for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010.


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council
        for Natural Scientific Professions for 2009-2009, including the
        Report of the Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010.

    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Advisory
        Council on Innovation for 2009-2010.

5.    The Minister of Tourism

    (a)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Republic of Kenya on Cooperation
        in the Field of Tourism, tabled in terms of section 231(3) of the
        Constitution, 1996.

    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Republic
        of Kenya on Cooperation in the Field of Tourism.

    (c)     Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt on
        Cooperation in the Field of Tourism, tabled in terms of section
        231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.

    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement between the Government
        of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of the Arab
        Republic of Egypt in the Field of Tourism.

National Assembly
1.    The Speaker

    (a)     Report of the Public Service Commission (PSC) on the
        Implementation of the Performance Management and Development System
        for Senior Managers in the Limpopo Province – April 2010 [RP 85-
        2010].

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly
 1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs on
    Oversight Visit to Gauteng, Mpumalanga and North West, Dated 8
    September 2010

    The Portfolio Committee on Water and Environmental Affairs having
    undertaken an oversight visit to Gauteng, Mpumalanga and North West, to
    assess and ascertain the management of Acid Mine Drainage (AMD), on 27
    – 30 July 2010 reports as follows:

1.    INTRODUCTION AND TERMS OF REFERENCE

The Committee, as mandated by the Constitution and Rules of Parliament,
undertook an oversight visit to the abovementioned regions.

The aim of the oversight was, amongst others:

   • To ascertain (during the site visits) and receive briefings on the
     levels of acid mine drainage and its subsequent impact on groundwater,
     rivers, and dams.


   • To be briefed by the Department of Water Affairs, the Water Research
     Commission (WRC), as well as the Federation for a Sustainable
     Environment on the impacts, consequences and threats of AMD to
     communities and water resources in South Africa.

   • To assess the extent to which an integrated solution to the management
     of AMD and the approaches proposed at national level on the
     utilization of ‘new’ water generated through treatment technologies.

   • To establish the technical research undertaken in the treatment of
     AMD, to enable cost-effective treatment of the range of AMD waters
     present in South Africa.

A multi party delegation undertook an oversight visit to the Gauteng,
Mpumalanga and North West from 27 – 30 July 2010. The delegation comprised:

Hon MM Sotyu (ANC), Chairperson and leader of the delegation, Hon PM
Mathebe (ANC), Hon JJ Skosana (ANC), Hon J Manganye (ANC), Dr Z Luyenge
(ANC), Hon GR Morgan (DA), Hon AT Lovemore (DA), Hon LW Greyling (ID) and
Hon HN Ndude (COPE)
The following support staff accompanied the delegation: Mr TR Maleeme
(Committee Secretary), Miss T Kambule (Executive Secretary to the
Chairperson).

2.    CONTEXT

The mining sector is one of the critical drivers of the economy in South
Africa. However, mining activities are also associated with environmental
contamination such as acid mine drainage (AMD).  AMD is highly acidic
water, usually containing high concentrations of metals, sulphides and
salts as a consequence of mining activity.  The major sources of AMD
include drainage from underground mine shafts, runoff and discharge from
open pits and mine waste dumps, tailings and one stockpile, which make up
nearly 80% of all waste produced in South Africa.

Acid mine drainage is the flow, or seepage, of polluted water from old
mining areas. Depending on the area, the water may contain toxic heavy
metals and radioactive particles. These are dangerous for people’s health,
as well as plants and animals. Acid mine drainage on the Witwatersrand has
reached a crisis point. This is because some mining companies allow acid
mine water to flow into streams, dams and sources of groundwater.

On the West Rand, toxic water has already severely affected, if not
completely undermined the ecosystem life in the Tweelopiespruit and the
Robinson Lake near Randfontein. Even some borehole water is polluted and
the AMD is most likely to have a negative effect on the integrity of the
Cradle of Humankind. In some areas, the water has polluted the soil, so
people cannot grow vegetables, and if communities grow vegetables, the
quality is affected.  The water is also used by livestock.

The Tweelopiespruit is part of the Crocodile River system and the Limpopo
River catchment area.
3.    DAY ONE:  27 JULY 2010

GAUTENG PROVINCE

 1. BRIEFING BY THE DEPARTMENT OF WATER AFFAIRS ON SITES TO BE VISITED

A representative from the Ekurhuleni Municipality, on behalf of the
Executive Mayor, Cllr Ntombi Mekgwe, welcomed the members of the committee.
The committee was briefed was the department on areas to be visited, with a
specific focus on interventions undertaken by the department in respect of
regulatory and enforcement cases. The purpose of the compliance, monitoring
and enforcement unit is, amongst others; to:

    • Ensure the protection of all water resources in the country.
    • Ascertain compliance as per the National Water Act and Water Services
      Act.
    • Ensure the enforcement where non compliance is not achieved.

The committee was informed that in Gauteng, the Grootvlei mine was under
investigation in terms of Section 53 (1). A criminal case was opened
against the mine for engaging in unlawful water use activities. In North
West, Madibeng Municipality was also under investigation for engaging in
unlawful water use activities.  The charges were laid by the Department of
Water Affairs.

2. SITE VISIT TO GROOTVLEI MINE (EAST RAND)

3.2.1 Background and Context

Grootvlei Proprietary Mines Limited is situated in the district of Springs
and falls within the Upper Vaal Water Management Area. The mine has a
metallurgical operation that extracts gold from underground mined ore. The
mine is at present operated by Aurora Gold East Rand.  To carry out this
activity, they need to pump underground water for their use as per the
provisions of Section 21(f) and (j) of the National Water Act, 1998 (Act 36
of 1998). The Grootvlei Proprietary Mines Limited was, on 19 May 2009,
issued Water Use Licence No. 20018320 by the Department of Water Affairs.
The license authorises Grootvlei Mine to remove, treat and discharge water
found underground for efficient continuation of mining and for the safety
of people.

3.2.2 Findings

The committee was informed that Aurora Mining has taken over the management
of the Grootvlei Mine. On the day of the visit, the committee was briefed
by the mining management on the status of the mine before being taken to
shaft 3, where the actual treatment of water occurs. The current situation
in the Eastern Basin is that the mine could not keep up with the pumping
and treatment of acidic mine water. Historically, Grootvlei mine pumped
less than 10ML/d to gain access to its own resources. At the time of the
visit, the mine was pumping water at the rate of 108 Mega litres per day
(ML/d) without sufficient treatment. The water had risen to 772 meters
below surface. Due to financial problems experienced by the mine, it is
envisaged that should the pumping operations stop, the pump station will be
flooded within 30 days.

The mine can no longer keep up with the discharge standards as per their
water use licence; and this is attributed to financial problems that have
overwhelmed the mine. The mine claimed it had not received the Department
of Mineral Resource’s (DMR) subsidy of R5 million since October 2009; and
as a result, the mine covers pumping costs out of working costs. It was
brought to the attention of the committee that the mine would lose the
shaft within 5 days if they stopped pumping. Furthermore, treatment has
been non-continuous, for example they would treat for few days and stopped
the treatment. To date, the mine has incurred over R100 million worth of
water pumping costs, which could have been used for other operations.

The discharging of untreated or partially treated water is severely
affecting the health of the neighbouring Ramsar wetland.

It is acknowledged that the Department of Water Affairs is pursuing a
criminal charge against the mine for the discharge of partially treated
water into the surrounding water course.


3. SITE VISIT TO eMALAHLENI MINE WATER TREATMENT PLANT


   1. Background and Context

The eMalahleni Mine Water Treatment Plant was built to recover potable
water from acid mine drainage from several mines in the eMalahleni
(Witbank) area. The plant was commissioned in September 2007 and has been
since operating successfully. It was designed to treat 25Ml/d of AMD (Acid
Mine Drainage) with a recovery consistently greater than 99%, producing
potable water with a guaranteed TDS (Total Dissolved Solids) of under
450mh/l. This exceptional water recovery is achieved using the Keyplan Hi
recovery Precipitating Reverse Osmosis (HiPRO) process. The plant receives
its feed water from four coal mines in the eMalahleni (Witbank) Area i.e.
Greenside Colliery, Kleinkopje Colliery, South Witbank Colliery and
Navigation Colliery.

   2. Findings

The plant was found to be fully automatic, while human intervention was
required for chemical change-over, monitoring and maintenance. The
committee established that the plant is able to treat 20 – 25 Ml/day of
water dependent on pH and salt concentrations. Of the 25 Ml/day, 20 Ml/day
is sold to the eMalahleni Local Municipality and 5 Ml/day was reused in
their operations. Strict safety interventions have been put in place which
includes amongst others; visible felt leadership, golden rule
implementation within and around the plant. This has led to more than 1000
days without lost time due to injury. This was a good accomplishment
considering that there are over eight hazardous chemicals on site for
various process functions.

 Anglo Coal SA has approved building of houses for its employees through
the production of gypsum (solid waste - a by-product of the Emahlakleni
purification process). The committee found that the chief characteristic of
the plant; was the use of Reverse Osmosis to concentrate the water and
produce supersaturated brine from which the salts could be released in a
simple precipitation process.  The results of such a process were high
recovery of water, low operating costs and minimum waste. The plant has
about 35 employees, each being actively involved in maintaining the plant
operability. A permanent training officer has been employed to ensure that
there is no lapse in skills amongst the staff and to deal with matters of
high turnover as and when such arises.

4.    DAY TWO: 28 JULY 2010

4.1   SITE VISIT TO LANCASTER DAM

Lancaster Dam is a pollution control dam. All the water that flows into it
is not supposed to flow out onto the other side. The main problem at the
dam was radio active particles attached to the sediment.

4.1.1 Findings

When the committee visited the Lancaster Dam, it found an area which
appeared to have been filled with slimes that had recently been mined. The
dam was characterised (another word) by heavy equipment which made it
possible for the acidic slimes water and fine slimes to drain into the pond
and wetland below the dam.  Downstream of the dam, an orange pool of
settled slimes, filled with acidic mine drainage water was evident. Dry
slimes were observed blowing throughout the Lancaster Dam site.

The committee was concerned about the RDP houses that had recently been
established around the dam. The community drank and baptised from acidic
mine water. The population groups around the area were said to be
vulnerable, poor, uninformed and therefore needed to be ‘workshopped’ on a
regular basis on the dangers of the acid mine water. The main pollutants
are suspected to be acidic water and associated toxic metals arising from
oxidation of sulphides such as iron sulphide. Two children had recently
drowned in two pollution control dams and this was due to the dams not
being fenced off. Enforcing the fencing of mine dams should be undertaken
by the Department of Mineral Resources (DMR).

4.2   VICTORIAN GUEST HOUSE

4.2.1 Introductions and welcome

The committee was welcomed by the Executive Mayor of West Rand, Cllr Mpho
Nawa. He made a plea that all parties that are involved must come on board
to resolve issues that relate to acid mine drainage within the
municipality.
4.2.1 Briefing and discussions on acid mine drainage

The committee was given an overview by Mr John Manrow and Mr Rex Zorab
(Rand Uranium) on the situation of the Acid Mine Drainage (AMD). The
situation faced by mining companies, civil society and the community at
large was of concern. Mining has been in existence in this country for at
least 120 years. Currently, there are large old underground workings that
extend from Randfontein to Boksburg. Mining has ceased and companies
responsible for the underground workings no longer exist.

The biggest challenge at present is that the workings are filling up with
water, Western Basin is overflowing and Central Basin will overflow in
2012. The AMD is essentially ownerless as companies that operate today are
new and, in the opinion of local mines, they cannot carry the burden. In
the Western Basin, mining stopped in the 1990’s. Workings are filled with
water and AMD overflowed in 2002. Temporary treatment operations were put
in place early in 2010 following the most recent decant. All the emergency
measures provided by DWA have been exhausted.

Rand Uranium is a 2 year old company. It has operated the water treatment
operations to maximum capacity. Despite exhaustive engagement with
government and proposal on possible solutions placed on the table, it felt
the delay by the state in responding did not help the situation. The
current system was such that the plant that they run was a temporary
measure. Acid water is neutralised, but there was no optimal lime
utilization due to insufficient mixing, high lime cost and there was no
optimal sulphate and TDS (total dissolved solids) removal.

Rand Uranium stated that a consortium of mines had submitted a proposal to
DWA on 14 July 2010 on how, in its opinion, AMD could be sustainably
managed in the short to medium term. They await a response from government.

4.3   VISITS TO KRUGERSDORP GAME RESERVE HIPPO DAM

At the time of the visit, the water was decanting at 6ML/day from the
neighbouring property. A sludge of radioactive and toxic metals was
observed. The hippos in the Hippo Dam were coated in sludge containing
heavy metals. There is anecdotal evidence that at least one of the hippos
is now partially sighted due to the pollution.

NORTH WEST

4.4   MADIBENG LOCAL MUNICIPALITY COUNCIL CHAMBERS

4.4.1 Briefing on Water Provision in Madibeng

The households of about 102, 060 in Madibeng Local Municipality (MLM)
receive free basic water subject to the current policy review.  It
estimated that more than 80% of the households have access to water
services either bulk, full, intermediate, informal intermediate or basic
supply. The municipality gets its water supply from Odi Water Services
(SWA), a water services provider. They entered into an agreement with the
provider for the provision of bulk water supply. Operations and maintenance
services were terminated in July 2009. On termination, the provider has
experienced difficulties in an attempt to retrieve payment from Madibeng
Local Municipality. A number of efforts to retrieve the arrears were
unsuccessful and the water supply to the area was restricted on 18 August
2008.  The supply of water was restored after an agreement was reached on
how the debt was to be serviced by the municipality.

What remains a challenge in this municipality is the rapid growth in
development which has led to the demand of water exceeding supply. The
sanitation system comprises of an aging infrastructure and thus poses
operational and maintenance challenges. The Water Purification Plant that
supplies Brits and environs also requires an expansion by an additional 40-
mega litres per day and it is envisaged to be completed in phases. The
municipality had requested the Department of Water Affairs to take over the
implementation of the RBIG project (upgrading of WWTP). An amount of about
R20 million has been made available for 2010/11 for the implementation of
the project. Magalies Water was recommended to manage the project.

5.    DAY THREE

5.1   SITE VISIT TO MADIBENG WWTW (Waste Water Treatment Works)

The municipality has a newly upgraded plant which processes 6Ml/day and the
old one which used to process 8Ml/day. The old plant has deteriorated due
to negligence and the principal consultant allegedly ill advised the
Municipality. The sludge lagoons were not working to capacity, and were at
the point of breaking and had not been emptied for the past 30 years. Some
of the problems associated with the plant which were identified were,
amongst others, non compliance to standards, staffing levels acutely
inadequate, no maintenance plans and effluent monitoring needed to be
increased. None of the pump stations were working, and of the average of
12Ml/day that should come to the plant, only 3Ml/day were treated and the
rest (about 9Ml/day) went to the streets.

The municipality was however, committed to urgently source funding for the
refurbishment of Water and Sanitation Infrastructure, recruitment of
critical positions in the Water and Sanitation department.

5.2   BRIEFING: ADDRESSING THE CHALLENGES OF WWTW AS IT ADDS TO THE
    EUTROPHICATION OF THE HARTBEESPOORT DAM

The Hartbeespoort Dam is the most significant dam in the economic hub of
the Crocodile West Marico Water Management Area for domestic, agricultural,
industrial and recreational purposes. The dam is in a hyper-eutrophic
state, meaning it is trapped with excessive nutrients. For many years, the
Crocodile River has been pouring an increasing load of phosphorus into
Hartbeespoort Dam. This had led to high levels of nutrients and
eutrophication of the water.

It was brought to the attention of the committee that about 9 wastewater
treatment works discharge their 620 million liters per day of purified
effluent into the Crocodile River, with very high loads of waste water
effluents. These intensify the occurrence of blue-green algae or
cyanobacteria. There is however, a remediation programme of the
Hartbeespoort Dam in place. It focuses on management of phosphate through
natural uptake in a food chain and re-establishing a biological balance
within the dam waters using among other things, floating islands and
removal of certain fish types.

The Hartbeespoort Dam is an invaluable water resource with a major economy
around recreation and tourism attractions. People and business are moving
into the area, thus contributing to its economic growth.
The remediation programme has been in existence for almost 5 years but a
determination of its effectiveness has not been undertaken. The project
manager was able to provide outcomes achieved, but there is no analysis of
how any particular outcomes are affecting the actual health of the dam.
In consultation with stakeholders from local resident organisations and
environmental organisations, there was a mixed response to the success of
the remediation programme. There was general appreciation that something
was being done to remediate the dam. There was a dominant feeling that the
managers of the remediation programme were not sufficiently including local
organisations in consultations, especially considering that many
organisations financially support efforts to remediate the dam themselves.
It is noted that a number of people donate their skills free of charge to
the remediation of the dam.

6.    RECOMMENDATIONS

     • The Department of Water Affairs (DWA) should produce a business plan
       on how it intends to tackle the AMD threat in the short, medium and
       long term. Such a plan should include timelines, budgetary
       projections and the plan of action.

   • DWA should engage with DMR about ensuring the safety of mining dams.

     • DWA should offer full cooperation with regards to any investigation
       by the NPA to prosecute the owners of Grootvlei mine following the
       criminal charge laid by the department.

     • DWA should engage with DMR about ensuring the implementation of the
       Regional Mine Closure Strategy.
     • DWA should urgently increase its response to the current decant of
       AMD on the West Rand, noting that due to the upcoming rainy season,
       it is highly likely that the decant will increase.

     • DWA should issue a directive to responsible mines in the West Rand
       for the remediation of the Hippo Dam in the Krugersdorp Game Reserve.



     • DWA should ensure that skilled staff of the department constantly
       monitors the remediation of the Brits WWTW. DWA should ensure strict
       timelines on the complete refurbishment of the plant.

     • DWA should complete a financial and skills audit of the Hartbeespoort
       Dam remediation programme now that it has been in existence for
       almost 5 years to determine whether it is effective, and whether the
       protocols and methodologies used to measure the state of health of
       the dam are adequate.

     • DWA should ensure that the Remediation Programme improves its efforts
       to engage with local stakeholders.

     • DWA needs to clarify the role of Rand Water as the implementing agent
       of the remediation project in relation to the involvement of local
       officials of DWA. In addition it should be clarified who has specific
       signing powers for services procured.

     • DWA should ensure that there is a wider system implemented to monitor
       the health of freshwater dams and reservoirs across South Africa.

7.    ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The committee expresses its appreciation to the National Department of
Water Affairs, the regional management of Gauteng and North West for their
co-operation during the visit.

Report to be considered.


