---
title: 'National Assembly - 09 September 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-09-09
---

THURSDAY, 09 SEPTEMBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:06.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members  to  observe  a  moment  of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Ms N A MNISI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates social and economic infrastructure and the
   extension of quality government services, particularly health and
   education, to the rural areas.


I thank you.

Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:


   That the House debates the performance of the Cross-border Road Transport
   Agency and whether any solutions are necessary in order for this entity
   to comply with its legislative mandate.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice ...

The SPEAKER: I didn’t recognise you. Speak only when you have been
recognised. Hon Smuts, I recognise you. [Laughter.]

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Mr Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the recent unrest in Mozambique resulting from
   deprivation and food shortages, and the impact on South Africa and the
   Southern Africa Development Community,region.


Mr N A RAMATLHODI: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates how to devise means in terms of which official
   languages are used in the courts in order to enhance access to justice.
   Thank you, Mr Speaker.
[Applause.]
Mr S N SWART: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:

   That the House debates the Special Report on the Implementation of
   Public Protector Reports and Remedial Action that states that non-
   implementing organs of state that reject or do not comply with the
   findings of the Public Protector can be held accountable by Parliament.

I thank you. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, it’s difficult to hear the speakers. I suspect we
are here to listen to them so, if you keep quiet, you stand a better chance
of hearing what they have to say.

Mr S MOKGALAPA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House discusses the principles that should guide South Africa’s
   foreign policy and our participation in international agreements, and
   how these principles relate to the national interests of our country.

Ms W NGWENYA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

    That the House debates community participation in Parole boards and
    correctional, rehabilitation and reintegration initiatives.

Thank you.

Dr S M VAN DYK: Speaker, ek gee hiermee kennis dat ek op die volgende
sittingsdag namens die DA sal voorstel:

    Dat die Huis ’n debat voer oor Eskom se onlangse verklaring dat die
    voorsiening van elektrisiteit aan Suid-Afrika slegs tot 2017 gewaarborg
    kan word.
(Translation of Afrikaans subject for discussion follows.)

[Dr S M VAN DYK: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
I shall move on behalf of the DA:


    That the House debates Eskom’s recent statement that the supply of
    sufficient electricity to South Africa can only be guaranteed until
    2017.]

Ms H F MATLANYANE: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

    That the House debates the significance strides made in mathematics,
    science and technology in our educational system.

Thank you.

Mr S J F MARAIS: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of the DA:

    That the House debates illegal and unsafe electricity and solutions to
    help Eskom eradicate this problem.

Thank you.

Mr L RAMATLAKANE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the unacceptable trend established by the ruling
   party to force directors-general and chief executive officers of
   parastatals to attend the ANC National General Council.

Thank you.

Mrs J D KILIAN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the decision by the SABC board on the appointment
   of the SABC news head and the pressure exerted on board members to
   regularise the appointment.
Thank you.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Hon Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the Khoi people’s alleged lack of recognition as
   a minority group.


Thank you.

The SPEAKER: Hon Ellis, please take your seat and welcome to the House.

                           ANNUAL ZULU REED DANCE

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House –


     1) notes that every year in September over 15 000 Zulu maidens  gather
        at King Goodwill Zwelithini’s royal palace for the Zulu reed  dance
        (uMkhosi woMhlanga) and that this year's event will take  place  on
        11 and 12 September at the Enyokeni Royal Palace in Nongoma;


     2)  further  notes  that  the  reed  dance  is  a  colourful  cultural
        celebration ...

The SPEAKER: Hon members of the ANC, you can’t hear your Chief Whip
speaking; please reduce your noise levels.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Thank you, hon Speaker, for the
protection. I shall continue:

        ... that promotes respect for young women and preserves the custom
        of keeping girls as virgins until marriage;

    (3)     believes that the Zulu reed dance plays a significant part in
         Zulu heritage in terms of portraying and instilling a sense of
         pride, belonging and identity among the youth;


    (4)     acknowledges that this year’s ceremony will see all the young
         women participating in the event undergoing life skills training as
         well as receiving information about moral regeneration and HIV and
         Aids education, especially on prevention methods; and


    (5)     wishes the participants a very successful uMkhosi woMhlanga.

I thank you, hon Speaker. [Applause.]

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: Thank you. May I just add that the attendance at the reed
dance is per invitation only, but ... [Laughter.] Order!

                        END OF HOLY MONTH OF RAMADAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move without notice:

    That the House -

      1) notes that Friday, 10 September 2010, marks the end  of  the  holy
         month of Ramadan;


      2) further notes that during this day, Muslims across the globe  wish
         each other “Eid-ul-Fitr’’ and families, friends and relatives  get
         together to build a feeling of unity among one another and  spread
         happiness all round;
      3)  believes  that  Muslims  in  this  country  have  made  a   great
         contribution to the defeat of apartheid, colonialism  and  to  the
         creation and sustenance of our democracy and that the  holy  month
         of Ramadan afforded them a unique opportunity to strengthen  bonds
         of friendship and family ties  among  themselves  and  with  their
         fellow South Africans;


      4) remembers that the religion of Islam preaches, among other things,
         respect for humanity and encourages peace and justice; and


      5) extends its best wishes to all Muslims in our country  and  around
         the world.


Agreed to.


                       COMMEMORATION OF BISHO MASSACRE

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr M A NHANHA: Speaker, I move without notice:


    That the House -

       1) notes that 7 September marked the 18th year of the Bisho  massacre
          in which 29 innocent lives were lost and  scores  of  people  were
          injured at the hands of Oupa Gqozo;


       2) commemorates those  freedom  fighters  who  either  died  or  were
          wounded during that fateful protest march;


       3) remembers with sadness the brave souls who paid the ultimate price
          for Ciskei’s reincorporation into South Africa  during  the  final
          years of apartheid; and

       4) expresses its regret to the families of the victims  and,  in  the
          same token, the appreciation of the nation for the liberation that
          we achieved through the sacrifices they made.


Agreed to.


                   NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR CRIME PREVENTION

                             (Draft Resolution)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Speaker, I move without notice:


     That the House -

       1) notes that on 6 September 2010 the National  Institute  for  Crime
          Prevention and the Reintegration of Offenders celebrated its 100th
          anniversary;


       2) further notes that Nicro provides crime  prevention  services  and
          public educational programmes as well as analysing the root causes
          of crime;


       3) recognises that the organisation has more than 40 community victim
          support centres throughout the country; and

       4) congratulates Nicro and wishes them success as they strive towards
          their goal of staying vibrant and relevant in the communities they
          serve.

Agreed to.

                       GOOD WISHES FOR JEWISH NEW YEAR

                             (Draft Resolution)
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Speaker, I move without notice:


     That the House -

       1) notes that Thursday marks  the  beginning  of  a  very  auspicious
          period in the Jewish calendar, with members of  the  Jewish  faith
          observing Rosh Hashanah;


       2) further notes that Rosh Hashanah, the beginning of the year, is  a
          time for introspection and reflection on the past year as well  as
          a time to look forward to the year ahead; and


       3) wishes the Jewish community of South Africa “Shana tova”.


Agreed to.

                SCHOOL EDUCATION AFTER PUBLIC SERVICE STRIKE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs J C MOLOI-MOROPA (ANC): Speaker, the ANC welcomes the suspension of the
public sector strike by the unions. We believe this is a step in the right
direction to ensure stability and normality in the public sector. The
strike caused a massive strain on public health care and the postponement
of the matric preliminary exams in some provinces.

With all teachers resuming their duties, we urge all educators to find
creative ways to ensure that all Grade 12 learners are fully prepared to
write the preliminary exams.

Learners are encouraged to make use of all programmes offered by their
various schools and the Department of Basic Education. The upcoming school
holidays should be utilised productively. Learners and teachers are urged
again to give assistance and guidance, even during the school holidays.

Consultations between labour unions and government should continue beyond
the negotiations to ensure the delivery of essential services to the
public. We believe that together we can do more.

Thank you.

                              CRIME STATISTICS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms D KOHLER-BARNARD (DA): Thank you, Chair. Today’s crime statistics really
shows incremental improvement across the board. So, South Africans do have
room to be cautiously optimistic. Crime is something which affects every
South African, and a decrease in crime is obviously something to be
welcomed. Crime statistics provide an important assessment of how well
government is managing to keep South Africans safe.

When the statistics for next year are released the SAPS’ special measures
during the Fifa World Cup will, I believe, translate into greater
measurable outcomes and demonstrate what happens when safety is a non-
negotiable priority of government, and the stress is on visible policing.

The SAPS have made important strides, especially in contact crimes. The
murder rate is down by a significant 8,6%, and attempted murder down by
6,1%. Robberies with attempt to inflict grievous bodily harm and secular
offences are also down.

Worryingly, residential burglaries and business premises robberies have
again increased, by 2,7% and 4,4% respectively. This means that South
Africans are unfortunately less safe in their homes than they were in the
previous year, and that businesses are more vulnerable to crime.

The DA commends all the brave men and women in the SAPS for their efforts
in keeping South Africa safe, and we also proffer our heartfelt condolences
to the families and friends of the 110 police officers who died in the
course of duty. Thank you. [Applause.]

                           CORRUPTION IN ARMS DEAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms L M MASHIANE (Cope): Chairperson, the arms deal saga hangs like an
albatross around the neck of the ANC - that is how it will stay!
[Interjections.]

The rearguard action by the ANC comes on top of the new evidence given by
Anwar Dramat to Scopa that high-ranking politicians and shady businessmen
had pocketed about R480 million from the R43 billion arms deal. According
to Dramat, R300 million in kickbacks might have been paid for the British
Aerospace Electronic Systems contract and R180 million by the German
frigate consortium.

These bribes would have been paid to secure contracts for the supply of
fighter aircrafts and naval vessels. The fact that the Hawks have 460 boxes
of documentary evidence, as well as 4,7 million computer-generated
documents, shouldn’t be a problem. The Hawks should use data mining
software and new technology to identify the wrongdoers.

The issue of time, money and manpower raised by Dramat is outrageous.
Corruption has been institutionalised in the ANC - this is common cause.
That is why it continues to frustrate the arms deal investigation. This is
why it pressurises its MPs in Scopa to follow instructions. It all points
to the rottenness of the core of this government which, if allowed to
fester, will destroy our democracy and our society. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

                         SAPS EDUCATIONAL TRUST FUND

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G LEKGETHO (ANC): Thank you, hon Speaker. The ANC welcomes Police
Minister Nathi Mthethwa’s announcement that the SAPS is to establish an
educational trust fund that will benefit children whose parents or
guardians have died in the line of duty. The announcement was made on the
SAPS National Commemoration Day, to honour the 110 police officers who died
in the line of duty during the past financial year.

The SAPS Education Trust Fund is expected to be fully operational by
January 2011. During this Commemoration Day, the Minister noted that many
of the police officers who died were fairly young, and even though the SAPS
paid out their pension and policy benefits, it was evidently impossible
that those payments would sustain the loved ones left behind.

The criteria in terms of permissibility into the educational trust fund
will be voluntary, but consideration will be on the neediest. The SAPS
Educational Trust Fund will be the first of its kind, and will be a lasting
legacy to those who have lost their lives in the service of the country. I
thank you.

                    DEATH OF IFP MEMBERS DURING STRUGGLE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr M A MNCWANGO (IFP): Hon Speaker, 16 years have passed since South
Africans were shot or burnt to death in political conflict, and even though
we will never forget this painful part of our history, memory of the trauma
has faded. Some 20 500 people were killed between 1984 and 1994. The
conventional wisdom is that they died at the hands of the state third
force, but Anthea Jeffery’s book, People’s War: New Light on the Struggle
for South Africa, paints an accurate picture in which she explains that
these people died as a result of the people’s war the ANC unleashed.

In 1993, the IFP president, Mangosuthu Buthelezi, drew attention to the 275
IFP leaders who had been killed since 1985. He asked why this was of no
consequence. Buthelezi asked how the 1994 election could be free and fair
in such a climate and withdrew from the election process in protest.

He was demonised for his views and actions at the time. Jeffery’s book lays
out how the people’s war allowed the ANC to dominate the negotiating
process, to marginalise people like Prince Buthelezi and to seize a virtual
monopoly on power in 1994. Even though Dr Jeffery’s book has been on the
shelves for many months, we would like to congratulate her on publishing a
balanced narrative of the history of South Africa and the struggle for
freedom. Since the dawn of democracy, there have been too many instances of
the ruling party trying to paint a distorted picture of the struggle, and
in some instances there have been attempts to rewrite history entirely.
[Applause.]

  MRS PATRICIA DE LILLE ON HER RETIREMENT FROM PARLIAMENT AND THE ARMS DEAL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P DE LILLE (ID): Hon Speaker, Phansi ANC Phansi! [Interjections.] Hon
Speaker, it is with immense sadness that I’m leaving this Parliament today.
[Interjections.] I have fought many fights in this Parliament, and I have
won most of them. [Interjections.] Even though I have fought with many
people, I’ve also made many friends. I also feel proud that we could all
build our new democracy together. But as I’m leaving today, I want to
remind you that exactly 11 years ago ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, order!

Ms P DE LILLE: ... on 9 September 1999 in this Parliament, I blew the
whistle on the arms deal.

Yesterday, the head of the Hawks, Mr Anwar Dramat, suggested to the
Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Scopa, that the investigations into
the arms deal must be dropped for financial reasons. How ridiculous! I
wonder which politicians instructed him to cover up for them. No amount of
money is too big to bring these crooks to book. Some of them are still in
government today. [Applause.]

I want to say to the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on
Communications, hon Vadi, and hon Sikhumbuzo Kholwane and all the members
of the portfolio committee, I wish you well in your task; also to the rural
development committee, hon Sizane, I wish you well in your task. Aluta
continua! I will see you on the streets. Thank you. [Applause.]

             PRESIDENT ZUMA’S VISIT TO EASTERN CAPE COMMUNITIES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P MADUNA (ANC): Hon Speaker, President Zuma, in his capacity as
President of the ANC, visited Uitenhage recently and, amongst other things,
went to speak to the people from Delview. While going from door to door,
the President went to the dilapidated house of 67-year-old Susan de Rocks.
The President saw the state of the house and after stepping into a hole
which was on the floor, whispered into her ear that he will make sure that
she moves into a new house soon.

On Monday, 16 August 2010, municipal workers from the Nelson Mandela
Metropole started building a new house for her, as promised by President
Zuma. Susan de Rocks will be moving into her new house soon after receiving
the keys personally from the Minister of Basic Education, Angie Motshekga.

President Zuma has shown repeatedly that he has empathy with the people of
South Africa and listens to the plight of the poor. The President
established a call centre last year whereby the public could call the
Presidency directly to raise queries and complaints.

The ANC commends the President for taking time out of his extremely busy
schedule to interact with the people and listen to their problems. Thank
you. [Applause.]

  DEPARTMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCES ALLEGEDLY INVOLVED IN FRAUDULENT ACTIONS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr E J MARAIS (DA): Speaker, the Department of Mineral Resources is in a
terrible state of affairs. Kumba is taking the Department of Mineral
Resources to court over alleged fraudulent manipulation by Imperial Crown
Trading of the application submitted to the department. It is therefore
concerning that the department is in possession of all the alleged
fraudulent documents on which Kumba is basing their court application.

If the court finds that the application by Imperial Crown Trading was
falsified and was indeed based on the documents emanating from the
department, then the department could well be criticised for closing its
eyes to the fraudulent activity or, even worse, be alleged to have been an
accomplice in manipulating applications in favour of ANC-linked
politicians.

Another issue of concern is a Lonmin-Keysha investment matter where Keysha
obtained rights to so-called associated minerals at the expense of an
established miner, Lonmin. While the department urges that the Act is not
clear on the issue of associated minerals, it continued with the issuing of
a prospecting right to Keysha investments, an entity with connections to
the ANC and with no proven record in mining or ability to have access to
funding requirements. Now the Minister, knowing that her department is out
of control, has instituted a six month moratorium on prospecting despite
the law not providing for such a draconian measure. Thank you, sir. [Time
expired.]
                             WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G J SELAU (ANC): Hon Speaker, 80 female volunteers who helped to build
54 houses in the North West province as part of Women’s Month are to
receive training that will equip them to start their own construction
companies. The training programme is an initiative of the Minister of Human
Settlements Tokyo Sexwale and the human settlement department of North
West.

The women will be trained in financial literacy by First National Bank and
will also get training in life orientation by the National Development
Agency. They will also receive three month’s training from the National
Home Builders Registration Council, where they will be taught technical
skills and undergo practical training.

On completion of the training, volunteers will be issued with National Home
Builders Registration Council accreditation certificates, which will then
give them opportunities to create jobs for themselves or establish
construction companies.

The ANC welcomes the initiative of expanding opportunities to women, so
that they can improve their entrepreneurial skills and stand a better
chance in accessing economic opportunities. Malibongwe! Igama
lamakhosikazi! [Praise! The name of women!] [Applause.]

                            ANTHEA JEFFERY’S BOOK

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI (IFP): Hon Speaker, the IFP would like to
congratulate Dr Anthea Jeffery on her latest book Chasing the Rainbow:
South Africa’s Move from Mandela. At its simplest level, Chasing the
Rainbow is the dispassionate assessment of South Africa’s progress since
1994 in ten critical areas ranging from the rule of law and effective
governance to liberating the poor and fighting crime. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, on a point of order
...

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI (IFP): Dr Jeffery hands out plaudits where merited,
but for the most ...

The SPEAKER: Order! Order! Is that a point of order, Deputy Chief Whip?

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Yes, Mr Speaker, we think that
the statement has been read.
The SPEAKER: We can’t hear you.

The DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Mr Speaker, the statement was
read earlier on. [Interjections.]

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI (IFP): Oh please, no! Hon Speaker, this is a new
statement.

Dr Jeffery hands out plaudits where merited ...

The SPEAKER: Let’s listen to the new statement. [Laughter.] Continue, hon
member.

Ms S P LEBENYA-NTANZI: ... but for the most part her analysis reveals a
country struggling desperately to fulfil the hopes that attended the dawn
of the rainbow era.

In addition, Dr Anthea Jeffery also discusses the ruling party’s newest
onslaughts on the opposition in pursuit of its national democratic
revolution programme. Amongst other things, this revolution aims to
eliminate any opposition to the ruling party. If this is indeed the ruling
party’s objective, I would like to signal a warning today, in this House,
that we all need to fear the future of our young democracy. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                PUBLIC SERVICES STRIKE AND STATE CULPABILITY
                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr W M MADISHA (Cope): Mr Speaker, Cope upholds the constitutional rights
of workers to engage in industrial action and to withhold their labour to
enhance their remuneration and working conditions. This right, however,
must be exercised responsibly and without violence.

During the strike, valuable time that cannot be made up now in education
was lost and plans must be implemented. Although the blame is wholly
shifted to educators and other public sector workers, the employer cannot
escape culpability in this regard because of bad faith negotiations and
arrogant ministerial statements. By allowing the industrial action to be
prolonged, matters got out of hand and people suffered injuries, deaths in
hospitals and learners were unable to complete their syllabi.

Had government, inter alia, curtailed accesses with regard to luxury
vehicles travel costs, hotel bills by some of the Ministers present here,
there would have been money in the fiscus to pay teachers, health workers
and others salaries commensurate with their qualifications and
responsibilities. Unfortunately government has been spending freely and
lavishly, and then it begins to plead poverty when public sector workers
request legitimate improvements in remuneration.

Government has three weeks to settle the problems faced by workers. We are
saying to you that you must negotiate in good faith. We call on government
to learn a lesson from this very long industrial action in our country’s
history. Salary reviews going forward must precede the passing of the
budget and not occur subsequently to its passing. [Time expired.]

                INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON YOUTH DEVELOPMENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs M T KUBAYI (ANC): Hon Speaker, the first international conference of
parliamentarians on youth development was held in Mexico City, from 24 to
27 August 2010. As part of the celebrations of 2010 being declared as the
youth year, as per the United Nations, the conference was also a UN-
supported initiative. At the conference the SA Parliament was represented
by members of both the National Assembly and the National Council of
Provinces.

The conference looked at various topics and South Africa participated in
the following: unemployment, health and education. Other topics that the
conference covered included peace and security, social participation and
democracy, information technology, immigration and sustainable development.
All of these topics are considered key to youth development.

As such, the conference adopted declarations which bind each parliamentary
member to adopt and implement in support of the youth. Thus, the ANC
continue to support the global campaigns, which are aimed at putting youth
development issues on the world agenda, and identifying priority action for
2015 on youth issues to be included in the international agenda for
development beyond the millennium development goals. Thank you. [Applause.]

                     SOUTH AFRICAN SATELLITE SUMBANDILA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms M R SHINN (DA): A year ago, South Africa launched its satellite,
SumbandilaSat, amid much fanfare. This pioneering craft heralded our bright
future as a space-faring nation.

But it’s a crippled ship. Cost compromises made during construction meant
that some of the components have permanently failed because they were not
robust enough. Some of the problems have been fixed, but about half the
promised capability of the satellite is lost.

Three universities that were promised the use of SumbandilaSat have not yet
been able to start their experiments – a year after launch.

The total cost of the programme is, I’ve been told, about R90 million and
about R52 million spent on getting the craft to work after launch. These
are expensive school, fees, particularly as all we get is 10 minutes worth
of information a day to compile images that take 15 days of processing to
become useable.

A year ago, the hon Minister of Science and Technology promised to provide
a cost justification on building our own satellites. When she did not
deliver on this promise, I sent her a question and her response was a
smokescreen.

She could not give concrete details of return on investment. She chose not
to give figures proving that it is cheaper to make our own satellite than
it is to acquire the earth observation information from the six satellite
providers we currently use.

Cabinet wants taxpayers to become the major shareholders of the satellite’s
manufacturer, SunSpace. I suggest that, instead, our money be better used
in developing our unique global competitive capabilities. [Applause.]

                       HOUSING DELIVERY IN URBAN AREAS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr J M MATSHOBA (ANC): Speaker, the ANC-led government, through the
Department of Human Settlements, is embarking on radical changes that could
turn the tide of housing delivery in the country.

According to data from the Department of Human Settlements, some
2,7 million houses have been in South Africa over the last 40 years. Post-
1994 South Africa marked the beginning of unprecedented demand for housing,
as more people moved to urban areas in search of new economic opportunities
that were being created by the new democratic order. The demand became so
high that the then Department of Housing was forced to look outside itself
for solutions to meet this deadline for delivery when it announced the
establishment of a housing delivery agency last year. The agency has
facilitated the acquisition of land for housing development across the
country, allowing for more than 240 000 new houses to be handed over to the
new owners between 2008 and 2009.

The expenditure on housing delivery has also increased from R4,9 billion in
2004-05 to R10,5 billion in the last financial year, increasing at an
average rate of 23%. Authorities, however, admit that there have been
challenges.

Ward authorities, as listed in the policy of the people housing process,
will seek the establishment of a new funding mechanism that will allow for
more committed urban projects in the delivery of what is now termed human
settlement.

The ANC-led government is committed to accelerating the delivery of housing
within the context of sustainable human settlement. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                    FEMALE ENTREPRENEUR OF THE YEAR AWARD

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs P C NGWENYA-MABILA (ANC): Speaker, the annual Female Entrepreneur of
the Year award was held in the Eastern Cape over the weekend. Its aim is to
encourage and recognise the participation of women in the agriculture,
forestry and fisheries sectors.

A Limpopo woman, Mavis Mathabatha, won the 2010 Female Entrepreneur of the
Year award, as well as R365 000. Mavis Mathabatha is the leader of the
Lammangata Moringa community wellness project, which cultivates and
utilises Moringa Oleifera, a plant possessing remarkable nutritional
properties. The plant, which is known as the miracle tree, possesses
vitamin A and C, iron and protein.

The Lammangata Moringa project produces and packages 10 000 tons of all-
natural Moringa leaf powder. It creates jobs for 12 women and five men. The
project also offers Moringa Oleifera seedlings and education on nutrition
at no cost to rural communities in Limpopo.

The ANC encourages these kinds of initiatives, especially initiatives that
empower rural women, particularly those who derive their livelihood from
the use of productive land. Thank you.

Mr K J DIKOBO (Azapo): Speaker, on a point of order: As far as we are
concerned, Azapo was supposed to have a slot during Members’ Statements. We
were not called.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I follow the list that I have in front of me. I
don’t know what list you have in front of you.

Mr K J DIKOBO (Azapo): I also have information from my Chief Whip that it
was our turn.

The SPEAKER: Well, I don’t know about your Chief Whip. Here I follow the
orders from the Table staff. I am sure we can check with the Table after
this but, sadly, you are not on my list.

I have said this before: People who are not on my list won’t be given a
chance to speak.

Table staff, can you please note the concern expressed, that Azapo was on
the list, should have been on the list, might have been on the list, but
was not recorded here?

                       GOOD WISHES FOR HERITAGE MONTH

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF ARTS AND CULTURE: Speaker, my response is, happy Heritage
Month to all the members! Thank you. [Applause.]

                     SOUTH AFRICAN SATELLITE SUMBANDILA
                            ANTHEA JEFFERY’S BOOK
    MRS PATRICIA DE LILLE ON HER RETIREMENT FROM PARLIAMENT AND ARMS DEAL
                 PUBLIC SERVICE STRIKE AND STATE CULPABILITY

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Speaker, if I could begin with the
statement made by hon Shinn, I certainly did not give her a response that
satisfied her in the question that she sent to me.

I do not believe she is correct in saying that the satellite is a costly
waste. We did indicate that this is a demonstrator satellite and that South
Africa would not have the entire set of responses it seeks to achieve
through the launch and utilisation of a satellite.

We will continue with our satellite programme. We believe we have the
skills, the ability, and the technology to develop satellites not just for
South Africa, but for the African continent as well. Therefore our plans
are under way and they will continue to be executed to serve the
innovation, technological and development interests of South Africa.

With respect to the statement and the excitement of the IFP on the book by
Anthea Jeffery, I should say that, when I was a lecturer at university, I
always taught my students not to use one source. Once you do, of course,
you distort the work that you are trying to do. [Interjections.]

Now, we know many persons attempt to be revisionists insofar as history is
concerned. Unfortunately, the glorious contribution of the ANC to the
struggle for freedom in South Africa and the achievement of democracy we
enjoy today cannot be changed by any historian ... [Applause.] ... and any
attempt to create the image and pretend that only one organisation was
involved in the violence which was visited on not just the people of
KwaZulu-Natal, but on the people of Gauteng and other areas, is absolutely
dishonest and untrue. Therefore I would say that what must be done is that
we should look at a wide range of historical sources and tell the political
truth in South Africa.

I also want to say that we wish hon De Lille well. We hope she spends less
time on the streets and more delivering to the poor, as she promised in her
statement last week. We were a little surprised that she has not joined the
benches of the party whose card she so bravely held high at her recent
conference. But, we understand hon De Lille’s embarrassment in that regard,
and we do wish her well.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Speaker, on a point of order: The hon
member shows an embarrassing lack of knowledge of the Rules of this House.

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Speaker, I think that hon member is
the last one to tell me about the Rules of this House, since I was party to
its writing. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Order, hon members! Order!

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Furthermore, the hon Chief Whip – I
understand he is the Chief Whip of the largest opposition party – certainly
does know that the hon member of his party joined his party a few weeks
ago. Therefore I don’t know why he has to deny this.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Speaker, the member should know that the
Rules of this House do not permit that party to join this party in this
House at this point in time. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: It is possible that the hon Chief
Whip of the largest opposition party does not understand the distinction
between member and party. I referred to a member joining the party to which
he belongs. [Applause.] [Laughter.] But we understand his difficulty.

I do not recall from the committee meeting that discussed the arms deal
that there was any reference to a politician by the persons that were
making statements in that committee meeting. There is, of course, always an
attempt to try to hang this on the ANC. Perhaps the hon member who made the
statement on behalf of Cope – since she was a member of the party at the
time – may know more than some of us, but there is no member of the ANC
that is a beneficiary of this particular deal. Therefore we do not
understand why there is a continual attempt to keep this going.

We also negotiated in absolute good faith during the negotiations on
salaries. We made the best offer that government is able to make in terms
of the resources available to it and we hope that once the 21 days’
suspension is over, we will have signature to what we think is a very good
offer for public servants and workers in the Public Service domain. If the
hon member of Cope disagrees that this is a good offer, perhaps he’s in the
wrong place and should be assisting the workers and government to secure
something even better. Thank you.

Mr M J ELLIS: Speaker, I wonder if I could appeal to you, Sir, to try and
make sure that more Cabinet Ministers attend the meetings so that we don’t
have to have this diatribe from the hon Pandor every time on behalf of a
wide range of Ministers. Really, that was atrocious! [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, that is not a point of order.

    MRS PATRICIA DE LILLE ON HER RETIREMENT FROM PARLIAMENT AND ARMS DEAL
                    DEATH OF IFP MEMBERS DURING STRUGGLE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Hon Speaker, I would like to wish hon De
Lille well and link that to the IFP’s statement about the ANC’s desire to
do away with the opposition. The national democratic revolution has nothing
to do with opposition parties. It really has everything to do with
democracy, improving the material conditions of our people, pushing back
the frontiers of poverty, making sure that the conditions of our people are
better than they were during the apartheid days, and a prosperous South
Africa. But the opposition will die ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: There is normally only one
response to a particular statement. [Interjections.] I can’t remember
whether the hon Pandor did, in fact, address this point already. Therefore
the hon Nkosazana Zuma is out of order in responding again to this
particular matter.

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: She didn’t.

The SPEAKER: No, hon member. Continue, hon Minister. [Interjections.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: But ...

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, are you satisfied, sir, that ... [Interjections.]


The SPEAKER: I am satisfied. Thank you very much.

Mr M J ELLIS: I find that difficult, sir, because she covered so many
points ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, please take your seat. Shall we continue?

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: Yes. The opposition ...

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: I
apologise to my colleague. But, Speaker, I think you should have
understanding for the hon Ellis; I noticed he walked in with crutches.
[Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, please. I really want us to conclude this session
today. [Interjections.]

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: With
great respect to my ... the hon ... Is it a Minister over there? I think
that’s out of order. To refer to somebody’s disability in that way ...
[Laughter.] ... I think it’s totally out of order. [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: I think the point is well made. We must treat people with
disabilities with respect. [Laughter.]

The MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS: I think the demise of the opposition has
nothing to do with the ANC, but has everything to do with the opposition
itself. As we have seen, the hon Patricia de Lille has decided to get
married and go to some place, running away from the opposition. We see
what’s going on in the other parties. This will, indeed, kill the
opposition because they have no vision for this country. They have no
vision for this country and all they are doing is to fight among
themselves. Thank you.

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, on a point of order: The hon
Minister said that the Opposition is diminishing, and Patricia de Lille is
getting married and going somewhere else other than ...

The SPEAKER: Marriage has nothing to do with a point of order, hon member
... [Laughter.]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: My point of order, hon Speaker, is that if
the hon Minister is honest with this House, she will tell the House that
the ranks of the opposition have burgeoned since the last election. It’s
the ANC that’s diminishing, not the opposition. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: That’s a point of information, not a point of order. Order,
hon Ministers, and Members of Parliament. [Laughter.]

                             WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
                       HOUSING DELIVERY IN URBAN AREAS

                            (Minister’s Response)
The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Thank you, Speaker ...
Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, on a point of order, sir: I don’t know what the
hon Deputy ...

The SPEAKER: You don’t know; why don’t you listen first? [Laughter.] Please
take your seat. [Interjections.]

Mr M J ELLIS: I have no doubt, the hon ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member Ellis, please take your seat.

Mr M J ELLIS: ... but the hon Pandor has covered it already, I can assure
you. [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Please take your seat. Hon Minister, you have my protection.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS: Thank you, Speaker, for the
protection. I want to thank hon member Selau for the statement on the North
West women volunteers. Those women built 54 houses. This is part of Women’s
Build in terms of the Human Settlements department. We have both the
Women’s Build and the Youth Build. The approach is to empower women and
youth as we build houses.

We have also said that 10% of our budget – now it’s 30% of our budget –
should go to women contractors. We applaud those women who went out there
and built during Women’s Month, August. In that spirit I also want to thank
the MEC of the North West who worked hard to ensure that that programme is
a success.

Speaker, also allow me to thank hon member Matshoba regarding his statement
on the issue of Human Settlements and the Housing Development Agency. I
just want to say that it is true that our establishment of the Housing
Development Agency has assisted Human Settlements with regard to
acquisition of well-located land. This helps us in building the gap housing
which is the rental stock, as well as contractor-driven Breaking New Ground
houses. But, at the same time, we promote the people’s housing process to
ensure that women build their own houses because we understand that if
people build their own houses, there will be less sale of houses. I thank
you.

                INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON YOUTH DEVELOPMENT

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Speaker, I
would like to thank the hon member Kubayi for the statement she made on the
International Youth Conference. I was honoured to lead the government
delegation to the World Youth Conference held in Mexico from 24 to 27
August. That conference brought together the government, nongovernmental
organisations and parliamentarians to discuss burning issues of youth
development in the world today. In particular, it looked at the millennium
development goals and how they relate to the youth with a view to making an
input at the United Nations General Assembly when it meets later in
September.

We focused on issues of particular concern to youth such as health,
education and job creation, and we hope that those deliberations are going
to guide the UN General Assembly. The significance is that this gathering
took place in the second international year of youth, the first one having
taken place in 1985 when the youth of South Africa were at the forefront
fighting for democracy.

As South Africa, we put forward a number of demands and needs in that
meeting relating to the establishment of the UN Youth Fund to start a
process leading to a UN Convention on the Rights of Youth. In that, we were
echoing the words of the late president of the ANC Oliver Tambo when he
said that “a nation, a movement, a people that does not value its youth
does not deserve its future”.

In conclusion, Speaker, we look forward to welcoming tens of thousands of
young people to South Africa from 13 to 21 December when the World
Federation of Democratic Youth hosts the 17th World Festival of Youth and
Students. I thank you. [Applause.]

                    FEMALE ENTREPRENEUR OF THE YEAR AWARD
                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND LAND REFORM: Hon Speaker, I
want to take this opportunity to welcome the statement by the hon Ngwenya-
Mabila on congratulating Ms Mathabatha on her selection as the Female
Entrepreneur of the Year. From our department, we welcome all initiatives
that are aimed at mobilising natural resources, especially the utilisation
of land for the improvement of the quality of life of people, especially
rural people.

We see our duty, as the department, more as being to support initiatives
such as that of Ms Mathabatha. We will continue to work with community
leaders, businesses and local and provincial authorities to identify people
like Ms Mathabatha in their effort to contribute towards a better life for
our people, especially those in rural areas. We see this as the practical
implementation of our motto that together we can do more. Thank you, hon
Speaker. [Applause.]


        CONSIDERATION OF REPORT OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND
   CONSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT - RECONSIDERATION OF NOMINATION OF ADV L K B
            MPUMLWANA AS SOUTH AFRICAN HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSIONER

Order disposed of without debate.
The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

 CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR NOMINATION OF PERSONS FOR APPOINTMENT TO SOUTH
      AFRICAN HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION IN TERMS OF SECTION 193(5) OF THE
                                CONSTITUTION

Ms M SMUTS: Mr Speaker, the DA asks the National Assembly to nominate Dr
Gladstone Sandi Baai as a member of the Human Rights Commission. Dr Baai is
a PhD: Philosophy (Durham), who played a leading role in establishing
ethics guidelines in the Public Service for more than a decade after the
adoption of the final Constitution. He served as Director of Professional
Ethics at the office of the Public Service Commission, the Chapter 10
institution. We would like to send him now to a Chapter 9 institution, the
SA Human Rights Commission, SAHRC, where, in our view, his skills in
developing the monitoring of the code - which he himself develop-and in
research makes him a good choice for functions such as the Human Rights
Commission’s special constitutional duty of holding government’s
departments to account for the implementation of the socioeconomic rights.
Among the many books that he authored and co-authored is a title called
Snatching Bread from the Mouth of the Poor: Ethics and Corruption, which I
rather think says it all.

May I say that Dr Baai struck me as a person of substance; human rights
commissioners must be such persons. Their entire impact and effect on
society rests on the moral authority they bring to bear, because they can
make no binding orders, they are not a court of law. They command and
exercise moral suasion – as the previous commission under Jody Kollapen,
Leon Wessels, Karthy Govender and a few others so successfully did – they
command moral suasion or nothing at all.

We therefore need Dr Baai. It is notable that a person specialising in
ethics takes the place of a person who you were asked to appoint last year,
until Cope drew to our attention, rather late in the day and moreover
erroneously as to exact fact, that Adv Mpulwana, who was the subject of the
motion we have just adopted, had been discharged from the employ of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, TRC.

Thanks to the intercession of a concerned citizen in the Eastern Cape, the
true facts and the actual High Court judgment in the matter between the TRC
vs Adv Mpulwana were provided to me, and therefore to the Portfolio
Committee on Justice. We gave the appropriate opportunity for a hearing.
We are bound, as is this House, by the unchallenged judgment of the High
Court that the advocate by his nondisclosure of his employment at that time
in the Eastern Cape Provincial Administration fraudulently misrepresented
to the TRC his fitness and propriety.

May I use this opportunity, Sir, to urge party spokespersons to present
shortlists for appointment to their caucuses well before the final decision
needs ratification, because, although we are indebted to the hon Adams for
raising the issue in however lacking a manner, it was brought very late.
This is not the first time, in respect of a Chapter 9 institution, that
inappropriate persons have in fact been selected when party caucus members,
who had insight or experience, could have averted such choices.
Unfortunately, it has happened before. In this case I imagine the hon
Thozamile Botha may have had something to do with our colleague the hon
Adams’s warning, but it came only when we were asking the House to vote on
a finally negotiated and agreed upon list. At least Cope has helped: in
other cases, it was too late and the consequences which duly unfolded were
unfortunately predictable.

So, we thank the House for the adoption of the previous motion for sending
this back to us at Justice and we ask the House to vote for Dr Gladstone
Sandi Baai. [Applause.]

Mr N J J KOORNHOF: Mr Speaker, to the hon Smuts, it was late but it worked.
It is now common knowledge that Adv Mpumlwana was expelled by the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, TRC, after a disciplinary inquiry and,
therefore, we are now debating this new appointment of Dr Gladstone Sandi
Baai today.

The ANC must be congratulated for not sweeping this under the carpet or
covering it up. This is a good example, even late, where a debate in the
House has played a positive role - a rare example. Let us all gathered here
today realise that one’s speech in a debate can make a difference. It
happened in this case.

Honesty and integrity must always be the prerequisite if you want to be a
custodian of human rights. It was wrong for the committee to appoint a
wrong candidate at the beginning. I don’t know why it happened. I was not
part of that committee. Dr Gladstone Sandi Baai was, at that time, the
correct candidate and still is now, in front of this House, the correct
one.

The point is that the SA Human Rights Commission is not there to protect
government or to declare their decisions invalid. It must promote and
protect the human rights of ordinary people. Therefore, commissioners
should be there with the right credentials, and not because they have the
right political connections. Cope will support the appointment of Dr
Gladstone Sandi Baai and we wish him well in this new job.
Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr Speaker, I think what had to be said has been
said. I would just like to add a notation in my two minutes - that politics
is an alternation between co-operation and competition. What we have seen
in the Justice Committee – not just on this occasion, but even on prior
occasions – is the prevalence of co-operation.

We started with candidates who were not consensus candidates, but
controversial candidates. We have now completed this process with somebody
who is a consensus candidate. I think a great deal of this is due to the
wise leadership of hon Ramatlhodi who has created a climate in which like-
minded people can work in the committee in the interest of the country,
setting aside political differences.

The other thing which I think needs to be raised is that this is a decision
that has just been made by Parliament, in Parliament, by the members of the
committee. I think it is significant and bodes well for how similar
processes can strengthen the supremacy of Parliament. Thank you.

Mr M S SHILOWA: Speaker, on a point of order: Taking into account the
advice that hon Stofile gave to Peter de Villiers, isn’t the member better
speaking in Italian?

The SPEAKER: Hon member, that is not a point of order. Please, hon members,
let us try to be serious from time to time. I know it is difficult to do it
all the time, but at least from time to time.

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Mr Speaker, hon members, the matter of filling the
vacancies that has arisen at the SA Human Rights Commission should have
been relative. Unfortunately, the committee discovered after it had
conducted interviews and supported the nomination of Adv Mpumlwana that
there were issues which had not been brought to its attention. The
committee was obliged to reconsider the matter and, after careful
consideration, the committee has withdrawn its support for that nominee.

A consideration of those persons previously interviewed has resulted in the
committee recommending the nomination of Dr Gladstone Sandi Baai for the
vacancy. The UDM supports the committee’s report. Thank you.

Mr S N SWART: Speaker, the ACDP also supports the recommendation that Dr
Sandi Baai be recommended for appointment as a commissioner to the Human
Rights Commission. He has a very impressive CV. He was involved in a lot of
missionary work and played a leading role in promoting sound ethics in the
Public Service Commission. He will undoubtedly add considerable value to
the commission.

That having been said, the ACDP would also like to highlight the need for
the appointment of additional commissioners to handle the ever-increasing
load of the commission. Let us bear in mind that the ad hoc committee on
the review of Chapter 9 institutions stated that “the appointment of only
five commissioners to an institution with as broad a mandate as that of the
Human Rights Commission is deeply problematic and wholly inadequate”.

So, whilst there are additional part-time commissioners, the ACDP shares
the view that at least two additional full-time commissioners should be
appointed. We trust that the office on institutions supporting democracy as
well as the Justice portfolio committee will look into this matter as a
matter of urgency, considering that the ad hoc committee made its
recommendation three years ago. Thank you.

Mr N A RAMATLHODI: Hon Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to extend
my deep gratitude to members of my committee for their collaborative work,
and I would also like to thank members particularly for working together in
seeking to advance the interest of our people, which is in South Africa’s
national interest.

Criticism has been levelled against us, which I humbly accept. Even in our
caucus, where we should have done a bit more research before we made the
decision that we arrived at. In our caucus, I suggested that we could have
just as easily googled it using modern technology and maybe found out that
there were things that we needed to have known, which we didn’t know.

What was fatal to the recommendation that we made earlier was the fact of
nondisclosure. We did not get involved with the merits or demerits of the
case. We were basically interested in disclosure because that had not
happened. We felt that we did not have a choice but to recommend to this
Parliament the withdrawal of the recommendation.

The ANC supports Dr S Baai, as the candidate who came out second best in
our interviews. He is the son of Xhosa people from the Eastern Cape and a
highly gifted intellectual. He comes from the poorest of the poor. He will
bring all those skills and temperament into the job of Commissioner of the
SA Human Rights Commission. He is highly recommended and I wish to use this
opportunity to urge the House to support this candidate.

We are interested in ensuring that the Chapter 9 institutions are
strengthened in whatever way possible. It is my view that we should not try
and localise them only to ourselves as the Justice committee. If there are
additional measures that can be taken by Parliament to reinforce our input
into our capabilities of these Chapter 9 institutions – personally, I have
no problem with it and I am very easy with that.
For instance, the suggestion that came from Professor Asmal’s
recommendations, the involvement of the Deputy Speaker, in reinforcing the
Chapter 9 institutions, makes a lot of sense to me. So, we should not hold
on to boundaries as a leadership and say this belongs to me; that belongs
to me. These institutions belong to Parliament and we must make sure that
whatever additional resources we can put into them we should do without
being led to failure. I thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Question  put:  That  the  nomination  of  Dr  Gladstone  Sandi   Baai   for
appointment as Commissioner on the South African Human Rights Commission  be
approved.

The Speaker announced that, due to the  failure  of  the  electronic  voting
system, the Whips would conduct a head count of members for the  purpose  of
ascertaining support for the nomination.
AYES - 254 (ANC - 180, DA - 46, COPE - 14, IFP - 6, ID - 1, UDM - 2, ACDP  -
2, PAC - 1, MF - 1, AZAPO - 1).

Question agreed to.

Nomination of Dr Gladstone Sandi Baai for  appointment  as  Commissioner  on
the  South  African  Human  Rights  Commission  accordingly  agreed  to,  in
accordance with section 193(5)(b)(ii) of the Constitution.

The SPEAKER: Also to add, just for the record: There is a precedent for
voting when the electoral system is not working. Towards the end of
September the electronic voting system in the National Assembly became
dysfunctional. On 25 September, at their regular weekly meeting, the Chief
Whips’ Forum agreed to a proposal to use a manual voting procedure. So this
is quite in order. Also, hon Mlangeni, you were right, everybody’s thing
was not working and so we didn’t believe you. But now we do. [Applause.]
Thank you very much.

                        TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (First Reading debate)

   VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE PROGRAMME AND TAXATION LAWS SECOND AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

Gqr Z LUYENGE: Somlomo, Sekela-Mongameli, Baphathiswa, malungu ale Ndlu,
ndimi apha egameni lombutho wesizwe ndiza kuphosa ndigibisela malunga
noMthetho woXabangelo ojengene nerhafu. Ndiqwalasele ke ngqo kuluntu
nakugcino-mali, imisebenzi kunye noshishino. Mandigawule ndiwarhuqa ke
ngenxa yexesha.

Lo Mthetho uYilwayo weRhafu wathunyelwa kule komiti ijongene nezimali
ukufumana izimvo zoluntu ngoMeyi kulo nyaka umiyo. Siyile komiti ke
sabulela ngokungazenzisiyo kubo bonke abathabatha inxaxheba ngokusinika
izimvo zabo ngalo Mthetho uYilwayo. Ngokunjalo, sabulela ngokungazenzisiyo
kuMphathiswa, uNongxowa weli lizwe, umfo ka Gordhan, kunye nabasebenzi be-
ofisi yakhe nakubaqokeleli berhafu, i-SA Revenue Service, Sars, ngomsebenzi
omkhulu abawenzileyo ngokusinika iimpendulo ezicace gca okwekati emhlophe
ehlungwini kwimibono esiyifumene ngexesha lofuno-zimvo zoluntu. Ezi
mpendulo ziye zasincedisa ekubeni sikwazi ukuthethisana saza safikelela
ekugqibeleni kwalo mcimbi singawo namhlaje.

Singombutho we-ANC ke sibona kufanelekile ukuba siwuxhase lo Mthetho
uYilwayo, kuba ubaluleke kakhulu ukuze siqhubeke nokutshintsha isebe lethu
lezerhafu. Olu tshintsho luza kusincedisa sikwazi ukuqinisa ezorhwebo
jikelele nokuxhasa siphinde siqinise ukukhula kwezophuhliso kwixesha
elizayo. Oku sikwenzela ukuba sikhulise irhafu yesizwe siphinde sijonge
nezinye iindlela zokukhulisa ingxowa yesizwe, mfo kaTrollip.

Sithethisana ke ngalo olu tshintsho lwerhafu, masikhumbule ukuba siqala
inyanga apho sibhiyozela khona amasiko nenkcubeko yethu. Isihloko salo
nyaka ke nje ngoko nisazi sithi: Living out the values of a just and caring
society. Esi sihloko salo nyaka sivumelana notshintsho lwerhafu
lwanamhlanje. Akubonakali ke ukuba singakwazi ukuba sakhe ithemba lesizwe
esikhathalelanayo ngaphandle kwendlela elungileyo yoqokelelo lwerhafu.
Ubuntu bethu njengabantu besizwe sama-Afrika buthi masikhathalelane.
Busifundisa le nto yokuba umntu mgumntu ngomnye umntu. Ngoko ke
kubalulekile ukuba sisisizwe esikhulayo sakhele phezu kweziseko
zokukhathalelana. Kubalulekile ke ukuba singabahlali sivuselelane siphinde
sibambisane ukwakha ilizwe lethu. Le nto ke ibonakaliswe kukuzimisela
ekuhlawuleni iirhafu kwabantu bakuthi ngexesha elililo. (Translation of
isiXhosa paragraphs follows.)

[Dr Z LUYENGE: Hon Speaker, hon Deputy President, Ministers, members of
this House, I am standing here on behalf of the people’s party, and I shall
comment regarding the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill. I am focussing directly
on the public and savings, jobs and industry. Let me briefly continue
because of time constraints.

This Bill on taxation laws was sent to the committee dealing with finances
in order to get public opinion in May this year. As members of this
committee we were very grateful to all those who participated by giving us
their opinions regarding this Bill. In addition, we were very grateful to
the Minister, who is the national treasurer, Mr Gordhan, and the employees
in his office and tax collectors, Sars, for the diligent work they have
done, which is to provide us with crystal clear answers regarding the
opinions we received during the public hearings. These answers helped us to
deliberate and eventually finalise this issue we are discussing today.

The ANC deems it right to support this Bill, because it is very important
and will allow us to proceed with the transformation of our tax laws. This
transformation will not only help us to strengthen trade in general, but
also to increase development in future. We are doing this in order to
increase the national tax coffers and we are also looking at various ways
to boost those, Mr Trollip.

Whilst addressing transformation in taxation laws, let us remember that we
are at the beginning of the month in which we celebrate our traditions and
culture. The theme, as you know, for this year’s celebrations is: Living
out the values of a just and caring society. This year’s theme is in line
with the transformation of tax laws happening nowadays. Therefore, we
cannot build the hope of a caring nation without the effective collection
of taxes. Ubuntu, as an African nation, requires us to care for each other.
Ubuntu inculcates the value that I am because you are. It is important,
therefore, that as a developing nation we build upon a caring foundation.
It is important that, as a community we motivate one another and work
together to build our country. This has been shown by the commitment of our
people to paying their taxes in time.]

Among other aspects that the Bill addresses, are those which contribute
towards the economic growth value chain such as individual and business
taxpayers, savings mechanisms and employment. These will have to be
welcomed and commended as they will both directly and indirectly contribute
towards the achievement of our priority goals as the ANC, in particular,
the creation of decent work and sustainable livelihoods. The ANC views tax
evasion and avoidance, not only as a crime, but also as a basis of building
a culture of corruption in our society.

In the main, the Bill’s proposal seeks to tighten the rules relating to
employer-provided motor vehicles with the aim of preventing tax arbitrage;
promote uniformity and avoid duplication in the implementation of the
retirement and pre-retirement withdrawal benefits by making the employer-
provided lump sum termination payout part of the tax preferred calculation;
tighten the deduction criteria for key insurance plans, which are commonly
funded by employers, in order to eliminate tax avoidance by expanding the
deduction allowance for insurance policies that act as commercial
collateral or payment to third party business creditors; narrow the
permissible instruments in the implementation of the interest exemption
threshold and review its effectiveness as an incentive intended to promote
savings by middle- and lower-income households.

It also seeks to place certain Shari’a compliant products such as Murabaha
and Diminishing Musharaka on an equal tax footing with conventional finance
products; as well as to close the loopholes relating to financial
institutions that are deducting beyond what should be equitably allowed to
the basic tax principles when implementing laws dealing with interest
expense allocations.

It is also to the credit of our democratic parliamentary processes that a
number of changes have been made to some of these original proposals as a
result of the comments and inputs received during the public hearings.

Due to the following responses from the Ministry and Sars, changes were
made to the draft legislation in the following areas: employer-provided
motor vehicles; narrowing of the interest exemption threshold; interest
expense allocation; as well as the termination of the residential entities.

The original proposals on the narrowing of the interest rate exemption
threshold and the anti-avoidance amendment relating to the interest expense
allocation have both been withdrawn. This is as a result of consideration
of the motivations from the public comments received by the committee. The
acceptance of these comments and inputs from the public, and effecting
changes, as a result, shows that indeed we are a people-centred Parliament
and that we take our democratic processes seriously.

Allow me to conclude by saying that it is also important to note the
enormous benefits that the proposals contained in this Bill will bring to
individual taxpayers, business and the economy as a whole. In particular,
we are happy that the proposal to promote uniformity and avoid duplication
in the implementation of the retirement and pre-retirement withdrawal
pension benefit has been concluded. This will ensure that the employer-
provided lump sum termination payout forms part of the tax preferred
calculation. This will benefit those who are faced with retrenchment. It
will be extra relief for these workers as it has the potential to bring
extra needed cash in hand to cater for their immediate economic needs.

Our historic trend in tax collection over the last few years has been the
lowering of personal taxes, bringing relief to low-income groups, whilst at
the same time managing to broaden our tax base through better collection
methods. Credit in this regard has to go to the Ministry of Finance under
the leadership of hon Minister Pravin Gordhan and the SA Revenue Service
for continuously improving tax collection in this country.

Mandiyicacise ke le nto ithi olu xabangelo luqondene ngqo nabantu bakuthi
abangathathi ntweni ngoba lo rhulumente siwuthathe kwizirhulumente
ezingaphambili ezazingahoyanga mntu. Ukuba ungajonga, abantu abaza kuthi
bafumane apha ngabona bantu bangathathi ntweni. Abona bantu baza kuxhamla,
xa unokujonga umise umnqwazi womsuthu kakuhle, aph’ ezantsi ngabona bantu
baza kufumana kakhulu. Ukuya phaya phezulu kwaba banezinto iye inzuzo
isibancinane, ngoba irhafu iye ifudumala ngokuya unyuka.

Uthi ke lo Mthetho uYilwayo kwaba bantu bangathi bafumane udendo - nokuba
lungenzeka kusasa - ukuba nje ukhe wapasiswa, oza kufumana isambuku-mali
sama-R300 000 uyifumana nje felefele kungatsalwanga nesenti ngurhulumemente
okhokelwa yi-ANC. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Kanti xa uqala apha kulamakhulu ama-
R301 000 uye kuma-R600 000 abo ngabo noko ngathi bafudumele, bona ke bathi
barhume i-18 lee pesenti, nto leyo ibingaqhelekanga. Yayingabonabona
babulaleka kakhulu. Loo nto ithethe ukuba, Mphathiswa uPandor, siza
kubaleka ngezantya singamalungu ale Ndlu siqhwaba izandla sisithi zange
siwubone uMthetho–sihlomelo oYilwayo othandwa ngumntu wonke ngokungathi
yimali, ngoba ungemali.

Sivene namaqela aphikisayo kulaa komiti ukuba lo umthetho ufike ngelona-
lona xesha lilungiselelwe ukuba kulungiselelwe abantu bakuthi yile
Palamente ekhululeke neyenza umsebenzi ngendlela ephum’ izandla. Manditsho
ke ndithi maz’ enethole. [Kwaqwatywa.] (Translation of isiXhosa paragraphs
follows.)
[Let me explain clearly that this amendment is directed at our people, who
are very poor because this government took over from previous governments
who did not care for anyone. If you consider the Bill carefully you will
discover that the people who benefit are the poor people. The low-income
groups are the people who will benefit. The benefits are reduced as you go
higher in the income brackets, but the tax increases.

This Bill is saying to those people who are about to be retrenched - even
if it is done tomorrow – if the Bill is passed: To those who will be
getting a lump sum, it will not be liable for tax. The ANC-led government
will not deduct a cent from that payout. [Applause.] However, if you are
getting from R301 000 to R600 000, those who are well off, will contribute
18%, which is something unusual. These used to be the ones who were
suffering because of tax burden. This means, hon Minister Pandor, as
members of the this House, we are going to jump and applaud, saying we have
never experienced an amending Bill that is as popular with everyone as
money, because it is about money.

We agreed with the opposition parties in the committee that this Act is
promulgated at the right time for this liberated Parliament; that is
working effectively, to provide for our people. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Dr D T GEORGE: Chairperson, when the Minister of Finance tabled the
Taxation Laws Amendment Bill in this House, he remarked that nobody seemed
to be listening to his presentation. His observation points to the reality
that many are disinterested in taxation laws because they do not find them
to be particularly exciting or easy to understand.

Taxation is, however, the single largest intervention that a government can
make in an economy. Tax policy influences economic behaviour, directs
scarce financial resources from one part of an economy to another, and has
a significant impact on the lives of the people who rely on the tax
redistribution system to improve their circumstances.

The taxation laws before us give effect to the revenue proposals announced
in the February 2010 Budget and amend 13 different Acts. When the former
President signed the Money Bills Amendment and Related Matters Act into law
in April last year, the budget process changed significantly.

Parliament now first approves a fiscal framework and revenue proposals,
then the tax laws are drafted and a process of public consultation is
activated. In theory, Parliament can amend the proposed tax laws before
they are enacted. The problem, however, is that the fiscal framework has
already been approved and any substantial deviation from revenue proposals
could affect national income and thus change the variables on the fiscal
framework. To avoid this, taxation amendments should be considered before
the fiscal framework is approved.

The Money Bills Amendment and Related Matters Act was passed after several
years in the making to provide Parliament with an opportunity to
demonstrate that it is, in fact, an active Parliament and that it will
exercise its power to amend the proposed Budget to the benefit of all South
Africans.

Almost a year and a half after the enabling legislation was enacted, the
parliamentary budget office is still not established. On 17 August 2010 the
Chief Whip of the DA wrote to the Speaker requesting a meeting to discuss
progress on the establishment of the office. The Speaker responded that a
report from the team tasked with implementing the Act would be tabled in
Parliament within two weeks. Those two weeks have passed.

Although the parliamentary budget office is an important support mechanism
for Parliament in its amendment of money Bills, the work of Parliament does
not need to be delayed in its absence. The chairman of the Standing
Committee on Finance, hon Mufamadi, has initiated a process to place the
matter of the VAT treatment of books on the committee agenda so that it can
consider whether a formal request will be made to National Treasury to
include a zero rating in its development of the budget for the next
financial year.

We welcome this development and thank the chairman for progressing this
matter that will have a significant and positive impact on improving access
to reading material for all South Africans, especially young readers whose
thirst for knowledge is severely hampered by empty school library
bookshelves and students who are subsidised to study and yet pay tax on the
prescribed books that they need to purchase to ensure success in their
examinations and ultimate qualification. The DA looks forward to progress
on this in the near future.

The DA also welcomes the voluntary disclosure programme that will run from
1 November 2010 to 31 October 2011 to grant relief to taxpayers who
disclose defaults which the SA Revenue Service was not aware of. This will
ensure that errant taxpayers are permitted to return to their respectable
position within the tax net. An opportunity also arises for the so-called
informal economy to be included in the calculation of the size of our
economy and to contribute to the society that generates its income.

The 2009 tax statistics reveal that 5,5 million individual taxpayers, from
a total population fast approaching 50 million, contributed 31,2% of tax
revenue. This is a significant contribution by a relatively small portion
of our population.
The DA does not welcome the increase in the general fuel levy and the one
for the Road Accident Fund. We believe that government should not be
increasing the tax burden when it has not made any significant progress in
plugging the gaping holes in the application of the people’s money. The
procurement process is highly inefficient at best, and at worst riddled
with corruption. The tender default register remains empty and we await
progress following the preliminary report on 27 October 2009 of the
government task team to affect saving.

We also await progress on the implementation of the wage subsidy, the
introduction of a poverty line index, progress on reducing the size of the
administration bureaucracy and increasing the number of teachers, nurses
and policemen who serve at the coalface of service delivery. The recent
public sector strike, currently on hold, demonstrated the wide disparities
in compensation between different classes of public servants.

The taxation laws include a number of amendments to tax on individuals,
including partial compensation for fiscal drag. The DA believes that it is
possible to offer taxpayers more comprehensive relief from the impact of
inflation on their disposable income and greater incentives to save through
higher tax-free thresholds on interest-bearing cash investments.

The DA supports the ideal of a lower carbon footprint and believes that
incentives are required to encourage economic behaviour which is beneficial
to our environment. Our concern that the flat rate carbon emission tax on
new vehicles was implemented in isolation from a broader strategy to lower
the carbon emissions from all sources in our economy has been addressed.
Given that consumers do have a choice to purchase lower emission vehicles,
we do not oppose the tax and believe that it will encourage the desired
consumer behaviour.

Some motor dealers have falsely advertised that the tax is applicable to
all new passenger vehicles to boost their sales. New passenger vehicles
that emit less than 120g per kilometre will not be subject to the tax.
Although measures have been taken to counter tax arbitrage facilitated
through transfer pricing, this risk will always exist while our corporate
tax regime is higher than that offered in other more attractive
jurisdictions.

Although participation in a race to the bottom in terms of corporate tax is
not constructive, National Treasury should continually work towards a lower
tax regime that will attract taxpayers into our tax net. The micro business
turnover tax should be redesigned, given that it has proved to be
unattractive to its target market.

The committee has raised with National Treasury our concern that the tax
laws are becoming increasingly complex and complicated and that their
simplification should be considered. Treasury has responded that
improvements are being made where possible, but that oversimplification can
result in unintended distortions to the detriment of particular taxpayers.

The DA remains convinced that a tax commission is required to formally
consider how a suitable balance between simplicity and comprehensiveness
can be achieved, and we look forward to the result. There was broad
consultation during the parliamentary hearings and the willingness of the
National Treasury to interact with various stakeholders is noted with
thanks. The DA will support the Bills.

Mr N J J KOORNHOF: Speaker, the proposed Bills will not only provide
personal income tax relief, but will also close various tax loopholes to
ensure a more equitable tax system. The big question is: Is this the end of
the road of tax relief? Is next year going to be different? A few options
spring to mind. We can see maybe even higher fuel levies ...

The SPEAKER: Hon members, order please. You are speaking too loudly now.

Mr N J J KOORNHOF: We can see higher fuel levies next year. We in Cope want
to urge, if that is on the cards, that Treasury starts building into their
future plans a higher fuel levy for a conditional grant to provinces to
take care of regional roads. A good road infrastructure is vital for
economic growth.

The other option is a range of new taxes. Are we preparing for a new Tobin
tax next year? Maybe the Minister can say something about this. This debate
today is against the background of a severe public sector strike. It was Mr
Vavi who has reminded us that, since the economic downturn in 2008, we have
lost over 1 million jobs and that we still have the highest inequality of
any middle-income country in the world. Both these reasons do not justify
the strike, but show how absurd it was.

When companies see revenues plunge and wages rise, they cut jobs. In 2009
Anglo Platinum agreed to a 9,5% wage hike, but immediately shed 15 000
jobs. The public sector is no different. Last year we saw an 11% increase
and therefore 35 000 jobs were not created. So, an out of control public
sector wage bill is bad news for fiscal discipline. If you do not start
shedding jobs, or cutting infrastructure spending, or raising taxes, or
introducing new ones, what do you do? The best way out is to see economic
growth. Even if you have to shed jobs, you will see more revenue for the
state. So, what we need in these difficult times is patience, a sustainable
and well-anchored fiscal and monetary policy.
So Cope wishes Sars all the best in collecting their due taxes and call on
all South Africans to make use of the instruments created today to come
clean and pay their due taxes. We shall support the legislation.
[Applause.]

Mr M G ORIANI-AMBROSINI: Mr Speaker, this complex legislation, like all
complex legislation, has good features, less than good features and some
features which are less than acceptable. I will limit my comments to
echoing a couple of statements made by the hon George.

The first one is that during the process in which we have been involved, we
witnessed much rather than participated in it. There was an exchange
between highly-paid consultants representing the top layers of the economic
system on the one side, and the Treasury on the other. What was lacking
within that process was the voice of the common citizen, the voice of the
average taxpayer who is carrying the lion’s share of the fiscal burden.

So, I think that we endorse the proposal of the Tax Commission which places
an emphasis on the representation of ordinary citizens, over and above what
we Members of Parliament can provide in what are often extremely technical
debates.

The second issue, which needs to be brought about as soon as possible, as
the hon George indicated, is the budget office. There is no reason why it
should not be there. We have delayed the enactment of legislation which
enables us to amend money Bills for many many years. This is a necessary
instrument to bring the democratic process to completion and it needs to be
done.

The other suggestion, Minister, please, is for a composite text. Tax
amendments are pounding one another. We have got bis, tres, quatres,
quinques, septes of the sections. I understand that within the Treasury
they are actually using a composite text. It would be nice to re-enact the
law, because I understand that there are even doubts on what the law is,
and there are differences between what Butterworths is publishing and what
others are publishing. So, certainty on the tax law this is an imperative.

Another issue, Minister, is that we tried to close loopholes, but I think
that a great deal of damage has been done in terms of simplicity.
Complexity has been increased. On the issue of the headquarters of foreign
companies, for instance, the system has become so hard to understand that
we may have created a tax disincentive for foreign companies placing their
headquarters in South Africa rather than in Botswana, where they are
currently doing it for no other reason than the fact that the tax system is
simpler.

Personally speaking, carbon tax is not something we can endorse. There is
no proven connection between a carbon tax and its positive effect in
redressing the terrible situation of global warming and climate change. So,
in the end, the carbon tax is another luxury tax by a different name and
will be remembered amongst taxes like the window taxes in England.

The fuel levy is a regressive form of taxation, and I will leave the rest
for another day. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Ms Z S DUBAZANA: Hon Chair, Ministers and Deputy Ministers present, hon
members and comrades, the point of departure for the ANC in approaching
this debate on the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill must start with ANC
policies. The ANC regards the amending Bill as a valuable contribution in
the ongoing reform of the taxation legislation regime.

In 1994, the Reconstruction and Development Programme, commonly known as
the RDP, proposed the reform of the financial sector and ongoing
transformation of the financial system. This RDP proposal was in
recognition of the fact that the ANC government inherited a distorted
financial system. The RDP notes that assets and taxation practices
contributed very little to the development of new sectors of the economy.

This Bill seeks to regulate our tax relationships with foreign countries.
Underpinning this tax relationship is our developmental agenda at home, on
the continent and with the rest of the world. Such a developmental agenda
must inform the nature and the content of the taxation regime and its
impact upon trade. Therefore, in crafting the Bill, consideration has been
given as to where the Industrial Policy Action Plan, Ipap 2, seeks to steer
our trading relations and how this is informed by our new economic growth
path, a subject that we have recently debated in this House.

The Bill will bring about the application of best international practice
and ensure the most modern methods of determining compliance on tax
collection by foreign and domestic companies. At this point in time, the
ANC recognises that our economy is export-led, in the main, with its focus
on raw material and commodities. The Bill recognises this current scenario,
but is crafted in such a manner to allow for further amendment. This will
ensure progress on the new growth path and have future implications on the
taxation regime.

The Bill further seeks to encourage foreign investment. Any tax regime must
be based on a scientific appreciation of the global environment. Within the
context of economic globalisation, we are increasingly conscious of
insistent demands for the free movement of commodities, finance and capital
across the globe. This Bill has, in content, been crafted to appreciate
this reality, one which we will still be engaged with in the longer term.

In this regard, our taxation system is not merely about the creation of a
foreign investor-friendly environment in order to do business. While
recognising the importance of foreign investment, such an approach will
negate the nature of the economy we are trying to build. However, tax
legislation must be informed by the ANC’s policy approach on industrial
strategy, international co-operation and our continental focus.
Importantly, as we enter into a new trade bloc agreement with Brazil,
Russia, India and China, the structure of our tax regime is going to be
critical.

A developmental state ensures that its tax regime speaks to the objectives
of what that state seeks to achieve, both nationally and internationally.
Therefore one of the key focuses of this Bill must be that it seeks to
ensure that both local and foreign investment generate a significant amount
of capital. That capital is then steered in such a manner that it
contributes towards the creation of decent jobs and the reduction of
poverty so as to achieve the national priorities.

The matter of global competitiveness and the nature of the new economic
bloc that we enter into will always pose fundamental questions on how we
structure our taxation regime and for what objective. The ANC does not
enter into this debate on the basis of seeking competitiveness as an end in
itself, but rather how the taxation regime leads to greater equity and
fairness in local and global trade. Greater equity must lead to a better
sharing of basic and natural resources, thus resulting in distribution of
wealth to the poor.

The Bill recognises that we operate in a highly regulated environment
which, globally, seeks to structure a particular outcome, one which the ANC
may not necessarily agree with. Equality, solidarity and sound governance
are principles we strive for, and this must influence how we structure
changes to the tax regime. The complexity that faces a developmental state
such as ours is to ensure that our influence and a more progressive world
outlook are achieved and how this must impact upon the nature and the
structure of our tax regime.

We are deeply conscious that many industrialised countries in Europe and
North America would want to extend their access to the market through a
system of greater tax liberalisation. The ANC believes that the
international tax system needs to be regulated appropriately in order to
protect developing countries and reflect the principles of equity,
solidarity and sound governance that were mentioned earlier on. We, of
course, desire to protect our fiscus through the adoption of new amendments
to the tax regime. These amendments should be viewed in the ongoing
restructuring of our economy, the new growth path and the developmental
state’s capacity to drive economic transformation.

The need for this amending Bill to address certain specifics is reflected
in the tax on cross-border trade finance exemptions, which are defined more
clearly, and interests associated with letters of credit agency. The Bill
seeks to realign the definition of foreign dividends in line with the
international law of the country under which foreign companies are
established. Here, a direct tax credit or a participation exemption is
encouraged. We are conscious that some foreign companies get into an
excessive amount of debt while remaining free from capitalisation
restrictions even when the main operations of the company in question are
contained within a local South African branch.

In this regard, the ANC therefore requests the hon Minister Mr Gordhan and
the Deputy Minister to ensure that transfer pricing is efficiently
implemented and a monitoring tool is designed. Thank you. The ANC supports
the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill. [Time expired.][Applause.]

Mr S N SWART: Chairperson, hon Minister, the ACDP shares concerns expressed
during the Finance Committee’s deliberations that the tax laws are becoming
more and more complex with all the amendments, and that some sort of
consolidation or simplification is required. Although I have studied tax
law, I still find legislation complex, and understand how other MPs, let
alone your normal, average citizens, would also struggle to follow the
amendments.
One of the key issues I do understand relates to tax rates and the
thresholds for individuals. Minister, it is commendable, given the
budgetary constraints, that personal income tax relief amounted to
R6,5 billion, albeit that this relief will basically address inflation and
the fiscal drag.

The ACDP also supports the voluntary disclosure programme and trusts that
defaulting taxpayers will make use of this opportunity to bring their tax
affairs into order. This programme will run from 1 November 2010 to
31 October 2011, with the penalties and some, or all, of the interest being
waived. Sars, as we understand, will also not pursue any criminal
prosecutions during this time.

Minister, as we are dealing with tax issues, would you care to comment on
reports that the budget deficit for the year may be far less than the level
estimated in your February Budget Speech? This is if the current trend of a
23% increase in government revenue between April and July this year
compared to last year continues, which is almost twice the 12,3% growth
projected in your Budget.

On the other hand, we understand that slowing economic growth will also
reduce revenue and the public sector wage increases will no doubt boost
government expenditure. But overall, do you expect the budget deficit to be
less than the projected 6,2% of GDP, or is it still too early to speculate
on this issue? Clearly, if it is less, this would buck the global trend for
increasing budget deficits.

Lastly, hon Minister, the ACDP wishes to commend Sars on tightening up on
revenue collection, and we will support these Bills. I thank you.

Mr D D VAN ROOYEN: Hon Chair, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hon
members as well as officials from Treasury, the Taxation Laws Amendment
Bill deals with, among other issues, payment of royalties by mining
companies. As the beloved movement of South Africans and the pride of
Africans, the African National Congress fully supports the amendments being
proposed in this Bill with regard to refinements to the minerals royalty
legislation.

Notwithstanding the argument suggesting that these amendments are just but
scratching the surface of the economic transformation of our country, the
ANC believes that the introduction of these changes will help to promote
our strategy of minerals beneficiation and thereby, grow the economy. The
changes will also help in establishing co-ordination between the
implementation of the Minerals and Petroleum Resources Royalty Act and
other taxation laws. This co-ordination is important for increasing our tax
base.

Hon Chair, it is our insistence that the proposed changes will ensure that
we expand the reach of tax policy as one of the potential forms of
redistribution mechanisms. Hon members, the concept of royalty in relation
to taxation is defined as a payment to the owners of natural resources such
as minerals and petroleum by the party licensed to extract such. Royalties,
or, as commonly known, resource rent, is paid for the exclusive or
nonexclusive licence granted to the operator to extract the minerals which
they sell for profit.

This debate, therefore, happens at an opportune time in our history when
there is much public debate about our mineral resources, the mining
industry and its ownership, as well as the role of the state. The
difficulties relating to the system of issuing mineral rights licences
experienced by our government is that these rights are open to abuse for a
quick profit in the private sector. This is a fact close to logical
necessity, but also at the centre of this topical issue is the enormous
wealth that can be accrued from such royalties.

Our taxation system classifies royalty as indirect tax. Currently, in
addition to our taxation laws, royalty payments are governed by the
Minerals and Petroleum Resources Royalty Act of 2008. The state holds the
custodianship of our natural resources, including minerals, through the
Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act of 2002. This is important
in the context of royalty because the owners of natural resources are
usually sovereign states.

The policy of the people’s movement, the African National Congress,
articulates that the use of natural resources, including the minerals, must
be undertaken in the interest of sustainable economic development. This
policy has informed one of the priorities of the ANC government, which is
the promotion of industrialisation through, among others, beneficiation.
The ANC policy states:


  Our programme must also deepen the linkages of the mineral sector to the
  national economy through beneficiation of these resources and creating
  supplier service industries around the mineral sector.

The essence of this Bill is to remove any impediments embedded in the
current rules and regulations which act as obstructions to minerals
beneficiation. Royalties are often governed by agreements which may specify
the determination of royalties in relation to the amounts per unit
extracted, or as a percentage of revenue.

Included in the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill are a number of proposals to
refine some of the mineral resources royalty provisions. During the tabling
of the Budget in February this year, the Budget Review indicated that the
Royalty Act has a number of technical anomalies that need correction. These
included, inter alia, issues on how unincorporated joint ventures are to be
treated, how information is to be stored between Sars and the Department of
Mineral Resources, co-ordination with the Income Tax Act as applied within
the context of the Royalty Act, and clarifying the specified conditions of
determination for certain minerals where there is a range of specified
conditions.

Most of the proposals mentioned were further outlined in detail in the
draft Bill submitted to the Standing Committee on Finance in May to
facilitate public hearings. The process of public hearings brought very
important contributions which have enriched the final draft of the Bill.
Most of the comments from the public and experts in the field were accepted
and resulted in changes being made. For this, we must give credit to all
those who gave inputs and to the Ministry for its consideration of the
positive comments that were received.

Credit should also be given to the Standing Committee for the robust
interrogation of the Bill and all the submissions, which was done despite
the existence of the Budget Office. Hon Oriani-Ambrosini, I hope that you
will join the committee in deliberations because it sometimes becomes
difficult for us to follow on your submissions when you make them from this
podium. We have more time in our committee engagements to listen to you
attentively. [Applause.]
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my initial emphasis on the importance of
mineral resources to our economy. We must accept that this Bill takes us a
step further towards the goal of embarking on a new economic growth path
that we have debated in this House, the growth path that is sustainable and
focused on growth and job creation through industrialisation. An important
element of this, as defined in the Industrial Policy Plan, is the
beneficiation of our minerals.

We must therefore welcome the proposals contained in this Bill as they are
specifically meant to eradicate any rules that have historically acted as
impediments to minerals beneficiation. The changes that are being
introduced will assist in the promotion of beneficiation and, thereby,
propel us to greater heights of industrialisation, economic growth and
employment creation. Hence, the tried and tested, glorious movement of the
ANC supports the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill. Ke a leboha. [Thank you.]
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF FINANCE: Chairperson and hon members, good afternoon. Let
me start with some good news. The Governor of the Reserve Bank has
decreased interest rates by 0,5%. [Applause.] So, you can go and borrow
some money if you can afford to pay it back. That is the key thing.
Interestingly, the Reserve Bank also says that inflation is going to be
fairly tame for the rest of this year and not expected to rise above 5% for
next year, that food prices will remain fairly benign, and that the issue
of growth is slightly less optimistic than what we have been talking about
before, because now they say that the rest of this year might produce
growth of 2,8%, whereas everybody else was talking about moving towards 3%.

Let me firstly thank the chair of the standing committee, Mr Mufamadi, and
members from all of the parties for their participation and for their
support. It looks like, although everyone has said how complex this
legislation is, they all understood it well enough to come and speak here.
So, that is a good sign. Am I right? [Laughter.] Let me also thank the
members of the public and the various constituencies who made submissions
to the committee and for the officials from Treasury and the SA Revenue
Service, Sars, who processed these.

The issue of simplicity and complexity in tax legislation is a perennial
one. It is one that we talk about every single time we get here, and even
the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development can’t help us to
simplify this legislation, I am afraid. The more complex, as I have
explained many times, the tax schemes become to either evade or avoid tax –
whatever you think is the right and more polite word – the more complex
legislation becomes throughout the world. I am sure my colleagues from
Treasury and Sars are listening carefully to work out ways of simplifying
this complexity. Perhaps the one step is removing the administrative
elements from tax legislation, which we now do in the Tax Administration
Bill, so once that is processed, that will be the first major step towards
simplifying tax legislation.

I am afraid that as long as there are stunts for pricing and there are all
sorts of schemes that are developed by batteries of people far larger, both
in terms of the resources that they have access to and the numbers that
they can actually command, than governments anywhere else in the world, we
are not going to be able to cure the problem of complex tax legislation.

Several of the hon members, and in particular hon Luyenge, has talked about
the importance of collecting tax, of increasing the tax base, of ensuring
that the state plays a key role in enhancing what we call our caring
society. Those who, I am afraid, engage in evading tax and who deliberately
use avoidance techniques as well don’t help us in this particular respect.
Much of the complexity in this legislation is, in fact, directed to them.

The hon George also referred to complexity and what we can do in this
particular regard. I am not sure that we are required to spend millions of
rands on a commission. Perhaps between Parliament and ourselves we can have
more dialogue about tax policy issues and whether some new tweaking is
required in respect of tax policies. So, I make that offer that we have a
workshop of some sort where contributions from each of us will, I am sure,
add some value in this regard. You say that you are awaiting reports from
us on procurement and other issues. There is good progress being made in
that particular regard.

However, where you are wrong, hon George, is that transfer pricing is not
related to the corporate tax regime. Transfer pricing is, in the context of
globalisation, in the context of distributive production and operations of
multinational companies, a feature that will grow increasingly. These are
arbitrage opportunities that companies around the world have, which they
utilise, and the world, through the tax administration and tax policy side,
is constantly upgrading, if you like, the tools that it has in order to
make sure that the country concerned doesn’t actually lose money. What we
see in the Act at the moment is in fact an attempt to once again up the
stakes, if you like, in terms of transfer pricing by introducing new
criteria which would assist in stemming the flow of monies lost to the
fiscus.

The hon Koornhof – I am not sure if the headline should read: Cope wants
higher fuel levies. It sounded like that a little bit, but I understand
where you are coming from, that you actually want to redirect some of the
fuel levies to regional roads. Thank you for that idea. The Tobin tax is
perhaps one of those things we could debate when we have this workshop that
I am talking about. You accurately described the balance between creating
jobs, more taxation and some cuts in expenditure, and that is what our
fiscal framework attempts to do. It attempts to create that balance between
taxation, expenditure and borrowing, in particular.

The hon Oriani-Ambrosini has been invited by the hon Van Rooyen to
committee meetings, it looks like, to raise some of the issues that he has,
but once again he never fails to entertain us with the latest thoughts that
he’s actually had, and we thank him for his contributions in that regard.
The same answers that I’ve given until now about simplification on tax
legislation apply to him as well.

The one we need to be careful of, as we talk about simplicity, is that we
do not create an environment – in this instance and something that other
colleagues have mentioned as well – of being part of the race to the
bottom. When we talk about foreign companies investing in South Africa,
when we open up new regimes for headquarters to be established in this
country as well, we should not compete in a way in which we want to beat
everybody else and in the end, when we turn around, we find that we have
nothing in our pockets. That is what the race to the bottom is about at
this point in time. So, at some stage we will have to ask ourselves what
would be in our national interest and where the limit would be where we
would go to in order protect our own tax base as well.

I think the hon Oriani-Ambrosini needs to also, perhaps, visit the
Treasury, let alone the committee, in order to enable us to give him some
evidence about the connection between carbon tax and behaviour. That
connection is certainly there, and we will want to make it available to
him.

I want to thank the hon Dubazana for her contribution and her plea to us to
make sure that the tax system links to our aspirations to build a
developmental state, to support the growth path and to support the creation
of jobs and growth in South Africa, as well.

The hon Swart also makes the plea about complexity. I have given the answer
to that. Thank you for your support for the voluntary disclosure regime,
and you asked me to commit myself on the budget deficit. I hope, like you,
that it will be lower as well, but 27 October is around the corner. Let’s
wait for that date, and we will all know what it might look like for the
foreseeable future.

Let me thank the hon Van Rooyen for his excellent research into mining
royalties, the importance of co-ordinating various aspects of tax policy,
and for his insight into the link between mining, industrialisation and the
beneficiation processes. Of course, our challenge in South Africa is to
stop talking about some of these things and attempt to concretely do the
things that will enable us to create jobs and grow the economy. Once again,
thank you to all of the parties for their support and for their
participation in this process. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

Taxation Laws Amendment Bill read a first time.

Voluntary Disclosure Programme and Taxation Laws Second Amendment Bill read
a second time.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): The Bills will be sent to the
National Council of Provinces for concurrence.

                        TAXATION LAWS AMENDMENT BILL

                           (Second Reading debate)

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): There is no list of speakers. Are
there any objections to the Taxation Laws Amendment Bill being read a
second time? No objections? Agreed to. The Secretary will read the Bill a
second time.

The Bill will be sent to the National Council of Provinces for concurrence.

    WORKING TOGETHER TO ENSURE DELIVERY OF QUALITY SERVICE TO COMMUNITIES

  (Consideration of Report of Ad Hoc Committee on Co-ordinated Oversight on
                              Service Delivery)

Mr S L TSENOLI: House Chairperson, hon Ministers, Deputy Ministers, members
and comrades, we are glad to have the opportunity to report to the House
the work of the Ad hoc Committee on Co-ordinated Oversight on Service
Delivery. My job today is to request you to accept our invitation of
reading the report.

We believe that one of the best legacies that demonstrated the injunction
“working together to ensure the delivery of quality service to communities”
is the recent World Cup, how it was conducted and in particular the role of
the host cities and the municipalities of the host cities. In addition to
that, others, although they were not host cities, mobilised the population
there to participate actively in the work of the World Cup.

It is an example of the potential that exists in the country that each
municipality and us at different levels of government can tap into and use
to advance the interest of the majority of the people in our country. This
report is a small contribution to that quality of work. The terms of
reference were that we should conduct public hearings in Parliament and in
all nine provinces; conduct co-ordinated oversight visits in rural and
urban areas; and table a report consisting of clear and achievable
recommendations with a proposed implementation plan.

This is what we are doing today. We have done the job and compiled the
report itself in addition to its nine chapters that outline our assessment,
observations and conclusions including recommendations. We have listed the
specific municipalities that we visited. We, of course, couldn’t visit as
many of them as we would have liked to.

We also listed the number of stakeholders that we interacted with,
including the unfolding of the media campaign that accompanied our work.
This point is particularly important because of the role the media played
in this particular effort. The report also contains an addendum, a record
of the public hearings in the provinces so that you can get a written feel
of those interactions. This is crucial for purposes of your constituency
work. If you come from some of these areas, we present to you what came out
of those with recommendations that often people themselves made about this.


The recommendations are not only in what we say at the end of the report,
but are also contained in the specific areas, as we have done in Durban
city, Umsunduzi for example. We give an account of what happened in those
meetings, what came out of it and what we see as an appropriate
recommendation in that area. So, that is why we recommend strongly that
members should take an interest in going through the entire report itself,
to look at areas in which we are making a recommendation. Part of the
responsibility we have is to take them forward.

We divided ourselves into three teams led by hon Stone Sizani and hon
Mandla Mandela, and each of us visited three provinces as teams. Our visits
were preceded by public advertising through print and electronic media in
all official languages - this we did during and after the programme ended.
Understandably, public engagement was robust, both on air and in meetings.
By opening such a space an opportunity, Parliament received a significant
platform to clarify its role, but people themselves welcomed the
opportunity to air their views very robustly, as I said.

We were also accompanied by members of committees of the legislature in
some of these provinces, but on not all of the visits were we accompanied
by these committees in other provinces. Those who came played a very
important role because we acted together and they were able to take on
board and provide responses to some of the issues that the public raised.

In addition, we were also accompanied by officials from national
departments. These played an equally crucial role. They were spot on, and
some of the questions they responded to immediately. Some overnight
enquiries were made and the information was brought to meetings of
stakeholders the following day. So, in the exercise and during the process
itself, we delivered information and things were clarified to people, and
the communities appreciated that a lot.

Those officials played a crucial role. We also acted as part of the
process. We acted on the spot, on issues that were raised by both
municipalities and individuals by writing to provincial departments,
communicating with them, raising issues that people were raising and
expecting responses to.

There are areas in the country where we received very positive responses
promptly. These were welcomed by the municipalities and communities in
those areas because of the value of such intervention. In other words, in
the process of doing the work of enquiry itself, the effort to communicate
produced useful results.

We understood that the reasons for protests were complex and different. We
also remembered that the 15-year review of the third administration pointed
out in advance that, if things went at the pace at which they were going,
we were likely to have problems – partly explaining why in some areas some
of these problems occurred.

It is the political issues that require urgent attention. The interface of
politics and administration, the quality and frequency of public
participation, responsiveness to citizens’ issues override all factors as
explanation of protests. In addition to that, poor conflict management
impacts naturally on the running of the councils and the relationship
between different spheres of government.

People reported that protests were their last resort - they would
ordinarily not have wanted to do so. They said that they often did not see
movement on the issues they had raised concerns about. We understood that,
should those issues have been addressed in time, often only by
communication, things would not have turned as ugly as they did in some of
the areas – except, of course, in instances where there was clear political
contestation, infighting and campaigning by others who would like to
replace those in office.

Municipal tenders, including provincial tenders, housing allocation,
management, shortages, water and sanitation, electricity, poor financial
management and corruption were issues that emerged as some of the reasons
stated as secondary reasons for protests. Although people in some instances
had similar problems, they didn’t protest because they had responses given
to them by officials and councillors in those areas, including departments
at provincial level.

In those instances where there were no protests, that would have been the
explanation. The difference was made by the active interaction between
those who had information and those who could respond to issues on time.
The issue of responsiveness was a key one. The issues that were raised were
crucial and important. They were not in themselves the major reasons for
the protests.

Our recommendations cover areas of governance, areas of anticorruption
work, service delivery issues, issues of the Integrated Development Plan,
IDP, housing, sanitation, water and electricity, and settlement. The
Integrated Development Plans are crucial, but we think that the emerging
work of the planning commission is obviously going to be crucial in
providing us with a long-term response. We hope that we will be provided
with responses that are sustainable, with what we believe is government
working together, and that the planning commission’s work will make a big
difference if the commission’s work takes on board the work that is
expressed in the Integrated Development Plans.

The implementation of the local government turnaround strategy, whilst
important, assumes also that the entire government itself as well as
provincial and national departments need to change in a manner that
reinforces the positive initiative that is already under way. So that
together, these three spheres of government produce the quality of service
that we are talking about.

Issues of municipal capacity, financial management and communication are
crucial; there is no doubt about it. We also appreciate the support we
received from councillors and municipal officials, including administrators
in municipalities that had administrators running them. They have played a
very important role in shedding light on issues - from here we didn’t quite
see until we were closely working with them there.

We also appreciate the support given by the technical team of Parliament.
They have played an important role. We want to recommend an increased
capacity in that area of work. It will make a huge difference in the amount
and quality of work that we generate as committees that are doing this kind
of work.

Our committee was composed of different committees and that was an
important and significant initiative by Parliament-just like the committee
that went around the country to look at the state of readiness for 2010,
which was composed of different sectoral committees. Similarly, this
committee was a very important forum for working together to produce the
best results for quality services on the ground.

We hope that some of the recommendations, on which members will touch while
speaking today, will shed some light on what we can do. Thank you very
much.

Mr A C STEYN: Chairperson, hon Minister, Deputy Ministers, hon members, it
is almost one year since the Ad hoc Committee on Co-ordinated Oversight on
Service Delivery was established to investigate the underlying reasons for
the often violent protests across the country.

The issues that led to many of the protests then, still existed during our
oversight visits and, sadly, still exist even as we debate this report this
afternoon. I must also say, right at the outset, that in my opinion, very
little that we have learnt from our visits and interaction with communities
as to the reasons for such protests was new or unknown to the majority, if
not all of us. As noted in the report, almost all major problems with
service delivery revolved around noncompliance of relevant legislation,
poor governance, lack of accountability and lack of meaningful
communication between government and communities, and even between
different spheres of government.

Housing was a particular challenging issue and was raised without exception
in all municipalities that we visited. Ironically, it wasn’t always about
the nondelivery of houses and long waiting lists. Where housing was
delivered, it was generally of a poor quality and, as mentioned in our
report, this particular programme appears to be a breeding ground for
corrupt activities. In most municipalities there appears to be a general
lack of proper planning and in some of the poorest communities, where some
delivery of houses did take place and where many people find themselves
without decent shelter, we came across houses that were either not
completed, or completed and standing empty for some reason.

In the Thulamela municipal area there were unoccupied houses which were
completed in 1998. I almost want to say that there can be no greater
injustice than this, where scarce resources - both land and finances - were
actually spent or used, but nobody is enjoying the benefit of that
expenditure. Sorry, I shouldn’t say nobody. The houses may not be
inhabited, but I suppose a builder and perhaps an official or two,
somewhere along the line, benefited. The fact remains, a homeless
beneficiary somewhere should have been homeless no more.

What became abundantly clear is the fact that many of these protests could
have been prevented. Now some of you among us may question this statement.
However, very many issues raised were of such a nature that, if we had
functioning municipalities, staffed by competent people appointed on merit,
they would have been addressed as a matter of course during the daily
service delivery activities that a municipality is obligated to do anyway.

We found, in many instances, that the most basic task to be undertaken by a
functioning municipality was not done. Granted, in some instances it may
have been due to a lack of resources or infrastructure, but even where
these were not a major obstacle, there was still a problem with the
delivery of such services.

For example, in the Ehlanzeni District Municipality, we found that there
was a lack of clarity of the role of the members of the mayoral committee.
In the Mkhondo Local Municipality, divisions within the elected political
representatives, where one group supported the mayor and another aligned
themselves with the speaker, led to paralysis in governance in that
municipality.

In a municipality like Buffalo City, where apparently nine councillors have
still not been sworn in, it was reported that almost half of the
councillors were determined to render the council dysfunctional. These are
issues where leadership in these municipalities has broken down and is
nonexistent. The fact that these paralysing situations were and are still
allowed to continue, points to a problem with leadership that goes right to
the top of our political and governance structures.

Wat vir my baie waardevol was omtrent hierdie oorsigbesoeke, was die feit
dat amptenare van verskeie departemente ons publieke vergaderings bygewoon
het. By hierdie vergaderings is dikwels probleme onder ons aandag gebring
waar die oplossing onmiddellik geïdentifiseer is en waar die voorsitter van
ons groep voorstelle kon maak aan die betrokke amptenare om die probleem op
te los. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)
[What was very valuable to me with regard to these oversight visits was the
fact that officials from various departments attended our public meetings.
Often at these meetings problems were brought to our attention where
solutions could immediately be identified and where the chairperson of our
group could put forward suggestions to the officials concerned to solve the
problem.]

A particular instance that comes to mind is a school where a portion of the
roof was blown off in a storm. When we visited the school, which were some
weeks after the storm and subsequent damage, the learners were still being
taught in the exposed classrooms and teaching was suspended whenever it
rained. The chairperson instructed officials from Public Works to take
steps to attend to the problem right there and then. However, why problems
like that have to wait until an intervention takes place, defies
comprehension.

It is, therefore, with regret that my suggestion that specific resolutions
identified at these meetings be recorded in our report was not adopted and
therefore cannot be tracked to determine whether they have indeed been
implemented. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Madam Chairperson, on a point of order: Is it in order that,
apart from the hon Minister for Human Settlements – we appreciate his
presence – there are no other Ministers present during this very important
debate? The Minister for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs
had an unfortunate event, but not even his deputy is here.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): That is not a point of order.
[Interjections.]

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, can’t you postpone the debate until later so
that we can have this important debate in the presence of Ministers?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): There was no point of order. The
programme has been decided on at the Chief Whips’ Forum and by the
programme committee. Whoever sits there had to propose that.

Mrs H N NDUDE: Chairperson, Ministers and Members of the House, Cope
welcomes the report of the Ad hoc Committee on Co-ordinated Oversight on
Service Delivery. Parliament has a major role to play in ensuring that the
provisions of the Constitution are met.

The protests that befell the country in the recent past have been about the
failure of municipalities to deliver services to millions of our people –
the most basic services like water, sanitation, roads, electricity and
housing.
How can such important constitutional obligations be given to structures
that lack capacity and political will? It is no secret that these
structures are known to be terribly undercapacitated and often lack
strategic and administrative vision. How do you expect them to function
effectively and deliver services effectively by taking over such huge
responsibilities without the funds and budgets needed? These capacity
problems have led to some municipalities returning unspent funds to the
Treasury annually.

Cope discovered, in a vast majority of municipalities we visited, that in
some instances there is only one or no engineers employed, and the town
planners have poor or no knowledge of town planning, because they were
party-political deployees out of their depth!

South Africa is one of the driest countries in the world, and we are
running out of the little amount of water we have left. Our water
purification systems have been found wanting and outdated, such that the
water we end up with has been dangerously contaminated even for human
consumption. Cope dreads what the outcome of this is going to be.
Government promised people that the bucket system would be phased out by
now, yet people in many communities still make use of the bucket system.

In view of the water crisis that we are facing in the country, the Water
Research Commission and the Water Institute of South Africa need to be
invited regularly to the portfolio committee to advise Parliament on the
magnitude of this problem and alert us to the red flags.

The Minister of Human Settlements has recently been bearing down on
renegade developers whose developments to these poor communities cost the
government over R40 billion to destroy and rebuild sloppy developments.
This calls for stricter scrutiny of the role of housing inspectors and
bodies such as the National Home Builders Registration Council, NHBRC, who
are supposed to monitor and inspect houses before they are finalised.

Cope supports the report and calls on this House to ensure that the
recommendation and implementation plan proposed by the committee be
accepted and put into action by this House. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr P F SMITH: Chairperson and colleagues, I think the country was caught
napping last year. The ANC had a very successful election campaign, and
they thought everything was hunky-dory. Suddenly they were met with lots of
protests where people were very angry with them. That was a big shock. The
ANC had to scramble to action. They sent delegations here, there and
everywhere.

The Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Cogta, entity’s
offices in Pretoria sent all the senior managers out to see what was going
on. I think some were belated, because it was only in September that
Parliament decided to get into the action as well and establish that
committee.

Today, a year later, we have the report of this committee and are asked to
approve it. The real question is: Is that report of real value?
Furthermore, is it worth the money, the very considerable resource spent in
human and financial resources? The answer is an unequivocal, yes.
Unfortunately, it is not quite that simple. There are a couple of sides to
this story.

On the one hand, the document - which is very lengthy, with many chapters,
as the Chair has said-enumerates a litany of problems in local government
and municipalities, and makes a whole hosts of recommendations. Most of
what we saw and heard was completely unacceptable. We all accepted that.
Some of them were really terrible and shocking. It was necessary and we
agree that it should be recorded.

My team leader was the hon Sizani. I think he did an excellent job. He was
an excellent team leader and I would like to thank him for his position
there. I must say that, if you regard the recommendations we made, most of
them were fine and there were no problems.

We are hard-pressed to say that they should not be supported, because they
are sensible, and speak to the issues. To that extent, I agree that the
committee has served its purpose and all is hunky-dory. However, on the
other hand, one should ask how much of what we have learnt was really new.
Basically, everybody had a pretty good idea of what was going on.

How much of what we learnt was different to what the NCOP proceeds with
every week; what the provincial legislatures deal with all the time; and
the ruling party teams that were sent out saw? It was all the same thing.
We just got more of it because we spent more time there. So, there was
nothing particularly new or surprising. It was actually very good that we
recorded it.

I have a couple of problems. Firstly, I think that, unfortunately, the
committee failed to address the question it was tasked with. It was tasked
with establishing the primary and secondary causes of the protests and to
make recommendations. What it did was to put forth a 60-page long list of
what went wrong, with recommendations. It did not explicitly say that the
protests were caused by a, b, or c. That was sloppy and rigorous work by
the committee. Nonetheless, the litany of ills, as they are recorded in the
ANC municipalities, are now, by and large, very good.

I do not want to reject the recommendations, but I should say that several
of them were problematic. There were certain recommendations made which
inexplicably have not been included, despite the fact that we and the DA
asked for them. The one which was mentioned now was that this House should
establish a mechanism to make sure that the recommendations were followed
up on then and there.

Why is that not in the report? It is an obvious thing. We visited two
municipalities per province and a long list of problems and recommendations
were made, but they are not in the report. Why not? So that was a weakness,
and I really regret that it was not there.

Secondly, there were also other recommendations, for example, section 57,
which deals with managers. It was problematic. We have a situation where
the municipal system we had was the interface between the administration
and the politicians, through the municipal manager and the mayor.

The report recommended that the section 57 managers should now report
politically to councillors seated as portfolio heads. That was a very
problematic issue. You are really twiddling the model in a way that is
problematic. Depending on how it was implemented, it could cause a lot of
trouble. We are not happy with that.

There was also a proposal for a local government service. I am not quite
sure what a single local government service means, because the ANC always
seems to be talking about a single public service for all three spheres.
Now we have a single sphere for local government. Whatever it means, since
it was not very clear, because it was very well scripted. It does intrude,
if we implement it, upon the autonomy of the municipalities to deal with
their own internal affairs, including staffing matters.

We do have problems, but having said that, we support the report and thank
everybody for doing it. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A J WILLIAMS: Hon House Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon Deputy
Ministers, hon members, guests and friends, most importantly, the South
African people did not exist so that we can hold political positions. We
exist to direct state resources in the best interest of the South African
people.

It is very important for South Africans to know this, because all politics
are about service delivery. The report of the Ad hoc Committee on Co-
ordinated Oversight and Service Delivery states:


   The foundation of democracy is primarily the ability of citizens to
   participate in their own affairs and not only limit the people’s
   involvement in voting every five years. Since the advent of democracy in
   South Africa there are many forums and structures that have been
   established to encourage public participation.


      There are numerous constraints confronting these structures which
      include resource availability and support. But the most critical in
      making these structures functional and yield the desired result is the
      actual participation of the people.

On 8 January 2010, on the occasion of the 98th anniversary of the founding
of the ANC, its national executive committee stated that:


   We must build a state that is democratic, people-driven and people-
   centred and we must pursue a sustained development, based on an
   inclusive growth path. It should be a state that unites South Africans
   around a vision of sustainable development and mobilises them to act as
   midwives to the birth of a truly united, nonracial, nonsexist,
   democratic and prosperous society.

The principle of a people-driven and people-centred state is not a new idea
that was thought out in some committee just before the elections. The
principle of Power to the People is the core of the ANC ideology. Former
President of the ANC, Oliver Tambo, on the occasion of the 60th anniversary
of the founding of the ANC, on 8 January 1972 said:


   Sixty years is a very long time for fruitless struggle for a freedom in
   an era in which the government of the people, by the people and for the
   people is an acceptable definition of democracy.

Then on the occasion of the 72nd anniversary of the founding of the ANC, on
8 January in 1984 former President Oliver Tambo said:


    All revolutions are about state power. Ours is no exception. The slogan,
    Power to the People, means one thing and one thing only; it means we
    seek to destroy the power of apartheid tyranny and replace it with the
    popular power with a government whose authority derives from the will of
    all of our people, both black and white.

The question that begs asking is why is South Africa not participating in
the running of its own country? Why are you not involving yourselves in
school governing bodies, hospital management committees, community policing
forums and ward committees? These structures exist for one reason and one
reason only, so that the people shall govern. South Africa, you owe it to
yourselves, your children and the future generations to get informed,
organised and active in the running of this country.

Bob Marley sang in the redemption song, ”Emancipate yourselves from mental
slavery, none but ourselves can free our minds.” In the context of this
speech, the emancipation of your minds is around the understanding, the
ideology and the policies of the political parties here in the Fourth
Parliament - policies like the ANC community participation policy, which is
derived from the ANC ideology, as previously stated.

An example of other kinds of policies that political parties have today is
the ANC labour policy, which is expressed through legislation, the Basic
Conditions of Employment Act, the Labour Relations Act and many more. Other
parties have policies too. The DA also has policies around labour:


    The DA will introduce a longer probationary period in which employers
    can dismiss under-performing workers without penalty.

Clearly that is a policy which is not in the best interest of the workers
here in the Western Cape or anywhere else in South Africa. One wonders from
which ideology a policy like that originated. Then again, a party that has
reinvented itself more times than Madonna is very unlikely to have any
consistent ideological foundation. So come on South Africa, get informed.
[Applause.]

Getting organised is not as hard as it sounds. In fact, I am requesting
that you, South Africa, go and speak to the person in charge of your
nearest police station, the school your children attend, the hospital and
your local government and tell them that Parliament has requested that you
should find out about ... [Interjections.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, hon member! Is that a point
of order?

Mr A C STEYN: Chair, I am wondering if the hon member is in the correct
debate. We are talking about an oversight report here and he is talking
about policies.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, can you please allow
the member to continue? Continue, hon member.

Mr A J WILLIAMS: Parliament has requested that you find out about how to
join the local community policing forums, school governing bodies, hospital
management committees, and the ward committees where you live. Become an
activist in one or more of these structures. In order for South Africa to
be a people-centred and people-driven progressive developmental state, you,
the people, must get involved.

Without the people’s activism and involvement, this country would not have
progressed from an oppressive apartheid system to a progressive democracy.
Without the people’s activism and involvement this country would never have
hosted one of the most successful World Cups. However, it should not only
be when there is a crisis or a national celebration that South Africa gets
involved.

Involve yourselves in the day to day running of this country, crime
prevention, health care issues, your child’s education, in the area where
you live and where your children play. You do not exist so that I can hold
a political position. Without you, South Africa, a people-centred, people-
driven progressive developmental state would not materialise.

The Constitution has numerous sections protecting your rights to govern.
There are many laws that create structures enabling you to govern. The only
thing left to do is for you, South Africa, to step up and live the ideology
that the people shall govern, because working together we can do more. I
thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J J MCGLUWA: Chairperson, the ID would like to welcome the report and
recommendations of the Ad hoc Committee on Co-ordinated Oversight on
Service Delivery. Government has allocated over R2 million to this ad hoc
committee to hold these public hearings around the country. This committee
had the crucial task of helping Parliament better understand the root
causes of service delivery protests.

However, the ID was extremely disappointed to find that only a handful of
councillors and members of the provincial legislature, MPLs, actually
bothered to attend the meetings. This lack of interest makes one understand
exactly why voters are losing patience with them. Other public
representatives were reluctant to speak openly on causes of bottlenecks in
service delivery.

During our visits, it was sad to see children playing in fields of material
and human waste; budgets unspent because of a shortage of project managers;
the bucket system still in existence in many informal settlements in spite
of a government promise to eradicate it by 2007 and, finally, a complete
lack of sporting and other facilities.

Most disturbing for me were the many stories of councillors making empty
promises to the community, while also failing to attend any public
meetings. It seems that some public representatives are more interested in
stealing from the poor than serving them.

We also visited Doringbach here in Cape Town, where 2 800 informal
dwellings have been erected on private property. Although these structures
are being serviced by the city, this does not include electricity, which is
a basic right. We applaud and welcome the move by the City of Cape Town to
pass a bylaw that will deal with the personal safety of residents on
private property.

In the case of Renosterberg Local Municipality, we saw that interns had
been employed to run the finance department. Unsurprisingly, the department
received a disclaimer.

I would like to thank the chairperson, hon Tsenoli, and the entire
committee for their dedication. I think my colleague, hon Tsenoli, as a
philosopher, will agree with me that it was once said that a fool elected
by a fool will be led by a fool but the biggest fool is the fool who
elected that fool. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr N M KGANYAGO: Chairperson, the report before us is comprehensive, and at
the outset we would like to congratulate the committee and those members of
government and civil society that participated in the entire process
leading up to this report. There is a Swahili saying that says, “You can’t
kill a louse with one finger.” Working together really means a lot to all
of us. We appreciate the effort that has gone into this process, but I want
to express the sincere hope that this is merely the beginning of a
nationwide survey, since this report only covers a small number of areas.

The country has witnessed many years of increasingly violent and widespread
service delivery protests by impoverished communities. Any effort by
Parliament to investigate and attempt to understand the underlying reasons
for these protests must be welcomed.

Indeed, this report is a huge step in the right direction if we can get
away from the inflammatory and unsubstantiated claims of a third force
behind the protests, which is put forward as a dubious justification for
unleashing the intelligence forces on our citizens.

That there is a political element to these protests cannot be denied.
Regrettably, the report does not dwell on the fact that angry local
communities’ legitimate expectations usually relate to ruling party
councillors and politicians making unfulfilled promises and failing to
provide basic services.

An honest assessment of service delivery protests must also acknowledge
that protests are often, if not always, instigated by the ruling party’s
own alliance partners, or propagated by competing factions within the ANC.
Every party is entitled to managing its internal discipline as it sees fit,
but the ruling party should not allow its internal conflicts to affect
service delivery.

Notwithstanding the above, the UDM concurs with the broad areas of concern
identified by the report with regards to governance, corruption, service
delivery, local economic development and communication.

At the heart of these service delivery protests lies the issue of
legitimacy. It is our duty as public representatives to ensure that
democracy remains healthy in this country. We cannot ignore the threat to
the legitimacy of democracy that is posed by masses of South Africans not
receiving the most basic of services.

Hope can be a powerful commodity, as the birth of democracy here has
demonstrated. But shattered hope can be an equally powerful and negative
force. We face a rapidly closing window for delivering on the hope that the
advent of democracy gave to the impoverished masses of our country. I thank
you.

Mrs T E KENYE: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, hom
members, the ANC, in preparation for the 2009 national and provincial
elections, developed a comprehensive policy framework that deals with the
state of health in the country and a turnaround strategy to deal with the
challenges. Out of this policy framework the ANC Subcommittee of Education
and Health developed a ten-point plan that became the foundation for the
department in its turnaround strategy. The department adopted this plan in
2009 – a plan that speaks directly to the experiences the ad hoc committee
had during its provincial visits.

The visit highlighted the centrality of the revitalisation of the primary
health care system. As in most public hearings, people complained about
inaccessibility of health services and time spent waiting for an ambulance
when needed. The policy framework and ten-point programme addresses the
need to expand access to and coverage of primary health care services, as
well as the incorporation of other priority programmes. It speaks to the
training of community nurses who work together with community health
workers in order to broaden the scope of their work.

The ANC policy framework and ten-point plan speak to the efficiency and
management of health care systems. The plan speaks to the needs, it
quantifies the totality of health care needs and ensures that those who are
graduating in the different health sciences and disciplines meet the
challenges we face. It ensures that the necessary clinical training,
infrastructure and capacity at higher education institutions are in place
and addressed by the Appropriation Bill.

The debate on the further training of nurses and whether we should not
begin to restructure the nursing graduate course and relook the nursing
diploma, is informed by some of the challenges that the ad hoc committee
experienced during its visit. This is informed by the need to deepen
experiential learning and deepen theory and practice with more hands
practically available to carry out the work. Equally, the requisite skills
and capacity speak to how we deal with internships and their proper
supervision.

During the visit of the ad hoc committee the revitalisation of
infrastructure was a critical point of discussion. Part of the ten-point
plan to turn around health speaks to the hospital revitalisation programme
and the role that different stakeholders can play in this. Again, from
experiences during our visit, the need for a review of aspects of
sanitation strategy became clear. National standards and norms remain a
huge challenge and, clearly, municipalities are still struggling with
internal systems that don’t effectively deal with the totality of needs for
sanitation.

The Khayelitsha public hearings revealed a lack of water and sanitation
which poses a serious threat to health. Residents are compelled to use
communal toilets which were not regularly maintained. Drainage systems are
also often blocked. It was even worse in the Harare area where residents
use the open toilet system, covering themselves with blankets to hide from
people passing by in the street. The lack of decent toilets and water has
an adverse effect on the health of residents, exposing them to illnesses
such as malaria, TB and other infectious diseases.

A central challenge revealed by the oversight visit was the lack of
provision of basic services in informal settlements. Health facilities,
clinics and community health centres are critical, and this reaffirms
government’s acceleration of the delivery of health infrastructure to
improve the quality of health care services to the communities through
public-private partnerships.

The ANC health policy and ten-point plan put in place the strengthening of
the health information system. This is informed by the experiences of the
ad hoc committee in most public hearings and of complaints about loss of
folders, other key data and specimens. The ANC health policy framework
speaks to accelerating the delivery of health technology and information
technology infrastructure so that there is ease of accessibility to
patients’ records.

The same strategy applies in the case of shortage or out of stock
medicines. Information technology systems have assisted tremendously in
being able to trace where to access medicines rather than to depend on
paper-based information. This has minimised paperwork, simplified the
management information system and provided far better and quicker service
delivery to patients.

Any system is only as good as the human resource capacity that has to run
it. The ten-point plan addresses the improved human resource planning and
development and management training. In addressing the scarcity of doctors,
the national human resource planning framework for health commenced in
2009. The plan draws upon historic work that had already been carried out
by the Health Sciences Review Committee in 2007, which developed
interventions to strengthen clinical training in higher education
institutions. It also addressed factors associated with increasing the
number of health professional graduates.

Clearly, the alignment of organograms must be informed by the needs of a
given environment and the programmes that the department is required to
carry out in terms of the Constitution and policy. Therefore, planning,
monitoring and evaluation are critical to ensuring performance.

Each province has developed a provincial human resources health plan and
these are being aligned to long-term plans known as service transformation
plans and the ten-point plan. With these provincial plans, an assessment
has been done of workforce challenges.

Central to the health policy framework is the mobilisation of communities
for better health care and environmental protection. This strategy is
underpinned by the basics of the health education and awareness programme,
using hygiene and morals as key levers. The continued mobilisation of
communities on HIV and Aids programmes has been a very important
achievement.

In conclusion, what the oversight visit has taught us is that the solutions
and answers to the challenges we were confronted with around health are
contained in the ANC’s comprehensive Manifesto Policy Framework and ten-
point plan. What we need to do is to intensify measures to improve
equitable access to health care provision. We must also involve communities
in service delivery improvement to ensure adequate supply of appropriate
medicines and other supplies, adequate safety for health institutions and
health workers as well as the monitoring of the general cleanliness of
facilities and the quality of care.

The first clause of the Freedom Charter says that the people shall govern.
Now we are governing and all of us must govern, regardless of political
affiliation. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S C MOTAU: Madam Chairperson, there are many cynics in the country who
argue that Parliament should not have to set up a committee and send nearly
40 MPs to nine provinces to establish the causes of service delivery
protests – many of them very violent – that have plagued our residential
areas in recent times. The sceptics argue that the whole exercise was mere
window dressing, a waste of taxpayers’ money, and that nothing will come of
it.

This negative posture becomes even more worrying when one takes into
account a finding by D Powell, in an article in The Magazine of Local
Government of October 2009, entitled, “What is wrong with local
government?” I quote:


    Local government is the least trusted of all public institutions in the
    country and that has been the case since the first municipal elections
    in 2000.

The message is quite clear.
We dare not prove the cynics right, because many of our people feel that
they are being left behind and they do not believe that the government
hears their pleas for improvement in their living conditions. In order to
restore some of the trust that the people have lost in local government and
in Parliament, it is very important that the work of the ad hoc committee
does not become yet another exercise in futility. To fail the people will
be to deepen their frustrations and anger, and to erode even further
whatever little faith they may still have in local government.

It is important to remind this House of the many individuals and
organisations that came to this Parliament when we invited them to do so,
to tell us about their problems. We have to remember how seriously the
people took our call, as manifested in their sincerity and their faith in
our ability to redress their anguish as they engaged with us in the many
public gatherings we attended with them.

How can we redeem ourselves? Firstly, we must recognise that party
politics, a core element in democracy, is the most divisive of all
institutions in a democracy. However, while we still have the current
system, we must strive to take party politics out of municipal
administration. How distressing it was to learn that one municipality was
dysfunctional and had been placed under administration because of
interparty rivalries and, even worse, because of factionalism within the
governing party.
In one instance, a house of a former mayor was torched, allegedly by
members of her own party. This act of violence has not done anything to
enhance the quality of life of the people involved.

To ensure that a municipality can deliver on its mandate, local government
must employ people for their skills, experience, potential and, most
importantly, their fitness for purpose. It is a very simple mandate,
involving efficient, prompt, top quality service delivery and clean
governance, with officials held accountable at the pain of consequences.

I do believe that all of us in this House now acknowledge that cadre
deployment and jobs for incompetent pals and close relatives have failed
the country. A new approach is needed, where we can employ the best skills
we have from all our people in this country, regardless of their political
party affiliation.

Colleagues have touched on some of our experiences during oversight visits
around the country. Two incidents stand out for me. They show what could
happen when we stop caring about the people we claim to serve and let greed
drive our behaviour.

During a visit to the Eastern Cape, our team went to the township of Komga
in the Great Kei Local Municipality. There we saw RDP houses that were said
to have been built around 1998-99. The four-walled structures were built of
very poor quality material, and had only one door and two small windows,
one at the back and one in front. The houses have no flooring and no
dividing walls. I could not help but ask myself how we could do that to our
people.

On a trip to Nala Municipality in the Free State we visited Monyakeng
Township. The Monyakeng sewer treatment works was being constructed and yet
household toilets were connected to the water system. The waste had nowhere
to flow but into the street, causing very serious health hazards for the
residents. One grandma called us to her house to show us her brand new
blocked toilet. How could anyone do something like that to our people?

In conclusion, Madam Chairperson, this House and the Minister for Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs must ensure that the work of
the Ad hoc Committee on Co-ordinated Oversight on Service Delivery produces
positive outcomes for all the people of our communities, particularly for
those areas with serious problems which were visited by the committee. We
must restore trust and confidence in our municipalities. They are the
forefront of local administration. Their success is the success of this
nation. There is no more time to waste. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs W J NELSON: Hon House Chairperson, hon Minister and Deputy Minister and
hon members, the Portfolio Committee on Social Development was afforded the
opportunity to be part of the Ad hoc Committee on Co-ordinated Oversight on
Service Delivery. This gave us the opportunity to interact and meet with
the communities on the ground throughout the country and to hear firsthand
about the quality of services being rendered by the Department of Social
Services and its agencies.

It is necessary to inform the House that, in all instances, we had a
delegation from the department as well as the SA Social Services Agency,
Sassa, in the stakeholder engagement sessions.

Inputs from the public hearings were varied. We had instances where a
community was very satisfied with services rendered. On the other hand, we
also had instances where a community raised concerns around services
rendered.

Challenges raised include long queues and inadequate facilities at pay
points; a shortage of social workers, leading to welfare cases not being
finalised quickly; stipends for caregivers not paid regularly; confusion
around whether applications for funding should be made at the Department of
Social Development or at the Department of Health; inadequate information
supplied to applicants when applying for grants, resulting in them having
to return to the offices more than twice; and a concern around the
registration of NGOs, which results in funding problems and a duplication
of services rendered. Concerns were also raised around the funding of early
childhood development centres.

In addressing the above-mentioned challenges and problems, the Department
of Social Development and the agency have put various measures in place.
The SA Social Services Agency has embarked on different strategies aimed at
the improvement of service delivery. Steps were taken to improve the grant
application processes and reduce the turnaround time, and to promote
customer care service at offices and service points.

They also piloted the improved grants administration process, Igap, which
was very successful. In areas where Igap is not yet implemented, they have
reduced the 90 days for completion of applications to an average of 12
days.

To manage the influx of clients to offices, they have implemented a queue
management system as well as a booking system for grant applications and
disability assessments.

In addressing the shortage of social workers, the department has come up
with a turnaround strategy which focuses on the provision of scholarships
for those interested in pursuing a career in social work. To date, over
6 000 undergraduate students have benefited from the programme and over 600
graduates have been placed in various provinces. It must be borne in mind
that this is an ongoing process.

With regard to the application for stipends of caregivers, there are
different roles and responsibilities for each department, and this needs to
be clarified for communities. Social Development has, however, put some
interventions in place to address these challenges. Information pamphlets
and brochures are printed and distributed in the dominant languages used in
a particular province. The department and Sassa have embarked on a campaign
in which they are now purchasing slots on community radio stations to
inform members of communities of services rendered as well as documents
required to access such services.

With regard to the nonprofit organisation registrations, there is a
national database that is updated on a monthly basis to check compliance
with the Nonprofit Organisations Act requirements. These lists are sent to
provinces annually and it must be noted that funding comes from provinces.
We also agree that more work needs to be done in this area.

Regarding ECD centres, subsidies are paid by provincial departments. We are
aware that there is a disparity in the amount that is being paid and we
have been informed by the Department of Social Development that they are
currently reviewing the costing mechanism for ECD subsidisation.

Hon members, the ANC government has put a basket of services in place to
address the challenges of poverty among vulnerable people in our country.
We have developed and implemented various programmes and, further to that,
have developed policies and guidelines as to how this should be
implemented. For instance, the child support grant is the largest social
assistance programme in terms of the number of beneficiaries, with just
over 9,8 million recipients receiving that grant. The age extension was
implemented last year following the realisation that thousands of children
between the ages of 15 and 18 years continue to live under the harsh
conditions of poverty. By June this year the total number of CSG extension
beneficiaries stood at over 393 000. Contrary to common belief, members,
most beneficiaries are older women who, in most cases, become the primary
caregivers of children born to teenagers.

It should be borne in mind that the objective of this grant is to ensure
that caregivers of children living in extreme poverty are able to access
financial assistance in the form of a cash transfer, to supplement rather
than replace household income.

In strengthening the collaboration between the Departments of Basic
Education and of Social Development in the provision of early childhood
development, the departments fulfil their roles according to applicable
legislation. At the end of March 2010 over 16 000 ECD sites were
registered, with just over 719 000 children benefiting from these sites and
about half of the children being subsidised by government.
In the attempt to address the scourge of alcohol and drug abuse the ANC, at
its 52nd National Conference, called for a concerted national effort to
address the drug problem in our country. This can only be effectively
addressed by eradicating poverty, escalating education and implementing
other development programmes.

The Department of Social Development is therefore reviewing the
institutional arrangement of the Central Drug Authority, CDA, with the view
to strengthening and optimising its functioning. The CDA is a body set up
specifically to advise government on drug-related issues and to implement
the national drug master plan.

The ANC-led government has championed the Prevention and Treatment of
Substance Abuse Act which highlights the negative effects of illicit drugs
and places particular emphasis on education and prevention, especially
among young people and their parents.

In conclusion, we have put various legislation programmes and guidelines in
place to ensure that services are rendered to the most vulnerable and needy
of our country. We can proudly say that, under this ANC-led government,
current reports suggest that most of the targets under Goal One ...

Speaker, working together we can surely do more! I thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]
Mr R B BHOOLA: Thank you, Chairperson. The MF welcomes the report, but
cherishes the hope to see that the reality of implementation of the
recommendations takes place. However, the MF notes with great sadness that
the broad suffering masses continue to endure hardship.

Service delivery protests show communities are frustrated and agitated.
Lack of competent skills, fraud, corruption, nepotism, etc were just some
of the concerns creating a negative destructive force to the delivery of
quality services for all our people.

It is absolutely imperative that the people chosen must be capable people,
and there must be skills development delivery. However, this cannot be
achieved if those Sector Education and Training Authorities, Setas, that
are given monies have become cheaters. They cheat and indeed that must be
re-examined. Indeed, there must be complete dedication about uplifting the
lot of the poor people.

The nondelivery problem is putting the wrong people in the job. South
Africa must move away from colour. The selection of councillors who cannot
read agendas and cannot take decisions is another area of great concern.

Let me give you an example. On land matters in eThekwini Municipality the
housing committee chairperson has been deferring matters for the past eight
months.
Apart from other municipalities in the report, in Umdoni Municipality,
after 16 years of democracy, people continue to live in informal
settlements under difficult and inhumane circumstances. People living in
houses for over 21 years continue to wait for the houses to be transferred.
Some are compelled, indeed, to sign acknowledgement of debts nullifying
government’s policies of housing subsidies and debt relieve. Actually,
where is the better life for all? Where is the creation of wealth assets
for the poor?

Councillors are directly involved in tenders. What about Mike Sutcliffe
using section 36 of the Supply Chain Management Act to give R1 billion
worth of contract, which makes up 25% of the entire contract? The MF will
support the report. [Time expired.]

Mrs C DUDLEY: Thank you, House Chairperson. The reasons for service
delivery protests are complex and neither obvious nor universal, and the
ACDP commends the ad hoc committee on the depth of their inquiry and on
their comprehensive recommendations, including complaints response,
management mechanisms and the strengthening of systems to curtail
corruption and improve oversight and monitoring.

In looking a little more broadly at enhancing the quality of service
delivery, the ACDP considers the possibility of a distinctive role for
business, perhaps through corporate social investment. It is true that many
companies have up till now regarded corporate social investment, CSI, as
little more than a means to points on the Black Economic Empowerment
scorecard. As a result many CSI initiatives folded, wasting millions of
rands once a company finished its funding commitments.

More recently, however, CSI has moved from being an ad hoc reactive to
being more strategic, proactive and beneficial as the relevance of
investing in communities is being recognised. Perhaps this would be a good
time to set up an industry body, not just to ensure that companies claiming
BEE points adhere to their commitments, but to bring needy communities and
even municipalities together with relevant businesses and to offer critical
guidance for innovative and self-sustaining programmes in order to maximise
the benefit in communities.

Another important consideration is the effects of climate change.
Government’s present struggle with service delivery will seem like a picnic
by comparison. Droughts, the flooding of certain crops and fish species no
longer thriving as they did before, are already adding to the stresses of
the poor. The impact on food production and quality of life are becoming
increasingly negative.

Government and Parliament have been accused of showing no signs of making
this matter an urgent priority. While the President’s interministerial task
team has made and done its reporting, we see no material change on
government’s agenda. The Integrated Resource Plan, IRP 2, which is the
energy plan for the country over the next 25 years, has once again been
delayed while plans to build Medupi and Kusile and discussions around
nuclear plants go ahead.

The country is at a watershed. We could turn around our energy industry, as
Australia has done, over a matter of a few years from close to nothing in
2007 to a billion dollar industry in 2010. By using concentrated solar
power and wind we could, within two to three years, set up plants to the
equivalent of four Medupis.

Government has managed to give the impression that it is biased and listens
only to the lobby which argues that renewable energy cannot provide base
load power and that the industry has not yet proven itself. These are
allegations which are blatantly untrue. Government is procrastinating over
urgent decisions relating to crucial issues and the people of South Africa
continue to go without. However, we will and we have supported the
initiative to interrogate service delivery problems and we will approve the
report. Thank you.

Mrs F F MUSHWANA: Hon House Chairperson, hon Ministers present, Deputy
Ministers, hon members, I salute you. Hon Kenye talked about health and
I’ll talk about education. The mobilisation of communities to raise
awareness and participation in the education of our children is one of the
components of the 10-point plan of education adopted by the ANC in 2009.

For any country to prosper, education has to be prioritised. A prosperous
nation is one in which everyone is literate; there is at least one employed
person in every family; school-going age children are all going to school;
their parents show an interest in the education of their children; and
parents are willing to assist in any manner informed by their capacity and
their support, ranging from encouraging their children to be at school
every day, to listening to their educators and being their identity within
the schools. Every child in every school paints a picture of their parents
in words and deeds.

During 2009 the Ad hoc Committee on Co-ordinated Oversight on Service
Delivery was deployed to all nine provinces to monitor and offer support to
service delivery. However, I took an interest in education. In the
identified municipalities we sought to establish the status of education in
those areas. Young people were vocal in their wish for more further
education and training colleges in rural areas. We noted in different
provinces that delivery of education was driven from the two levels as
reflected in the configuration of education, that is, basic and higher
education.

We have noted that the 16 different education departments are things of the
past. Thanks to the ANC, the ANC-led government has managed to end
disparities as far as the education departments of old are concerned. Our
children receive the same education, and that education needs to be viewed
as every person’s business for this country to achieve maximum
expectations.

In our Polokwane Conference we stated, and I quote:


   ... precisely because patriarchal oppression was embedded in the economy,
   social, religious, cultural, family and other relations in all
   communities.

We need to use the democratic organs of people of power which have been
created by our Constitution and successive legislative amendments, starting
with the principle of the South African Schools Act which is informing our
turnaround strategy.

Let’s talk about the support of children. Children need to be supported by
their parents. Parents don’t have to be educated to do that. Parents will
just inform their children to go to school. When they are at school they
will be able to learn. After realising that education is important - as the
ANC, we are saying that parents must assist us out there by telling their
children to go to school - teachers will be able to do their job.

Another strategic resolution from Polokwane stated that:


   Amongst the most vulnerable in society are children, and the national
   democratic society should ensure their protection and continuous
   advancement.

The whole society includes everyone in South Africa, including my brothers
and sisters sitting this side. We should all assist to make sure that we
change the education status of this country.

His Excellency President J G Zuma gave clear marching orders to schools as
to what is expected of learners, educators and parents. We urge parents and
all those organs to participate. He also reminded us that the unions, the
SA Democratic Teachers’ Union, Sadtu, the National Professional Teachers
Organisation of South Africa, Naptosa and the “Suid-Afrikaanse
Onderwysersunie” [SA Teachers’ Union] have also pledged that they would be
supportive.

Machangana va ri “Khoma hikwaleyo”. Loko ho khomisana hinkwerhu swi hi vava
swa vana va hina, ngopfu swa dyondzo, vusiwana laha tikweni leri ku nga va
ntsheketo eka malembe lawa ya taka.

Un’wana na un’wana a vi na vutihlamuleri eka dyondzo ya vana va tiko leri.
Vatswari a hi yeni etinhlengeletanini. Tinhlengeletano a ti vitaniwi hi
nkarhi lowu vatswari va nga ta kota ku ti nghenelela. Vafundhisi
etikerekeni a va hlohloteli vana ku dyondza. (Translation of Xitsonga
paragraphs follows.)

[The Shangaan people say that we must work together. If we can work
together being concerned of the wellbeing of our children, particularly in
education, poverty in this country will be a thing of the past.

Everybody must take the responsibility in respect of the education of this
country. We, as parents, must go to meetings. Meetings should be called
when it is convenient for parents to attend. Pastors in churches must
encourage children to learn.]

It may not necessarily be easy, that is why in Polokwane we agreed that,
and I quote:


   Revolutionary democracy shall not find social relations of the new order
   right and ready for harvesting.

Therefore, we call on all of us to participate positively. Let’s rid our
streets of children of school-going age by taking them to school. Let us
make it our business to assist less fortunate children and pay for one
school trip for a particular child, buy them uniforms and so forth. All
organisations, if they call themselves organisations, should ensure that
they assist at least one child per annum.

This country will only change if all of us participate by doing what we
can. Remember, being positive, or rather positivism, is contagious. If we
are positive, everybody there will be. Together we can do more. Before I go
down I need to talk ... [Laughter.] ... and remind hon members, my
colleagues sitting here, and hon Ndude of Cope that the undercapacitated
personnel you are talking about are all receiving training. The ANC is
taking care of them. In no time, I believe, they will be more capacitated
than you. [Laughter.] [Applause.]

I also want to talk to hon J J McGluwa of the ID, or is it the DA? You see
all the voters are smart. There is no one who can vote if they are not
smart. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr L M MPHAHLELE: Hon Chairperson, from the outset, let me state
unequivocally that the PAC supports the report.

However, the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania is concerned with the
quality and quantity of service delivery. Yes, houses are delivered here
and there, to be washed away by moderate rains because of poor workmanship.
The lifespan of a bridge worthy of the name is 50 years. Yet, our bridges
collapse even before they are commissioned. We deliver stillborn bridges.

The local government is a strategic point of service delivery. What
happened to the town clerk, the city engineer ... [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Order, please!

Mr L M MPHAHLELE: ... and the town planner of yesterday? These are the key
functionaries who went through rigorous, specialised training.

The municipal manager, the director of infrastructure and the director of
development are cadres deployed on a political mission. No wonder service
delivery is politicised, not professionalised.

The most vocal communities are the ones that are serviced. The rural
communities, where millions of our people are trapped in poverty, are
considered last because they are not as vocal as their urban counterparts.
Even the media elects to ignore them.

The issuing of tenders has ...

Corruption is the biggest hindrance to service delivery. Thank you. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs S P KOPANE: Chairperson, after these visits, I am really convinced,
like never before, that financial constraints are not the main reasons for
the poor service delivery by municipalities. Crime, corruption and poor
financial management are the problem in local governance.
Maybe it is time for all of us to ask ourselves the following questions:
Why are people protesting? Why is service delivery not rendered to the
people of South Africa? What happened to the Batho Pele principles?

Bobodu le manyofonyofo le tsamaiso e mpe ya ditjhelete, le ho hirwa ha
bahlanka ba phahameng ka lebaka la kamano tsa bona tsa dipolitiki kapa
feela hobane ho batlwa tekano ya bong, ke tse ding tsa dintho tse amang
phumantsho e fokolang ya ditshebeletso. Hantle ntle mona re bua ka ntho e
hlokolotsi, eleng phano ya ditshebeletso. Phano ena ke motheo wa tokelo tsa
botho.

Ho hloleha ha bommasepala ho ikobela melawana ya mohlahlobi e moholo wa
ditjhelete, ke enngwe ya dintho tse bakang mathata kahare ho bommasepala ba
bangata. Ho hlahelletse hore bommasepala ba bangata ba fane ka ditlaleho
tsa bona tsa ditjhelete kamorao ho nako. Ha ba bang bona ba sa ka ba
itshwenya le ho tlisa ditlaleho tsa mofuta o jwalo. Ho hong hape ke hore
bommasepala ba hloleha ho bokella ditefello tsa phano ya ditshebelletso.
Mohlahlobi e moholo wa ditjhelete o boletse hore bommasepala ha ba tsebe ho
laola dikoloto tsa bona le ho etsa phaello, hore ho tle ho tsejwe ho fanwa
ka ditshebeletso.

Mona ho bonahala hantle hore tlhokeho ya bokgoni ke yona e emeng tseleng ya
hore phumantsho ya ditshebeletso e etswe ka tsela e nepahetseng. Ho boetse
ho na le lesisitheho la sepolotiki ha ho lokelwa hore ho bokellwe
ditefello, haholoholo ho bao ba nang le bokgoni ba ho lefa mmasepala.
(Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Corruption and bad financial management, employment of top officials based
on their political ties or only because of the desire to fulfil gender
quotas are some of the things that affect service delivery. In fact, here
we are dealing with a critical issue which is service delivery. Service
delivery is a basic human right.

The failure of municipalities to adhere to the regulations of the Auditor-
General is one of the things that create problems in many municipalities.
It has since come to light that many municipalities released their
financial reports late. Some of them did not even bother to bring such
reports. The other issue is that municipalities have failed to collect
municipal rates. The Auditor-General has mentioned that municipalities
don’t know how to manage their debts as well as saving money so that they
could deliver services.

It is quite clear that here that lack of capacity is an obstacle for
provision of service delivery to be done properly. There is also no
political will when it comes to the municipal rates, especially from those
who can afford to pay them.]

Chairperson, municipalities have become virtually synonymous with illegal
tendering practices and unauthorised loans to councillors. The obvious
consequence of corruption is that it leaves less money for service
delivery. Municipalities have generally become a haven for those who have
no fears about plundering state resources.

The challenges facing those municipalities are that contractors were paid
before the projects were completed. According to the quantity surveyors,
77% or more of the money was paid to contractors, while 40% of the work was
done. As a result, those contractors disappeared and left the projects
unfinished.

It was also reported that, in most of the tenders, no performance agreement
was signed between the municipality and the contractors.
During the investigation process, significant documents regarding the
projects were destroyed or went missing because the officials were
involved. This impacted negatively on the investigations.

Millions are stolen from municipalities and nothing is done to recover it.
As a committee, we fully agree that the perpetrators must be brought to
book and all findings from the auditors and forensic investigations must be
implemented.

The officials and councillors who resign while they are being investigated
must be blacklisted by government to prevent them from being employed
elsewhere until their investigations are completed.

An exorbitant amount is paid in salaries to officials and councillors. It
exceeds spending on service delivery. Bonuses are also paid to councillors
despite their failures to run the municipalities.

Municipal resources are spent on the luxurious and lavish lifestyles of the
mayors and senior officials – like expensive cars and social parties –
while basic responsibilities, like water, electricity, sanitation and
roads, are not attended to. That is why people are angry and protesting.
Municipal infrastructure grants are only used for the running costs of the
municipalities instead of infrastructure projects. The unfunded mandates
also pressurise municipal budgets.

Motsamaisi ya kgabane wa dipuisano, ha re ntse re nonya setjhaba maikutlo,
re utlwile setjhaba se lla ka hore mmuso ha o se kgathalle ebile ha o se
sekehele tsebe dillong tsa sona. Sena se bakile merusu e sa hlokahaleng, e
bakileng mathata ho phatlalla le naha. Bomajoro ba bang ha ba hlomphe
setjhaba haholoholo ha ba bua le sona, mme ba tletse lenyatso. Sena se
halefisa setjhaba le hofeta.

Ha ke phetela Motsamaisi wa Dipuisano, ke batla ho lemohisa Ntlo ena e
kgabane hore nako e fihlile jwale, ya hore mmuso wa rona o tlohele ho
nyatsa le ho kgella dikelello tsa setjhaba sa haeso fatshe. Batho ba
bulehile mahlo mme ba ke ke ba dula ba thetswa, ba fedile pelo ke ho
hloleha ha mmuso ho phethisa thomo ya bona. Ke a leboha. [Mahofi.]
(Translation of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Chairperson, as we were canvassing the nation’s opinion we heard the
nation’s cry about the fact that government does not care about it and does
not even listen to its grievances. This has led to unnecessary violence,
which has caused problems nationally. Some mayors have no respect for their
communities when they address them and they are very arrogant. This
attitude angers the nation a lot.

As I conclude, Chairperson, I would like to make the honourable House aware
that the time has now arrived for government to stop ignoring and
undermining our nation’s intelligence. The people have become wiser and
cannot be fooled forever. They are running out of patience at the
government’s failure to fulfil its mandate. I thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr G J SELAU: Hon Chairperson, I am deeply hurt that this Parliament
decided to delegate its members to go throughout the country in order to
hear what people are saying are the causes of the problems that we were
seeing as Parliament. The debate started very well at the beginning, with
those who were present and those who went around and did what Parliament
sent them to do. Until such time that those that were not part of this work
started to come to this podium, things turned around and the debate
degenerated.

But the reality is that the ANC-led government inherited a politically,
socially and economically skew society from the apartheid regime in 1994,
in which very few people, particularly whites, were economically empowered.
They had access to better education and lived in beautiful and big houses
with electricity and sanitation. On the one hand, they had infrastructure
of the first world class, and on the other hand the majority of the nation,
predominantly black people, were living in horrifying, rural and very poor
areas of this country with no electricity and/or sanitation at all. They
depended on wood fires as energy, later paraffin and coal stoves, and
candles.

Those who stayed near the cities and towns were forcefully removed and
dumped in remote areas far away from the developed areas. Those who found
employment in mines, factories and shops were given no accommodation, but
were expected to be at work on time, and give the best of their ability
without even adequate training. This later resulted in migration into these
areas as money was the source of life for their families. Subsequently,
informal temporary settlements engulfed entire urban areas of our country,
a challenge we are still continuing to grapple with in South Africa. The
hard reality is that this challenge cannot be overcome overnight, though
government is doing its best in this regard.

The previously disadvantaged section of our society, which forms the
majority of the people of South Africa, is getting impatient with the slow
machinery of the state to deliver services. That is the hard reality. Let
me take this opportunity to focus my attention on the portfolio of energy,
to which I am deployed, particularly as it affects the previously
disadvantaged people of South Africa and beyond.

Remember, energy is regarded as the cornerstone of economic development in
our society. The Department of Energy reported that much work has been done
in the area of electrifying households to the extent that we are left with
20%-25% to reach the universal access to electricity countrywide. This,
however, is not without challenges: Firstly, in the deep rural areas of our
provinces, electricity is still a dream to come true in that there is no
infrastructure, at this stage, for them to access it, and this is what we
inherited.

Secondly, the informal settlements in urban areas have people who are
engaging in very dangerous activities of illegal electricity connections.
This was evident during our recent visit, as the parliamentary Ad hoc
Committee on Co-ordinated Oversight on Service Delivery, to such areas.

Thirdly, internationally, universities and other key institutions of
science, engineering and technology are engaging each other. This is to
exchange ideas and develop technologies in various areas of energy and
efficiencies, such as reliability and resistance, cleaner coal grid energy
and the development of grid energy in the form of alternative sources like
solar, wind, hydro, natural gas, nuclear and others, which are still at
infancy level. These initiatives are aimed at ensuring that our children
should find a foundation as regards energy supply and demand challenges as
the society grows in years ahead.

Finally, coming back home, I wish to draw the attention of our august House
to this extract from the Ad hoc Committee on Co-ordinated Oversight on
Service Delivery. Local government is the centre of gravity. Integrated
development plans should be central in development planning. An
intergovernmental structure like the financial and fiscal commission needs
to be established to consider plans, synchronise and budget. This will
ameliorate the concern that departmental officials do not attend the
independent development planning, IDP, meetings or junior officials, who do
not have authority to make concrete decisions, are sent to attend IDP
meetings. This intergovernmental structure will ensure co-ordinated
planning and implementation against developmental trajectory. Thank you.
[Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs D F BOSHIGO: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers and Deputy Ministers, and
hon members, last year, the Fourth Democratic Parliament, which was aptly
characterised as an activist Parliament, took the correct decision to
establish an Ad hoc Committee on Co-ordinated Oversight on Service
Delivery. The establishment of this committee was intended at finding
empirical evidence on the underlying reasons for the so-called service
delivery protests, which engulfed our municipalities in South Africa. The
committee was ushered in under the theme: Working together to ensure the
delivery of quality services to the communities.

Ye ke tabataba e swanetšego, e bile tshepedišong kamoka, komiti ye ya
nakwana e be e nolofatša tšhomišano magareng ga dikgoro tša mmušo wa
bosetšhaba, dikgoro tša diprofense le ditirelo tša tshepedišo go swana le
Eskom le Sassa magareng ga tše dingwe. Se se bohlokwa kudu ke gore, komiti
ye e šomišana le dikomiti tša diprofense go lekola gore ditirelo di a abja,
gammogo le bomasepala le setšhaba. Tsenelelano ye e bontšhitše go ba le
mohola go netefatšeng gore mahlakore kamoka a setšhaba a lemoga bohlokwa
bja tšhomišanommogo go potlakiša kabo ya ditirelo.

Ka ntle ga dikatlego go bontši bja dimasepala, go nale ditlhotlo tše ntši
tše di tšwelelago tšeo di tšwelago pele go hloriša kudukudu dimasepala. Le
ge go le bjalo, ditlhotlo di amana gape le tshepedišo kamoka ya mmušo
mabapi le thekgo ya bosetšhaba le diprofense go dimasepala. Tlhotlo ya ka
mehla yeo e hlagišitšwego ka maatla ke setšhaba, e bile hlokego ya karabo
ya mmušo go matshwenyego ao a hlagišitšwego ke maloko a setšhaba. Ditšhaba
di belaela gore, le ge go hlagišitšwe matshwenyego ka mangwalo ao a
balegago le dimemorantamo, matshwenyego a bona ga se a rarollwe.
(Translation of Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[In the whole process the ad hoc committee made it easier for the national
government, provincial government, Eskom and Sassa to work co-operatively.
This ad hoc committee works co-operatively with provincial committees,
municipalities and the public to ensure service delivery. This integration
has made the public aware of the importance of co-operation in speeding up
service delivery.

Municipalities are encountering many challenges, including lack of adequate
support by the national and provincial government. The main challenge
raised by the public is lack of response by government to their concerns.
The public is concerned that even after taking effort to raise their
concerns in written form and in the form of memoranda they are still not
attended to.]

The country witnessed intense community struggles, clashes with the police
and the destruction of municipal buildings and houses of individual
councillors. As Parliament, we need to condemn this behaviour; we need to
underscore the fact that local government is at the coalface of service
delivery. As such, frustrations are directed at them individually and to
the community infrastructure. This is untenable and must come to an end.

There are systematic, structural and government or community interface
problems crippling municipalities. Based on evidence, challenges which
beset municipalities are not the functional areas of municipalities but
provincial government and national imperatives. A thorny issue of
incomplete houses is a provincial government competence. Another challenge,
that of unemployment and lack of skills, is a structural challenge, which
government in general has to respond to urgently.

A pressing challenge concerns the relationship of accountability between
ward councillors and ward committees on the one hand and communities on the
other. Councillors are accused of lack of responsiveness as well as the
inability to champion community interest in council, and thus
accountability to the people.

Go nale tlhotlo e nngwe e bohlokwa e lego hlokego ya hlokomelo ya
diprotšeke le tshenyo ya neo tša melao ya taolo ya phepokgolego [supply
chain management regulations]. Mathata a mantši ke diprotšeke tšeo di
tlogetšwego di sa fela mola 100% ya tšhelete e lefilwe.

Borakontraka bao ba nago le molato, ba swanetše go ngwadišwa go lenaneo la
difiwa la Letlotlo la Bošetšhaba la basenyi go ba thibela go hwetša mošomo
o mongwe mmušong. Go swana le bašomedi bao ba itokollago mošomong ka
maitšhireletšo goba ka lebaka la dinyakišišo tšeo di dirwago kgahlanong le
bona, le bona ba swanetše ba ngwadišwe ke kgoro ya Pušotirišano le Merero
ya Setšo, CoGTA, go ba thibela gore ba se hwetše mošomo lefelong le lengwe
ka ntle go sephetho sa dinyakišišo, ba na le molato wa go jabetša goba
boradia, gape ba swanetše go ngwadišwa lenaeong la CoGTA go thibela
phatlalalo ya basenyi go tloga go masepala o mongwe go ya go o mongwe.

Go nale mengwako e mentši ya Lenaneo la Kagoleswa le Tšwetšopele, RDP, yeo
e sa fetšwago dikarolong tše ntši tša naga, go fa mohlala, kua Nokeng tša
Taemane go la Gauteng. Tlhohlo ye ke sešupo sa gore Kgoro ya Bodulo bja
Batho e nepile ge e nyakišiša dithentara le go thuba mengwako yeo e
senyegilego ka lebaka la bofokodi bja mošomo wa baagi. Komiti ya Nakwana e
swanetše go thekga lenaneo le go phošolla bothata bjo bo lego gona gona
bjale.

Tlhotlo ye nngwe ye thata yeo e nyakago šedi ya mmušo ke pelaelo\ ya gore
dikgoro ga di ye dikopanong tša diIDP goba ba romela bašomedi ba maemo a
tlase bao ba ka se kgonego go tšea diphetho. Mokgwa wo o nyaka hlokomelo ya
tšhoganetšo go netefatša gore mmušo o ineetše go tsela ya mohlakanela ya
thlabollo.

Diprofenseng tše dingwe go nale maano a thomilwego go netefatša gore diMEC
di amega thwii lenaneong la kgotlaganyo ya diIDP, gagolo kua KwaZulu-Natal.
Se se laola gabotse Mahlomo a Dikamano tša ka gare tša mmušo...
[Tšhwahlelo.] [Nako e fedile.] [Legoswi.] Ke a leboga. (Translation of
Sepedi paragraphs follows.)

[Another pressing challenge is a lack of projects monitoring and the
contravention of supply chain management regulations. Many problems are
caused by incomplete projects that have already been paid for 100%.

The contractors who are found guilty should be blacklisted at the
offenders’ programme in the National Treasury to make it impossible for
them to get another job offer from the government. The Department of Co-
operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Cogta, must also blacklist
employees who commit fraud and resign to protect themselves or to avoid
investigations against them. This should be done to prevent them to get
another job offer before the completion of investigations and to stop the
spread of corruption from one municipality to another.

There are many houses in the Reconstruction and Development Programme, RDP,
that are still incomplete in many parts of the country, for example, Nokeng
tsa Taemane in Gauteng. This proves that the Department of Human
Settlements is right in investigating tenders and demolishing poorly
constructed houses due to poor workmanship. The ad hoc committee must
support this programme to solve the existing problem.

The fact that government departments do not attend integrated development
planning, IDP, meetings and are also delegating junior staff members who
cannot take decisions should be attended to. This matter needs urgent
attention to ensure that the government is committed to integrated
development.

There are plans in place in other provinces like Kwazulu-Natal to ensure
that the Members of the Executive Council, MECs, are fully involved in the
IDP programme. This controls effectively foundations of internal relations
in government ... Thank you. [Interjections.] [Time expired.] [Applause.]]

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Hon Chairperson, on a point of order: There
was a structural and institutional malfunction during the hon member’s
maiden speech that militated against many of us being able to give her
maiden speech the necessary respect of listening to it. The interpretation
is so poor that it is almost impossible to follow. I saw you with the
interpretation at your ear and I tried also, but eventually gave up. And
really, it is very, very difficult if we are going to have a situation
where interpretation is of such a nature that we cannot follow the debate.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Thank you, hon member, I think the
relevant people will take care of that. The Table staff will take care of
the issue of interpretation. Thank you.

Mr T BOTHA: Hon Chairperson, I would like to start by correcting hon
Mushwana who alleged that hon Ndude suggested that the municipalities are
incapacitated. It is, in fact, the ad hoc committee report which states
that the municipalities are incapacitated.

Cope welcomes and supports the ad hoc committee report on service delivery,
but wishes to draw the attention of the House to specific concerns which,
notwithstanding the recommendations of the report, will remain a challenge
for the government.

It goes without saying that appropriate institutional arrangements and
intergovernmental relations are a cornerstone of effective and efficient
service delivery co-ordination. This supposed appropriate institutional
arrangement is often predicated on the assumption that there is a stable
political environment within which such institutions exist and operate.
However, in some of the communities we visited it cannot be said that the
conditions for a stable political environment are conducive to smooth
service delivery.

This was the experience we had in Thembisa, the informal settlement in
Johannesburg. Four residents had erected shacks on one stand without even
one of them holding a title deed. Only one of the four shacks had been
provided with electricity. Furthermore, electricity was illegally connected
to the other three shacks, which means that if one resident is not home,
the rest cannot have access to electricity. This is a recipe for social
conflict and has the potential to trigger protest in these areas.

Short-term solutions to the current crisis that do not contribute
positively to a permanent long-term solution should be discarded. These are
simply contributing to the mounting crisis in these areas.

To illustrate my point further, I wish to draw the attention of the House
to a potential time bomb. A large number of people in this country,
particularly in the low-income groups, have been allocated houses to which
they hold no title deeds. In fact, they do hold title deeds, but the irony
is that these houses are occupied by people who are either politically
connected or who use force to occupy them illegally.

This was the experience in Diepsloot, where a number of people occupied
houses illegally. They are even busy extending these houses, yet the
rightful owners are in the queue waiting to get houses. The challenge is
that the people who hold the title deeds are neither able to gain access to
their houses, nor are they entitled to join the housing waiting list. Such
incidences are on the increase and critical attention must be paid to this
impending disaster.

The situation is further exacerbated by people illegally selling RDP houses
without registering such transfers with the Deeds Office. This will make it
difficult for both the government and the Deeds Office to trace the legal
owners of these properties in the future, as illegal transactions continue
without transfers being registered.

Lastly, I wish to draw attention to the issue of bulk municipal
infrastructure funding. As a consequence of historical circumstances, South
Africa inherited an enormous backlog in bulk infrastructure. Even though
municipalities are capable of providing water and sanitation through their
allocated budgets, they cannot fully address these backlogs within the
regulated timeframes and context of their own normal operational budgets.

Cope therefore wishes to call on the government to create a special fund to
address these backlogs. If this does not happen, we may in future have to
ask the question which Ringo Madlingozi asks in his song: “Whose song will
the future sing?” Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M WENGER: Madam Chair, hon Minister Sexwale, considering the numerous
violent demonstrations throughout the country, it was necessary that an
oversight visit be done, particularly to the so-called hot spot areas in
all nine provinces. However, the visits, done quite some time after the
protests, did not give us the exact impact. Hon Selau, I was part of the
delegation. However, you failed to inform us of the corruption and
maladministration that you were talking about.

Service delivery protests turned violent in many areas. They have brought
political instability, not to mention the vandalism of municipal buildings,
libraries and clinics. These very communities now want the same structures
and buildings that they themselves have destroyed to be replaced. Most
municipalities cannot afford to do this. Will this result in another round
of protests?

Many of the protests were due to maladministration, cadre deployment,
corruption and political infighting between the factions of the ruling
party. It was evident that the leadership had lost touch with the residents
on the ground and had taken refuge in their ivory towers, forgetting about
the plight of the people.
There is also a lack of understanding of the functions of the different
spheres of government, and municipalities often bear the brunt of
nondelivery by district councils and provincial government. Municipalities
have become an easy target for demonstrators. Districts and provincial
departments very seldom come to their rescue, but, rather, hide behind the
back of the municipalities.

Whilst municipalities are responsible for providing internal reticulation,
bulk infrastructure lies with the districts, which have failed dismally.
Municipalities, particularly medium- and low-capacity municipalities,
cannot afford to budget for and install bulk services which run into
billions.

People living in glass houses should not throw stones.

A HON MEMBER: Hear, hear!

Mrs M WENGER: It is rather strange that the hon member from the ad hoc
committee seems to be concentrating on Khayelitsha instead of highlighting
the shortcomings of the other eight provinces. Hundreds of instances in ANC-
controlled municipalities show that they have not complied with any of the
norms.

In the Rammulotsi Township near Viljoenskroon in the Free State there are
still dozens of open toilets after nine years of ANC rule. Take Protea
South, where 548 toilets are being shared by 8 000 families. The national
norm is 1:5. Here it is 1:15 families.  Further to this, for 15 years, the
council has failed to provide sanitation, and is currently in defiance of a
court order that was handed down last year.

This week, in a KwaZulu-Natal newspaper, The Mercury, a front-page article
carries the story that a prominent ANC member’s daughter was awarded a
contract for 50 container toilets ordered by the eThekwini Municipality at
a cost of millions of rands, on the basis that they were needed for an
informal settlement. The toilets are still lying opposite a police station
in Sydenham.

We have seen sewage spillages, nonexistent stormwater drainage, leaking
pipes, a total absence of refuse removal, inaccessible roads, no
electrification, and huge unemployment particularly amongst school leavers.
Communities are not experiencing any difference in or change to their
lifestyles. However, they clearly see the wastage that occurs, particularly
on the part of the political leadership and administration who have, in
many instances, become arrogant and inaccessible to people and communities.

It does not help, either, when a mayor calls the disadvantaged people in
her community “stupid”, or where she refers to the youth as “lazy
drunkards”, instead of assisting them to improve their lifestyles and
empower them with skills. These kinds of allegations by community leaders
cannot be ignored, and action must be taken if we are to improve the living
conditions of our communities.

Political infighting between community development workers, CDWs, and ward
committee members and councillors is evident far and wide. CDWs and ward
committee members have suddenly become aspirant councillor candidates, and
instead of strengthening and supporting the councillors, they are
undermining them.

The ad hoc committee had its work cut out, and its term has now come to an
end. But what about the report-back to the communities? We have heard it
time and time again during public hearings that on a continuous basis
representations from ministry, province, the NCOP and Parliament make
promises, yet no one does a report-back to them. Unless the report-back is
done, communities will continue to distrust the different structures.

The absence of the Minister and the Deputy Minister of Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs is most unfortunate, considering the
importance of this report. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr P S SIZANI: Hon Chairperson, hon members, many speakers who came to this
podium shied away from looking at the oversight instruments that are
available along the three spheres of state, which deserve to be reinforced.
I beg your indulgence, hon Chairperson, to look into this matter this
afternoon, but before I do that, let me quote the President of our country
when he said:


  You will recall that during the inauguration we committed ourselves to
  the service of the nation with dedication, commitment, discipline,
  integrity, hard work and passion. We called for faster service delivery.
  We said the dreams and hopes of all the people of our country must be
  fulfilled. We said there was no place for complacency, cynicism and
  excuses.

These are the words of the President opening the ANC Lekgotla on 15 to 18
January 2010, drawing the line on the sand for all elected and deployed
cadres to serve the population diligently. He warned that “there must be no
social distance between the people and their government, and the people
must not be ignored.” He said, ”We should identify the weaknesses and work
out the correction measures and rectify them.”

The Ad hoc Committee on Co-ordinated Oversight on Service Delivery visited
many local municipalities to identify these weaknesses in line with this
injunction and constitutional imperative, which outlines the framework for
oversight by Parliament in terms of section 55(2) of the Constitution of
the Republic of South Africa.

It is common cause, at least among those who participated in this oversight
fact-finding mission, that many weaknesses have been due to the social
distance between the people and their government, particularly in many of
the areas visited by the ad hoc committee. I will draw your attention to
one thing I’ll come back to, hon Wenger. The hon Waters, hon Smith, hon
Ndude, hon Steyn would attest to the fact that the toilets in Du Noon do
not meet the national standards. That is the problem.

I think we must collectively agree that our oversight function must focus
on how we can pressurise all three spheres of government to maintain and
perform their functions properly instead of throwing stones at them.
Because the more we criticise them, the more we weaken them. We should
instead support them. I suggest that this throwing of stones is, in fact,
especially by those who live in glass houses, and does not make sense
either to them or to us.

Members of Parliament who went to Taung in the North West and those who
came with us to Thulamela and Molemole in Limpopo will confirm that there
are huge dams, the Taung and the Nandoni Dams. They are full of water, but
the villages around them have no water, no water in the taps, no water for
irrigation and there is no water for the animals.

Hon Chief Whip, there has to be a way, in terms of the Constitution, to
make us in this Parliament work with our colleagues in the provincial
legislatures and standing committees at local level. There is absolutely no
reason why these people should sit there hoping that one day, God willing,
this water that they see in this dam will come to their homes when they
vote every five years. Our colleagues, who provide this oversight function,
see this thing everyday and do nothing. I think this throwing of stones
here is not helping. And this function of the ad hoc committee that this
Parliament has created must continue rather than come to an end as a once-
off event.

Section 55(2) of the Constitution states that the National Assembly must
provide for mechanisms to ensure all organs of state in the national sphere
of government are accountable to it. What is this oversight function that
we provide that makes these departments account to us when these things are
there for 16 years and we always talk about them in this podium but do
nothing?

This is a constitutional imperative given to us as an oversight function,
but we talk about it and do nothing. This means that the ad hoc committee
must submit a clear report of its findings to this House for Parliament to
demand an explanation of incomplete projects originally created to better
the life of affected communities.

Similarly, all relevant portfolio committees of this House and those of
provincial legislatures must take steps to follow these matters up in order
to correct these weaknesses so that the dedication the President spoke
about, the commitment that we are supposed to show in our tasks, the
discipline and integrity, hard work and the passion that we deployees of
this nation must show in our work will be seen in practice, not only on the
podium. [Applause.]

Hon members, councillors reported that state-owned enterprises, especially
Eskom and the water boards in particular, are a law unto themselves. They
choose which villages to electrify; they choose which villages will get
water, without talking to councillors, without even due regard to the mayor
of the town.

When these fights between the mayors and councillors with the communities
take place, all these other spheres fold their arms as if they have nothing
to do with that fight. Yet Eskom is the provider of electricity, water
boards are in charge and not local authorities, and yet the communities
fight against councillors because they are the face of government nearest
to the people. What is the oversight function of Parliament in this regard?
Remember, water and electricity are a national competence. When people
fight for water and electricity, we behave as if it has nothing to do with
us.

It is important to note that these councillors, although they have their
weaknesses, also have their problems, including corruption. There has to be
a way which will insist on the structural and institutional co-operation
between councillors and traditional leaders. We were told that there are
townships, hon Sexwale, that are built between towns and outside villages.

Those people who are regarded as the poorest of the poor in the village are
taken out of the social network of the villages, away from the villages,
which means they have nobody to look after them because they do not belong
to the traditional leader or the town, so it is a township in the middle of
nowhere.

We create, suddenly, social problems that have nothing to do with what they
experience in the village. Do you know what the problem is? These people
cannot negotiate a livelihood outside the village because the only skills
they have are those skills they acquired from birth in the village, and
suddenly they must depend on social grants outside their villages where
there is no work. Why is it allowed for townships to be built outside the
village nowhere close to the town? We saw this thing with our own eyes when
we visited North West and Limpopo. Why is it allowed?

We were horrified in Molemole Municipality to learn that a corpse had been
in a mortuary for months because the traditional leaders would not allow
that Zimbabwean citizen to be buried anywhere in the village, not because
they could not bury that person, but simply because they had a fight with
the councillors who want to regulate land use planning. Now this dead
person could not be buried. We had to abandon our task and create a
negotiating process to reconcile the two people for the dead person to be
buried.

The point here is that we must create a mechanism to regulate the working
relationship between the traditional leaders and the councillors,
especially with relation to land, commonages, graveyards, grazing land and
even fields for the cultivation of food. The majority of people in
townships do not work, anyway, so the land available must be put to use to
produce food for food security. [Applause.] [Time expired.]

Debate concluded.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Hon Chairperson and hon members, I
move:

   That the Report be adopted.

Mr W P DOMAN: Chairperson, we also agree; but can it just be put in the
minutes that we are not necessarily agreeing with all the recommendations
of the report?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): That will be noted. Hon member, is
that a point of order?

Mr P S SIZANI: Chairperson, no ... yes, it is a point of order: We spent
close to an hour last night in the ad hoc committee, dealing with the
concerns raised by the hon Doman. We changed the report and they told us
that they have accepted the report. I don’t understand what is happening
today. What happened between last night and now?

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, if the hon member was there
right to the end of the meeting ... [Interjections.] ... he would recall
...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, I didn’t give you the
floor. Can you please take your seat?

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, I will do so; but I just wanted
to answer him.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon members, you have agreed that
the report be adopted. The DA said that we should note their concerns,
because they do not agree with some recommendations in the report.
Therefore, they have a right to do so. I have already indicated that we
will note their concern.

What will happen afterwards will be discussed at the relevant committee. We
cannot debate that in this House. [Applause.] Hon member, is that a point
of order?

The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Chairperson, yes, it is a point of order: The
hon Sizani got your attention and you asked him if it was a point of order;
and he said no. Then he changed his mind and said it was a point of order.
Actually, he didn’t make a point of order, but you allowed him to speak and
conclude. When the hon Doman wanted to speak, you didn’t give him an
opportunity to respond. [Interjections.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M N Oliphant): Hon member, I had to respond,
because I had already given the ruling on the issue. I hope that the hon
Doman is happy that we have agreed that his concern will be noted.

Motion agreed to.

Report accordingly adopted.

The House adjourned at 18:40.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Assent by President in respect of Bills

      1) South African Reserve Bank Amendment Bill [B 10 – 2010] – Act No 4
         of 2010 (assented to and signed by President on 8 September 2010).

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

 1. The Minister of Finance

    (a)     Government Notice No R 381 published in Government Gazette No
        33171 dated 14 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/660), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (b)     Government Notice No R 437 published in Government Gazette No
        33211dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1405),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (c)    Government Notice No R 438 published in  Government  Gazette  No
         33211 dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No. 1 (No  1/1/1406)
         in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (d)     Government Notice No R 439 published in Government Gazette No
        33211 dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1407),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (e)     Government Notice No R 440 published in Government Gazette No
        33211 dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/325), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (f)     Government Notice No R 441 published in Government Gazette No
        33211 dated 28 May 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/1/662),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (g)     Government Notice No R 454 published in Government Gazette No
        33211 dated 28 May 2010: Exemption in terms of the Financial
        Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).


    (h)     Government Notice No 471 published in Government Gazette No
        33241 dated 04 June 2010: Exemption in terms of the Financial
        Intelligence Centre Act, 2001 (Act No 38 of 2001).


    (i)     Government Notice No R 622 published in Government Gazette No
        33382 dated 14 July 2010: Amendment of Rules (DAR/72), in terms of
        the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (j)     Government Notice No R 623 published in Government Gazette No
        33382  dated 14 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/326),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (k)     Government Notice No R 624 published in Government Gazette No
        33383  dated 15 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1410), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (l)     Government Notice No R 604 published in Government Gazette No
        33370 dated 16 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1409),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (m)     Government Notice No R 606 published in Government Gazette No
        33370 dated 16 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 3 (No 3/662), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (n)     Government Notice No R 616 published in Government Gazette No
        33370 dated 16 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/327), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (o)     Government Notice No R 630 published in Government Gazette No
        33385 dated 23 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 4 (No 4/332), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (p)     Government Notice No R 639 published in Government Gazette No
        33385 dated 23 July 2010: Regulations made under section 121 of the
        Income Tax Act, 1962 (Act No 58 of 1962).


    (q)     Government Notice No R 637 published in Government Gazette No
        33394 dated 23 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1411),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (r)     Government Notice No R 638 published in Government Gazette No
        33394 dated 23 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/328), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (s)     Government Notice No R 653 published in Government Gazette No
        33400 dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1408),
        in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (t)     Government Notice No R 655 published in Government Gazette No
        33400 dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/329), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (u)     Government Notice No R 656 published in Government Gazette No
        33400 dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 2 (No 2/330), in
        terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (v)     Government Notice No R 672 published in Government Gazette No
        33423 dated 30 July 2010: Amendment of Rules (DAR/73), in terms of
        the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).

    (w)     Government Notice No 710 published in Government Gazette No
        33457 dated 13 August 2010: Amendment of Regulations, in terms of
        the South African Reserve Bank Act, 1964 (Act No 90 of
        1989).Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No 1/1/1413), in terms of the
        Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91 of 1964).


    (x)     Government Notice No R 738 published in Government Gazette No
        33481 dated 20 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1412), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).


    (y)     Government Notice No R 739 published in Government Gazette No
        33481 dated 20 August 2010: Amendment of Schedule No 1 (No
        1/1/1413), in terms of the Customs and Excise Act, 1964 (Act No 91
        of 1964).

2. The Minister of Basic Education

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Council
        for Educators for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.
3. The Minister of Communications

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of Vote 21 – Department of
        Communications for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information of
        Vote 21 for 2009-2010 [RP 126-2010].


    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the Independent
        Communications Authority of South Africa (ICASA) for 2009-2010,
        including the Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial
        Statements and Performance Information for 2009-2010 [RP 210-2010].


     c) Report and Financial Statements of the National Electronic Media
        Institute of South Africa (NEMISA) for 2009-2010, including the
        Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and
        Performance Information for 2009-2010.


4. The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the National Research
        Foundation for 2009-2010, including the Report of the Auditor-
        General on the Financial Statements and Performance Information for
        2009-2010.


5. The Minister of Trade and Industry

    (a)     Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the State of Kuwait, tabled in terms
        of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (b)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Trade Agreement between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the State of Kuwait.


    (c)     Agreement on Economic, Commercial and Technical Co-operation
        between the Government of the Republic of South Africa and the
        Government of the State of Qatar, tabled in terms of section 231(3)
        of the Constitution, 1996.


    (d)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Agreement on Economic, Commercial
        and Technical Co-operation between the Government of the Republic
        of South Africa and the Government of the State of Qatar.


    (e)     Bilateral Agreement on Economic, Trade and Technical Co-
        operation between the Government of the Republic of South Africa
        and the Government of the United Arab Emirates, tabled in terms of
        section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (f)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Bilateral Agreement on Economic,
        Trade and Technical Co-operation between the Government of the
        Republic of South Africa and the Government of the United Arab
        Emirates.


    (g)     Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic of South
        Africa and the Government of the Republic of Yemen, tabled in terms
        of section 231(3) of the Constitution, 1996.


    (h)     Explanatory Memorandum to the Trade Agreement between the
        Government of the Republic of South Africa and the Government of
        the Republic of Yemen.
6. The Minister of Transport

    (a)     Report and Financial Statements of the Airports Company South
        Africa (Ltd) (ACSA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of the
        Independent Auditors on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.

    (b)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African Civil
        Aviation Authority (SACAA) for 2009-2010, including the Report of
        the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010.


    (c)     Report and Financial Statements of the South African National
        Roads Agency Limited (SANRAL) for 2009-2010, including the Report
        of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements and Performance
        Information for 2009-2010 [RP 81-2010].


