---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 11 February 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2010-02-11
---

THURSDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 2010
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 19:00.

The Speaker of the National Assembly and the Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces took the Chair.

The Speaker of the National Assembly requested members to observe a moment
of silence for prayers or meditation.

                          CALLING OF JOINT SITTING

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker of the National Assembly announced that the President had
called a Joint Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of
Provinces in terms of section 84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic
of South Africa, 1996, read with Joint Rule 7(1)(a), to enable him to
deliver his state of the nation address to Parliament.
            ADDRESS BY PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, Chairperson of the National
Council of Provinces, Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly and Deputy
Chairperson of the NCOP, Deputy President of the Republic, hon Kgalema
Motlanthe, hon Chief Justice of the Republic of South Africa and all
esteemed members of the judiciary, Isithwalandwe President Nelson
Rolihlahla Mandela ... [Applause.] ... former President F W de Klerk ...
[Applause.] ... our father, former President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia ...
[Applause.] ... former Deputy Presidents, distinguished Premiers and
Speakers of our provinces, Chairperson of Salga and all local government
leadership, Chairperson of the National House of Traditional Leaders, heads
of Chapter 9 Institutions, the Governor of the Reserve Bank, special
international guests, especially the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr Jean Ping ... [Applause.] ... former political prisoners and
veterans, members of the diplomatic corps, South African and foreign media,
fellow South Africans, dumelang, molweni, goeienaand, good evening,
sanibonani nonke emakhaya! [Good evening to all of you at home!]

Siyavuya ukuba nani ngobubusuku bubaluleke kangaka. [We take great pleasure
in your company on such an important evening as this.]

I stand before you this evening, 20 years since President Nelson Rolihlahla
Mandela walked out of prison. [Applause.]
We have chosen this as the day to call this Joint Sitting of Parliament to
deliver the state of the nation address to celebrate a watershed moment
that changed our country. The release of Madiba was brought about by the
resolute struggles of the South African people.

Former political prisoners and veterans bear witness because they were part
of that process. You will, of course, recall that the masses of this
country, in their different formations, responded with determination to the
call to make the country ungovernable and apartheid unworkable.

We are celebrating this day with former political prisoners who we have
specially invited to join us. We welcome in particular those who have
travelled from abroad to be here, Helene Pastoors ... [Applause.] ...
Michael Dingake from Botswana ... [Applause.] ... and Mr Andimba Toivo ya
Toivo of Swapo in Namibia. [Applause.]

We are pleased to be joined by members of the legal team in the Rivonia
Treason Trial, Lord Joel Joffe ... [Applause.] ... who is now based in
London, and Judge Arthur Chaskalson. [Applause.] We also remember and pay
tribute to Mr Harry Schwarz, who sadly passed away last week. He was,
amongst other things, a member of the Rivonia defence team. [Applause.]

We extend our gratitude to our friends and comrades in the international
community for fighting side by side with us to achieve freedom.

We extend a special welcome to the Mandela family. [Applause.] They became
a symbol of the sacrifices of many who bore the brunt of apartheid.

We greet the leadership of the ruling party and alliance partners, for whom
this is an extra special occasion. [Applause.]

Compatriots and friends, on this special day, we must also acknowledge the
contribution of those within the leadership of the National Party, who
eventually realised that apartheid had no future. Allow me to mention the
role played by former President P W Botha. It was he who initiated the
discussion about the possible release of political prisoners. President
Botha worked with the former Minister of Justice, Mr Kobie Coetzee, who was
in turn assisted by Dr Neil Barnard and Mr Mike Louw. They played a
significant role in the process leading to the release of Madiba.

Hon members, South Africa is yet to acknowledge in full the critical role
played by the former president of the ANC, Comrade Oliver Tambo ...
[Applause.] ... who laid the foundation for this country to become a
shining example of freedom and democracy. It was his outstanding
leadership, foresight and clarity of vision that led the ANC to intensify
the pursuit of a negotiated settlement. His wisdom was also displayed in
the Harare Declaration, which he wrote and championed.

It was this that laid the groundwork for the historic announcements by
President F W de Klerk 20 years ago. In this, President De Klerk
demonstrated great courage and decisive leadership. [Applause.]

On this great day, let me also acknowledge the role played by the late Mrs
Helen Suzman. [Applause.] She was, for a long time, a lone voice in
Parliament calling for change.

We also recognise the role of the leader of the Inkatha Freedom Party,
Inkosi Mangosuthu Buthelezi ... [Applause.] ... who also called for
Madiba’s release, as well as that of other political prisoners and the
return of exiles.

We reiterate our heartfelt gratitude to the international community for its
unwavering support of our struggle. [Applause.]

These moments in our history demonstrate our ability to come together, even
under the most difficult of circumstances, and to put the country’s
interests first, above all other interests.

Deur saam te werk, kan ons meer bereik. [Applous.] [By working together, we
can achieve more. [Applause.]]

Hon members, during the course of this year, we will mark the centenary of
the establishment of the Union of South Africa in 1910. This created a
unitary state. Significantly, the exclusion of black people from this Union
was one of the chief reasons for the formation of the African National
Congress in 1912. [Applause.] As we mark this centenary later in the year,
we should reflect on how far we have travelled as a country.

Hon members, we recall the words of Madiba on his release, when he said:

   I stand before you, not as a prophet but as a humble servant of you, the
   people. Your tireless and heroic sacrifices have made it possible for me
   to be here today. I therefore place the remaining years of my life in
   your hands.

[Applause.]

These words inspire us not to rest until we achieve the ideals of a society
free of poverty and deprivation.

In the two decades since the release of Madiba, our country has changed
fundamentally. President Mandela united this country behind the goal of a
non-sexist, non-racial, democratic and prosperous South Africa.

As we celebrate Madiba’s release today, let us recommit ourselves to
building a better future for all South Africans, black and white. Let us
pursue the ideal for which Madiba has fought his entire life - the ideal of
a democratic and free society, in which all persons live together in
harmony and with equal opportunities.

Hon members, we called a Joint Sitting in the evening so that the majority
in our country, workers and schoolchildren, can be part of the occasion. We
are impressed by the enthusiasm of the youth about the occasion.
[Applause.] Two hundred and sixty-six children from all provinces
participated in the pre-state of the nation debate on the role of the youth
in the fight against poverty. We congratulate the overall winner, Charlotte
le Fleur of Worcester Secondary School, and all the participants for the
hard work. [Applause.]

Compatriots and friends, we are meeting against the backdrop of a global
economic crisis. Last year, we experienced our first recession in 17 years.
The crisis cost our economy about 900 000 jobs. Many of those who lost
their jobs were the breadwinners in poor families.

In February last year, government, business, labour and community
representatives agreed on a package of measures to reduce the scale and
impact of the crisis. We have put many of these measures in place. We have
implemented decisive anti-recession spending by government, especially on
infrastructure.

To ensure a safety cushion for the poor, we brought social grant increases
forward, and extended the child support grant to children over 14 years of
age. In the next three years, an additional two million children from poor
households, aged 15 to 18 years, will benefit from the child support grant.
[Applause.]

The Industrial Development Corporation has put aside R6 billion to help
companies in distress. Government introduced a “training lay-off scheme” to
allow workers the option of a period of training instead of retrenchment.
These efforts were enhanced by our public works programme.

The nation will recall that during the 2009 state of the nation address, I
announced that the Expanded Public Works Programme would create 500 000
work opportunities by December 2009. Let me reiterate that these are not
jobs in the mainstream economy. These are job opportunities created to
provide unemployed people with an income, work experience, and training
opportunities.

Hon members, fellow South Africans, we are pleased to announce that by the
end of December we had created more than 480 000 public works job
opportunities ... [Applause.] ... which is 97% of the target we had set.
[Applause.] The jobs are in areas like construction, home and community-
based care, and environmental projects. We have identified some areas of
improvement which we will effect going forward, including ensuring more
labour-intensive projects. We know that these and other measures cannot
fully mitigate the effects of the recession. We are grateful for the spirit
of family, community and voluntary work that inspires many people to help
those most affected by the crisis through these difficult times.

Hon members, economic indicators suggest that we are now turning the
corner. Economic activity is rising in South Africa, and we expect growth
going forward. The labour statistics released on Tuesday show that the
economy is now creating jobs rather than shedding them. [Applause.] It is
too soon, though, to be certain of the pace of recovery. Government will
therefore not withdraw its support measures. Now is the time to lay the
groundwork for stronger growth going forward, and for growth that gives
rise to more jobs.

Our long-term infrastructure programme will help us grow faster.

Our education and skills programmes will increase our productivity and
competitiveness.

Our Industrial Policy Action Plan and our new focus on green jobs will
build stronger and more labour-absorbing industries. Our rural development
programme will improve rural productivity, and the lives of people living
in rural areas.

Underpinning our strategy for economic recovery and growth, is our capital
investment programme. Over the next three years government will spend R846
billion on public infrastructure. [Applause.] On transport, we will
maintain and expand our road network. We will ensure that our rail network
is reliable, competitive and better integrated with our sea ports.

To ensure reliable power supply, we have established an Inter-Ministerial
Committee on Energy to develop a 20-year integrated resource plan. Among
other things, this will look at the participation of independent power
producers, and protecting the poor from rising electricity prices.
[Applause.] We will establish an independent system operator, separate from
Eskom Holdings. [Applause.] Eskom will continue to build additional
generation capacity and improve the maintenance of its power stations.

To ensure the promotion of an inclusive economy and to aid growth and
development, we have established the Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment
Advisory Council, chaired by the President.

The most urgent focus of policy change must be interventions to create jobs
for young people. [Applause.] Unemployment rates for young people are
substantially higher than the average. Proposals will be tabled to
subsidise the cost of hiring younger workers to encourage firms to take on
inexperienced staff. [Applause.]

A further expansion of public employment programmes is also under way. This
includes local infrastructure and literacy projects, home-based care,
school maintenance and early childhood development initiatives.

Last year we launched the National Youth Development Agency. We have
directed the agency to work faster to establish its structures throughout
the country so that it can assist us to mainstream youth development
programmes within government.

Hon members, when this administration came into office last year, we
undertook to work harder to build a strong developmental state. We said it
would be a state that responds to the needs and aspirations of the people,
and which performs better and faster.

This year, 2010, shall be a year of action. [Applause.] The defining
feature of this administration will be that it knows where people live,
understands their needs, and responds faster. Government must work faster,
harder and smarter. [Applause.]

We will expect the executive and the Public Service to comply with this
vision. We are building a performance-oriented state by improving planning
as well as performance monitoring and evaluation. We also need to integrate
gender equity measures into the government’s programme of action.
[Applause.] This action will ensure that women, children and persons with
disabilities can access developmental opportunities.

We are pleased to announce a new way of doing things in government.

The work of departments will be measured by outcomes, developed through our
performance monitoring and evaluation system. The Ministers who are
responsible for a particular outcome will sign a detailed delivery
agreement with the President. [Applause.] It will outline what is to be
done, how, by whom, within what time period and using what measurements and
resources. [Applause.]
As you are aware, we are committed to five priorities: education, health,
rural development and land reform, creating decent work, and fighting
crime. In addition, we will work to improve the effectiveness of local
government, infrastructure development and human settlements. [Applause.]
We will undertake a number of key activities towards the achievement of
these outcomes.

We have placed education and skills development at the centre of this
government’s policies. In our 2010 programme, we want to improve the
ability of our children to read, write and count in the foundation years.
[Applause.] Unless we do this, we will not improve the quality of
education.

Our education targets are simple but critical: We want learners and
teachers to be in school, in class, on time, learning and teaching for
seven hours a day. [Applause.]

We will assist teachers by providing detailed daily lesson plans. To
students we will provide easy-to-use workbooks in all 11 languages. From
this year onwards, all Grade 3, 6 and 9 students will write literacy and
numeracy tests that are independently moderated. [Applause.] We aim to
increase the pass rate for these tests from the current average of between
35% and 40% to at least 60% by 2014. Results will be sent to parents to
track progress.

In addition, each of our 27 000 schools will be assessed by officials from
the Department of Basic Education. [Applause.] This will be recorded in an
auditable written report.

We aim to increase the number of matric students who are eligible for
university admission to 175 000 a year by 2014. We urge parents to co-
operate with us in making this a success.

We welcome last month’s statement by the three teacher unions, Naptosa,
Sadtu and the SAOU, reaffirming their commitment to the Quality Learning
and Teaching Campaign from the beginning of 2010. [Applause.]

Hon members, we need to invest in our youth to ensure a skilled and capable
workforce to support growth and job creation. We therefore plan to increase
the training of 16 to 25-year-olds in further education and training
facilities. This will enable us to provide a second chance at education for
those who do not qualify for university. [Applause.]

We are working with higher education institutions to ensure that eligible
students obtain financial assistance through the National Student Financial
Aid Scheme.

We have also set ambitious targets for skills development to produce
additional engineers and technicians, and to increase the number of
qualified mathematics and science teachers.

We must also increase the number of youth who enter learnerships in the
private and public sectors.

Hon members, another key outcome is to ensure a long and healthy life for
all South Africans. We will continue to improve our health care system.
This includes building and upgrading hospitals and clinics, and further
improving the working conditions of health care workers.

We have partnered with the Development Bank of Southern Africa to improve
the functionality of public hospitals and their district offices.

We are also collaborating with Absa ... sorry, with the DBSA ...
[Laughter.] [Interjections.] We are also collaborating with the DBSA and
the Industrial Development Corporation, in a public-private partnership
programme to improve hospitals and provide finance for projects.

Hon members, we must confront the fact that life expectancy at birth has
dropped from 60 years in 1994 to just below 50 years today. We are
therefore making interventions to lower maternal mortality rates, to reduce
new HIV infections and to effectively treat HIV and tuberculosis.
[Applause.] We will also reduce infant mortality through a massive
immunisation programme. We will reinstate health programmes in schools. We
will implement all the undertakings made on World Aids Day relating to new
HIV prevention and treatment measures. [Applause.] Intensive work is under
way to ensure that this work is on schedule.

We will also continue preparations for the establishment of a national
health insurance system.

Fellow South Africans, we are working hard to ensure that everyone in South
Africa feels safe and is safe. We will take further our work to reduce
serious and violent crimes, and ensure that the justice system works
efficiently. We are implementing plans to increase the number of policemen
and women by 10% over the next three years. [Applause.] We have identified
the fight against hijacking, business and house robberies, as well as
contact crimes such as murder, rape and assault, as top priorities.

We all have a role to play. Let us participate in community safety forums.
Let us stop buying stolen goods. Let us always be ready to provide the
police with information about criminal activity.

Tshebedisanommoho e tla lwantsha botlokotsebe. [Mahofi.] [Working together,
we will fight crime. [Applause.]]
Compatriots and esteemed guests, local government must work. Municipalities
must improve the provision of housing, water, sanitation, electricity,
waste management and roads.

We held a meeting with mayors and municipal managers last year. This
provided valuable insight into the challenges in local government.

We also visited various communities and municipalities, including Balfour
in Mpumalanga and Thembisa in Gauteng. After the Balfour visit, we sent a
nine-member ministerial team to visit the area to address the issues that
had been raised by the community. A number of issues have already received
attention. [Applause.] I have directed the Ministers to attend to the
outstanding matters.

We reiterate that there are no grievances that can justify violence and the
destruction of property. [Applause.] We have directed law enforcement
agencies to take a tougher stance on lawlessness in Balfour and other
areas. [Applause.]

In December 2009, Cabinet approved a turnaround strategy for local
government. This will ensure that local government has the correct
management, administrative and technical skills. During this year of
action, let us work together to make local government everybody’s business.

We are working to upgrade well-located informal settlements and provide
proper services and land tenure to at least 500 000 households by 2014. We
plan to set aside over 6 000 hectares of well-located public land for low-
income and affordable housing. [Applause.]

A new key initiative will be to accommodate people whose salaries are too
high to get government subsidies, but who earn too little to qualify for a
normal bank mortgage. We will set up a guarantee fund of R1 billion to
incentivise the private banking and housing sector, to develop new products
to meet this housing demand.

Bakwethu, ngonyaka odlule sathi, abantu basemakhaya nabo banelungelo lokuba
nogesi, amanzi, izindlu zangasese ezigijima amanzi nemigwaqo.

Sathi kufanele babe nezindawo zezemidlalo kanye nezindawo zokuthenga
ezinkulukazi eziphucuzekile njengasemadolobheni. (Translation of isiZulu
paragraphs follows.)

[Compatriots, last year we said that people from the rural areas also have
the right to have electricity, water, flush toilets and roads.

We said they should have sports facilities as well as big, state-of-the-art
shopping complexes like in urban areas.]

In this regard, we launched the first pilot site of the Comprehensive Rural
Development Programme in Giyani, Limpopo, in August last year. Since then
231 houses have been built. [Applause.] Progress has also been made in
providing infrastructure to support agricultural development, and training
for community members. Access to health and education facilities has
improved.

We are implementing similar programmes in seven sites across the country,
benefiting 21 wards. By 2014, we aim to have sites in 160 wards. We want
60% of households in these sites to meet their food requirements from their
own production by 2014. [Applause.]

Kancane kancane kuze kulunge, phela bakwethu, kuthiwa nempandla iqala
ngenhlonhlo. [Uhleko.] [Ihlombe.] [Slowly but surely, we will get there;
Rome was not built in a day. [Laughter.] [Applause.]]

We also need to better integrate land reform and agricultural support
programmes. Our success in this area will be measured by the increase in
the number of small-scale farmers that become economically viable.

Hon Speaker and Chairperson of the NCOP, we are not a water-rich country.
Yet we still lose a lot of water through leaking pipes and inadequate
infrastructure. We will be putting in place measures to reduce our water
loss by half by 2014.

Hon members, as part of our efforts to encourage greater economic growth,
we are working to reduce the cost to communicate. The South African public
can look forward to an even further reduction of broadband, cellphone,
landline and public phone rates. We will work to increase broadband speed
and ensure a high standard of Internet service, in line with international
norms. [Applause.]

Fellow South Africans, this government will ensure that our environmental
assets and natural resources are well protected, and are continually
enhanced.

Together with Brazil, India and China, and joined by the United States
which represented the developed world, we made a significant contribution
to the accord adopted at the Copenhagen Climate Change Summit in December
last year. Although it does not go as far as required, it is an important
step forward as it commits all countries to respond to climate change. We
will work harder with our international counterparts towards a legally
binding treaty. As South Africa, we have voluntarily committed ourselves to
specific emission reduction targets, and will continue working on our long-
term climate change mitigation strategy.

Hon members, we will intensify efforts to promote the interests of South
Africa globally. We will support efforts to speed up the political and
economic integration of the SADC region, and promote intraregional trade
and investment. South Africa continues to play a leading role in
continental efforts to strengthen the African Union and its organs, and to
work for unity. We will focus energy on revitalising the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development as a strategy for economic development on the
continent.

Fellow South Africans, the Public Service has to respond to the call to
make this term one of faster action and improved state performance. We
require excellence and hard work. We need public servants who are
dedicated, capable and who care for the needs of citizens. [Applause.]
Government is already working on the development and implementation of a
public service development programme, which will set the norms and
standards for public servants in all spheres.

Hon members, we continue our efforts to eradicate corruption and fraud in
procurement and tender processes, and in applications for drivers’
licences, social grants, and identity documents, among other things.
[Applause.] We are pleased with the progress government is making in some
areas. This week, we terminated 32 687 fraudulent social grant payments,
valued at R180 million. [Applause.] Our Inter-Ministerial Committee on
Corruption is looking at ways to decisively defeat corruption.

Nga u shumisana rothe ringa bveledza zwinzhi. [Working together, we can do
more. [Applause.]]

Compatriots, as you are aware, we introduced the Presidential Hotline to
make government and the Presidency more accessible to the public ...
[Applause.] ... and to help unblock service delivery blockages. The hotline
represents our determination to do things differently in government.

It has made a difference in the lives of many South Africans. [Applause.]
We can mention Mrs Buziwe Ngaleka of Mount Frere, whose call about her late
husband’s pension was the first we took on the first day of the service.
She is with us here tonight. [Applause.] We also have among us Mr Nkululeko
Cele, who was helped to obtain identity documents which allowed him to
enroll at Tshwane University of Technology. [Applause.] These are just two
among many success stories. [Applause.]

From these and other examples, we identify weaknesses that should be
rectified by various spheres of government. Through the Speaker, we have
invited a multiparty delegation from Parliament to visit the call centre so
that MPs can get a first-hand account of the work done. [Applause.]

Compatriots and friends, I have outlined the main elements of our plans for
2010, our collective commitment as government to the people of South
Africa. The state of the nation address provides a broad overview of our
action plan. Ministers will provide the detail in their respective Budget
Vote speeches.
Hon members, fellow South Africans, in November this year, we will mark the
150th anniversary of the arrival of Indians in South Africa. It provides an
opportunity to recognise the important contribution of the Indian community
in the fields of labour, business, science, sports, religion, arts, culture
and the achievement and consolidation of our democracy. [Applause.]

Compatriots and friends, let me take this opportunity to once again extend
our heartfelt condolences to the government and people of Haiti on the
monumental tragedy that has befallen them. We are pleased that our rescue
teams were able to go and assist. I would especially like to recognise one
South African who never fails to assist in times of disasters, and who
helps us to promote the vision of a caring society. We welcome Dr Imtiaz
Sooliman of the Gift of the Givers, who is in this House today. [Applause.]

Fellow South Africans, the hosting of the Fifa World Cup truly makes 2010 a
year of action. We have spent many years planning for this World Cup. We
only have three months to go. And we are determined to make a success of
it. [Applause.] The infrastructure, security and logistics arrangements are
in place to ensure a successful tournament.

As a nation, we owe a debt of gratitude to the 2010 Local Organising
Committee for their sterling effort. [Applause.] We wish the LOC
Chairperson Irvin Khoza, CEO Danny Jordaan and Bafana Bafana coach Carlos
Alberto Parreira all the best for the months ahead. [Applause.]

President Mandela was central in assisting the country to win the rights to
host this great event. [Applause.] We therefore have to make the World Cup
a huge success in his honour. [Applause.]

Compatriots, let us also stand behind the national team, Bafana Bafana.
[Applause.] I am one of those who believe that Bafana Bafana is going to
produce surprises. [Applause.] Most importantly, ithikithi esandleni,
bakwethu! [Fellow citizens, let us get our tickets!] Let us all buy tickets
timeously to be able to attend the games.

Fellow South Africans, as we celebrate Madiba’s release today, we recommit
ourselves to reconciliation, national unity, non-racialism and building a
better future together as South Africans, black and white. [Applause.]

We are guided by what Madiba said in the dock, that:

   During my lifetime I have dedicated myself to this struggle of the
   African people. I have fought against white domination, and I have fought
   against black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and
   free society in which all persons live together in harmony and with equal
   opportunities. It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to achieve.
   But if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die.

[Applause.]

Inspired by our icon, Madiba, it is my honour to dedicate this 2010 state
of the nation address to all our heroes and heroines, sung and unsung,
known and unknown.

Let us work together to make this year of action a successful one for our
country.

I thank you. [Applause.]

The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces adjourned the Joint
Sitting at 20:10.



