---
title: 'National Council of Provinces - 22 April 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
section: parliamentary
category: National Council of Provinces
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-council-of-provinces/parliamentary-debates-NCOP-2010-04-22
---

THURSDAY, 22 APRIL 2010
                                    ____

              PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF PROVINCES
                                    ____

The Council met at 14:01.

The Deputy Chairperson (Ms T C Memela) took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)

Vote No 27 — Economic Development:
Vote No 28 – Energy:

The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Chairperson, Minister Peters, hon
members, ladies and gentlemen, Lubala is a small settlement about 35 km
from Lusikisiki, and a bit more than an hour’s drive from Port St Johns.

The road to Lubala cuts through the green hills of Pondoland, with
occasional stray cattle sharing the space with cars on the road. The
settlement has 83 households, and has been described as one of the poorest
areas in one of the poorest provinces in our country.

Last week I was part of the team that, with Deputy President Motlanthe,
visited Lubala where government’s antipoverty strategy was launched in
2008. The area remains poor and underdeveloped. Our team visited about a
quarter of the households and spoke to fellow South Africans who live
without electricity, without running water and without modern sanitation or
refuse removal.

Nomantombi Mhluthwa is a 74-year-old grandmother, who is the head of a
household of three children. Her story of struggling under bitterly poor
conditions was repeated by grandmothers in neighbouring households. Health
care and educational opportunities for her and for the people of Lubala are
limited.

The residents of the little village rely largely on income from social
grants and some limited subsistence farming to feed their families. The
village consists mainly of children and old people. This is the story of
many, many rural areas.

Young people in Lubala struggle to find jobs in their village or in the
surrounding areas and often leave as soon as possible, in many cases
sending very little money back to Lubala. About 400 km from Lubala is the
industrial town of Dimbaza. A decade ago it had about 140 factories
providing work for people from neighbouring villages and towns.

By last year there were only four factories left in Dimbaza. As Dimbaza was
deindustrialised it left poverty and development challenges in its wake.
Many of those displaced by the contraction of economic activity have not
found sustainable alternative employment; some have remained unemployed
years after losing their jobs in Dimbaza.

In highlighting the challenges that Lubala and Dimbaza pose for us, hon
members, we stare our reality, the South African reality, in the face. We
seek through our policies and our implementation to change this reality.

There are opportunities to grow the Eastern Cape economy and expand its
industrial base. Let me mention one example: The Eastern Cape currently
produces about 20% of the country’s milk; so, statistically, every fifth
glass of milk you drink comes from the Eastern Cape. Almost half of that
milk is processed outside the province.

My staff in the department are now working with the milk producers
organisation and government agencies to determine whether there is a viable
case for more agri-processing capacity in the province. We need to assess
how much of this apparent imbalance is due to poor infrastructural
development or lack of support for enterprises and how much is due to what
you call bottom-line economics.

Hon members and Chairperson, I have spoken about the challenges of one
little village in the Eastern Cape and one industrial town, but you will
know from your experience that these stories are not unique to that
province. Throughout the country in the provinces that each of you come
from, as the official unemployment and income data shows, we face
significant and, in many cases, very similar challenges.

The Economic Development department strategic plan and budget has to make a
difference to the lives of residents in areas such as Lubala and Dimbaza
and those in each of the provinces. I believe that the budget we have
tabled and gone through today, together with the provincial and local
budgets for economic development, can make a positive difference in the
lives of our people. The Economic Development Department, EDD, budget
allocation is R418 million, which covers the work of the department and
certain entities that report to the department.

We have proposed the distribution of the budget as follows: The amount of
R25,8 million for economic planning and co-ordination; R18,2 million for
policy development work; R11,2 million for economic development and for
dialogue; R44,8 million for administration, the work of the Ministry and
capital expenditure; R152 million for small business funding through
transfers to Khula and the South African Microfinance Apex Fund, Samaf;
R102 million for the competition authorities to strengthen their work; and
R64 million for trade administration and promotion to the International
Trade Administration Commission of South Africa, Itac.

Hon members will see that the larger part of the budget, namely
R318 million of the funding, will be transferred directly to entities that
report to the Economic Development department. An important part of our
capacity will be the partnerships we forge, particularly with provinces and
local governments, to tap into the wider pool of knowledge, people and
money that exists out there to address the country’s challenges.

Last week, I met with members of the Select Committee on Economic
Development when we presented our strategic plan and budget. I would like
to thank the chairperson, hon Freddie Adams, and members of the select
committee for the stimulating and fruitful engagement. I don’t know why I’m
coming in so infrequently to the NCOP when the engagement is so fruitful. I
advised the select committee and we have done some work on the economic
development budget of each province and of the main metros for a report
that we shared with the members of the executive council, MECs, for
economic development. We called them to Pretoria and we said on a
PowerPoint presentation, “This is each of your budgets”.
Last year, these two levels of government, the provinces and the metros,
which excludes many of the smaller local authorities, budgeted R6,7 billion
for economic development. I’m excluding here the allocations for tourism –
only economic development — with the metros accounting for R2,1 billion of
this figure. For each three rands that we spend below national level, one
rand comes from the budgets of the metros for economic development.

The point of this study was to determine the full value of potential
resources for our joint mandate and to work with each other to improve this
impact of our spending. If you add the budgets of the national Departments
of Economic Development, Trade and Industry, Science and Technology, and
Tourism as well as the development finance institutions, we have a
potentially large funding resource available and this has to be focused on
our priority of development and decent work.

However, economic development is not only promoted through the spending of
line departments responsible for this function. The full Budget of the
country is a resource we need to tap into.

My colleague, the Minister of Finance, announced in his Budget Speech in
February this year that government in all spheres plans to spend
R907 billion this year, and R2,9 trillion over the medium term. Over half
of this amount goes to provinces and municipalities for education, health,
municipal infrastructure and human settlement.

Now, clearly, this money is intended for these functions, but how we spend
the money has a dramatic impact on economic development. We can do more for
our people if we identify additional opportunities for local procurement by
all three levels of government and by other public entities and state-owned
enterprises.

To this end we have set funding aside and put it into the economic
development budget to establish an office on local procurement and we have
budgeted R3,8 million for work in this area. Through the department’s
programme on planning and co-ordination, we intend to ensure greater
synergy in economic development across the different spheres of government.


Our work in partnership with the provinces may be of interest to hon
members. We seek to identify the competitive advantages in each province;
maximise the employment impact of these provincial strengths and benefit
all provinces through exploiting the economic linkages between them.

Some of our work will identify or strengthen corridor opportunities across
provinces and projects for economic clusters across sectors and regions. We
have built greater coherence between national and provincial development
agencies; we have built a strategic relationship with the South African
Local Government Association, Salga, and metropolitan councils; and we have
worked closely with the National Planning Commission and Minister Manuel to
develop special and sector economic development plans, including those for
the distressed sectors and regions.

Our work on sector policy will also support the Industrial Policy Action
Plan, Ipap, announced by Minister Davies two months ago, as well as rural
economic development initiatives. By the end of this financial year, we
intend to have reviewed or produced at least five sector plans and ten
special plans. National government manages key levers of economic
development, including funding for small business development.

On 1 April the Economic Development department, EDD, assumed responsibility
for three development finance institutions, namely the Industrial
Development Corporation, IDC, Khula and Samaf. If we join their budgets
they have in excess of R16 billion available for industrial development, a
portion of which will go to business support. Our work will be to ensure
that the R16 billion is spent wisely with the best development and decent
work outcomes.

We recently announced the R2 million industrial development bond at very
attractive interest rates that the IDC placed and which will allow it to
expand its resources for job creation. This development bond has been fully
taken up by the Unemployment Insurance Fund, UIF, which has placed surplus
funds with the IDC.

Nelie Kok and his wife live in Keimoes, a town on the biggest island in the
Orange River. They are members of a co-operative consisting of 82 members,
which supports 450 people. They are Fairtrade accredited and their products
are sold by Fairtrade all over Europe.

Their chief export is raisins and they would like to expand to make use of
the 2 000 ha of land that they have, of which only 600 has access to some
kind of an irrigation system. What is significant is that they would like
to have more control over the value-adding process. In the period ahead, we
will examine how well we have assisted entrepreneurs such as Nelie Kok to
realise their potential and to create more jobs.

The EDD guides the work of three economic regulatory bodies, namely the
Competition Commission of South Africa, the Competition Tribunal of South
Africa and the International Trade Administration Commission of South
Africa called Itac. The commission agencies have had considerable success
in recent months with their investigations and actions against companies
that are involved in price-fixing and collusion. Over the past decade,
about R1,1 billion has been collected in penalties from companies that have
been found guilty of anticompetitive behaviour.
The global economic recession has had a damaging impact on employment in
South Africa. Even before the recession, our economy was struggling to
create sufficient jobs for those South Africans able and willing to work.
Faced with these realities and the challenges of very high inequality and
deep levels of poverty, we are working on ways to improve the employment
performance of the economy and create many more decent work opportunities
and better social outcomes.

This work we group under our policy work and we call it the “development of
a new growth path”. The central idea of this developmental growth path is
to enhance the labour-absorbing capacity of the economy; to build the lower
carbon emission economy; and to find ways to connect knowledge and
innovation to the challenges of jobs and growth.

Through this work we’ve identified a number of areas where we believe new
jobs can be created, namely infrastructure development; the green economy;
the manufacturing sector; the knowledge economy activities; the rural
agricultural and agro-processing sector; tourism and business process
services; the social economy, which includes co-operatives; public sector
growth; and the continental and regional economy. We are now working on
bedding that down into real opportunities and identifying the provincial
dimension.

The green economy, for example, has huge potential for employment creation
in the energy, agricultural, manufacturing and service sectors, including
ecotourism. Government departments, working together, are pursuing these
opportunities in solar, wind and nuclear energy generation; solar heating
geysers; biofuels and co-generation; repairing environmental degradation;
ecotourism; smart manufacturing; waste management; the regulation of energy
efficiency of commercial buildings; and the installation of more energy-
efficient equipment.

It is apposite that my colleague, Minister Peters, follows immediately
after me because she’s been a leading proponent of turning the energy
challenge into a green economy opportunity.

In our own budget, we will allocate R2 million for work on the green
economy and green jobs and we will mobilise additional resources for
investment. The IDC is already investing in a number of green economy
projects ranging from solar power plants to manufacturing activities in the
green economy.

We are conscious of the number of policy challenges; one of them is in
skills development. We are a country with a relatively weak skills base for
the modern economy that we are seeking to build. We need to produce more
engineers, artisans, technicians and agricultural specialists to strengthen
the economy and improve our competitiveness.
By the end of this year, we plan to have the core of an economic
development institute in place, which will draw together leading economists
and development practitioners. It will commission research, seminars and
workshops; and create a database of global economic development initiatives
and institutions. We will make its resources and ideas available to
provinces and use it as a means to develop a common knowledge platform
across government.

I believe that there is no contradiction in advocating strong and vibrant
competition in the private sector on the one hand, while supporting joint
planning, co-operation and sharing to promote economic development, on the
other hand. Competition and co-operation are not mutually exclusive; it’s
about finding the balance. One big part of our work, therefore, will be
social partnerships to draw in the ideas of business and labour and to
share that with communities.

Last year we hosted a very successful policy platform on rural development
in KwaZulu-Natal. By the end of the financial year we will hold an economic
development conference, which will also deliberate on the special
dimensions of economic planning and co-ordination. For the year ahead, we
are planning to develop social dialogue on growth and social equity issues
at sector and workplace level so that we can build partnerships at the very
heart of the wealth-creating machinery of the economy.

We have established a subprogramme to address the role of productivity,
innovation and entrepreneurship in driving economic growth and development.
The department will promote workplace productivity agreements and foster
entrepreneurial endeavours in the economy, particularly among black
entrepreneurs.

In the first month that the EDD was officially established, it took
responsibility for co-ordinating government’s work within the framework of
South Africa’s response to the international economic crisis. We have now
launched 20 actions in this programme. One example is the training layoff
scheme as well as the funding that the IDC is providing to companies and
sectors in distress.

I spoke earlier of the challenges of the recession; we are confident that
we can repair the damage of the recession and build an inclusive economy.
We will maximise the economic development impact only by working together.
Each of us has a role to play because the economy is about all of us, and
employment growth and development are in the interests of all of us. I
thank you.

The MINISTER OF ENERGY: Chairperson, Minister Patel, hon members of this
august House, the National Council of Provinces, in September last year,
working together with Ezinqoleni municipality in KwaZulu-Natal, we launched
the Safe Illuminating Paraffin Stove Project in the town of Ezingolweni.

As we did that, we were once again reminded of the scale of poverty and
underdevelopment that characterises our communities. In particular, what
stood out was the plight of one resident who barely had a house to live in,
let alone the bare necessities for survival. Working together with business
leaders in the area, we were able to offer the lady and her two teenage
sons a home and a sense of hope for a better tomorrow.

There was also a story that was shown on television last year of the death
of three children from KwaZulu-Natal, who died when the generator they were
using exploded. This happened after they had travelled for 10 km to watch
the soccer game between our national soccer team, Bafana Bafana, and
Uruguay.

It is these tragic events that continuously remind us of the enormousness
of the tasks that face the democratic developmental state as it seeks to
usher in a new era in energy planning, modelling, forecasting and service
delivery.

Tomorrow, 23 April, I will be travelling to Grahamstown at the invitation
of our national oil company, PetroSA, to participate in the opening of
classrooms at a primary school that was established by the nuns of the
Anglican Church in 1844. The new structure will provide a science and
computer laboratory for about 200 children.

We are also going to offer these children a sense of hope and a promise of
a better tomorrow. To date, PetroSA, a subsidiary of the Central Energy
Fund, has spent a total of R260 million on such initiatives throughout the
country.

For us to achieve social justice, we will continue with the implementation
of the Integrated National Electrification Programme as a vehicle for
social change. In spite of the challenges facing us as a department in
relation to the implementation of this programme, we have made significant
progress. I must indicate that, out of the 237 local municipalities, 128 of
them will eradicate existing backlogs with regard to the electrification of
formal households by 2011 and 2012.

The majority of these municipalities are in Gauteng, North West, the
Western Cape, Free State, Mpumalanga and the Northern Cape. Accordingly, my
department will prioritise the extension of the rural electricity network
capacity to ensure that the rural communities of Limpopo, KwaZulu-Natal and
the Eastern Cape achieve the same level of electrification as the provinces
mentioned above.

To indicate our commitment to the goal of making sure that we prioritise
these provinces, 64% of the total allocation of R2,8 billion has been
allocated to the three provinces. In this regard, we have identified the
municipalities that have backlogs of less than 5 000 to achieve universal
access to electrification.
In the Eastern Cape, we are targeting about 14 municipalities with a
backlog of less than 5 000; in the Free State it is 17; in Gauteng it is 4,
in KwaZulu-Natal it is 11; and in Limpopo it is 18. In Mpumalanga it is 4
municipalities; North West, 11 municipalities; Northern Cape, 26; and the
Western Cape, 23.

You would have understood that these are the municipalities with backlogs
of less than 5 000. Those with backlogs of more than 5 000 are as follows:
In the Eastern Cape it is 24; Free State, three; Gauteng, eight; KwaZulu-
Natal, 40; Limpopo, seven; Mpumalanga, 14; North West, 10; Northern Cape,
one; and the Western Cape, two.

Out of the totals, there are 128 municipalities with a backlog of less than
5 000, and 109 municipalities with a backlog of more than 5 000. As regards
the total budget for these municipalities in the year 2011-12, the Eastern
Cape will receive about R167 million; Free State, R198 million; Gauteng,
R80 million; KwaZulu-Natal, R180 million; Limpopo, R270 million;
Mpumalanga, R35 million; North West, R216 million; Northern Cape, R94
million; and the Western Cape, R186 million. This makes a total of about
R1,426 billion.

All metros have been left out of these arrangements, except Ekurhuleni,
where 64 000 formal households still have to be electrified. In this
regard, the rest of the metros will work on eradicating their backlogs and
this they will do through the Breaking New Ground programme of the
Department of Human Settlements.

I am pleased to report that restructuring of the distribution side of
electricity has gained tremendous momentum over the past year. The state of
readiness for the consolidation of the 187 municipalities and Eskom
distribution systems into single, viable regional electricity distributors,
REDs, as directed by the Cabinet decision of 25 October 2006, has reached
its highest level ever.

Working together with the SA Local Government Association, Salga, our
mayors, councillors and officials of the 147 municipalities out of 187 that
distribute electricity, EDI Holdings has signed accession to co-operative
agreements with these entities. They have subsequently committed themselves
to actively participate in the EDI restructuring process.

Furthermore, over 30 municipalities, which together with Eskom constitute
about 90% of the entire electricity distribution in the country, have
undertaken the process of ring-fencing their electricity distribution
assets in preparation for incorporating their electricity assets into REDs.
Thus far, EDI Holdings has spent about R62 million to assist municipalities
and Eskom with the ring-fencing exercise.

The huge backlog in maintenance, refurbishment and investment in EDI
infrastructure, which is estimated at no less than R27 billion, continues
to be a major challenge. This continues to have a negative impact on
service delivery. The government has established an Interministerial
Committee on Energy to urgently redress this situation, amongst other
things. The process of integrating this programme into the overall Local
Government Turnaround Strategy is under way.

The main focus in the months ahead for my department and its implementing
agency, EDI Holdings, is to ensure that all stakeholders agree as soon as
possible on the implementation plan to ensure the acceleration of the
establishment of the six wall-to-wall REDs as agreed upon by Cabinet.

We expect the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development to
finalise the processing of the proposed Constitution Seventeenth Amendment
Bill after which we will be able to table the RED Establishment Bill.

Members of the National Council of Provinces are the ones who actually
understand better than those of the National Assembly the impact of
electricity distribution on municipalities, because you are the ones who
are dealing directly with municipalities and provinces. You would know the
challenges that municipalities have in relation to decaying infrastructure,
where in some instances there is electricity, but people would be sitting
without lights going on, primarily because the network that leads to the
household is unable to provide that service to them.

It is important, therefore, ladies and gentlemen, that all parties who have
the interests of South Africans at heart should support the Constitution
Seventeenth Amendment Bill so that when people switch on the lights, there
will be light.

As electricity tariffs increase, our main concern is the impact on the
impoverished, the poorest of the poor. We will mitigate the adverse impact
of tariff increases on the poor through a number of mechanisms over and
above the free basic electricity programme.

The first mechanism is based on inclining block tariffs, and the second one
is related to savings on the electricity bill which are derived from the
solar water heating programme. For example, the tariff increase applicable
to the indigent will be the lowest part of the block tariff proposed by the
National Energy Regulator of South Africa, Nersa, and this is minus 10% for
year one for consumption below 50 units per month, followed by 5,4% for
year two and 5,5% for year three.

The highest increase is applicable to customers who consume more than 350
units per month, which is in line with the user-pays principle. If you are
sitting in this House and your lights are on, your pumps are on, and
everything is running, you must pay for that. You must also pay for what
you waste, even for the electricity that you are not using. You will have
to pay for that.

We will work with the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs, Cogta, and the National Treasury to sort out the funding of
municipalities in so far as electricity distribution infrastructure is
concerned. We need municipalities on our side as energy champions, and we
call on them to apply surcharge increases in a manner that is sensitive to
the circumstances of the indigent. We also appeal to the hon members of
this House to support the restructuring of this sector.

You will remember that municipalities – and I am sure they have come a
number of times to this House — indicated that they rely on the electricity
revenue to be able to sustain themselves. Unfortunately, while electricity
is providing the revenue, that money is not being used to sustain the
infrastructure for electricity. It is being used for other services that
municipalities need, so that is why we are appealing to you to engage with
the finance committee.

You should be able to motivate for a better funding model for
municipalities, so that they do not rely on what we call low-hanging fruit,
which is easy for them to get. The increased electricity surcharge means
increased revenue for municipalities.

However, that also works against energy efficiency, because if
municipalities have to rely on the electricity charges, they would motivate
people to use electricity so that they can have more revenue. It also works
against their own challenge of revenue collection, because they are not
able to collect the full revenue. So, as people use more, municipalities
would believe that they would get at least half of that from electricity
tariffs in order to sustain their programmes.

In order to encourage energy saving, a financial incentive scheme, to be
known as the standard offer, will be introduced. In terms of this, project
developers will be able to claim a rebate in respect of the amount of
energy they have saved from the electricity system.

It is expected that these interventions will emanate from, firstly, the
residential sector, by the replacement of incandescent lighting with energy-
saving bulbs; secondly, the industrial sector, through the power
conservation programmes in terms of which industrial customers will be able
to claim incentives due from less energy-intensive production methods; and
lastly, the commercial sector, with energy efficiency interventions like
improved insulation in buildings.

We intend to intensify energy efficiency in the estimated 100 000 public
buildings, which will be retrofitted to comply with energy efficiency
standards. We urge the Department of Public Works to ensure that all
provincial governments participate in this project. We once again call upon
the hospitality industry to embrace the spirit of this campaign.

We would also like to congratulate the Department of Arts and Culture for
working through the SA National Energy Research Institute, Saneri, on
making Robben Island one of our major greening projects.

Solar water heaters are one of the key interventions in energy efficiency
and demand-side management, EEDSM, in terms of which we are making a
commitment to progressively deploy solar water heating for water heating in
all residential dwellings. The outcomes of this programme are expected to
include electricity demand reduction of about 3 600 megawatts, and
localisation of solar water heating technology, design and production.

I am sure you have heard the Minister of Economic Development indicating
the type of interventions his department will make to ensure that we
emphasise and support localisation and the production of this technology
locally. Issues of climate change mitigation and job creation as well as
skills development are further expected outcomes.

As you may be aware, next week on 28 April President Zuma will launch the
first massified solar water heater project in Winterveldt. This is a
precursor to numerous other projects, which will ultimately result in the
displacement of coal by the sun as an energy carrier for water heating in
this country. Very soon, we will also be launching 5 000 units with the Sol
Plaatje municipality.

We will also be working with the Departments of Public Service and
Administration and Public Works on a framework to roll out solar water
heating systems to public servants. We want to take this opportunity to
thank the Japanese Embassy for being the most energy-efficient foreign
mission in South Africa. We also want to congratulate the Legacy Group’s Da
Vinci hotel in Sandton for its retrofitting, from conventional water
heating to solar water heating.

This year, the department will be launching the Working for Energy
programme, with the primary objective of using the feedstock created from
clearing alien biomass vegetation to produce power. We are happy to
announce that we are working with municipalities, the Department of Water
Affairs and the Department of Economic Development with regard to waste-to-
energy projects. You heard the Minister announce the green economy
initiatives.

Chairperson, we would like to reaffirm our commitment to establishing more
integrated energy centres, IECs, throughout the country in order to reduce
the impact of energy poverty. This programme is one of the vehicles that
the department is using to contribute to government’s commitment to rural
development and sustainable job creation.

An integrated energy centre is a one-stop energy shop owned and operated by
community co-operatives and organised as a community project. The IECs act
as community information hubs and energy shops that sell illuminating
paraffin, liquid petroleum gas — which is LPG — candles, petrol and diesel
from oil companies directly to the community at more affordable prices.

The department, working together with the affected stakeholders, is
currently reviewing the IEC sustainability strategy that was developed in
2005 in order to ensure that these IECs are achieving the desired results.

Discussions are under way with the Department of Rural Development and Land
Reform to ensure that the IEC programme is aligned with the Comprehensive
Rural Development Programme. This year, we intend to launch two IECs, in
King Sabata Dalindyebo and Mbizana Local Municipalities in the Eastern
Cape.

My department is also actively involved in assisting operating IECs in
places like Ratlou in the North West, Mutale in Limpopo and Moshaweng and
John Taolo Gaetsewe municipalities in the Northern Cape.

Through this House, I would like to appeal to you to engage with
municipalities to make sure that they can process applications for land, in
particular for sites for the IECs as quickly as possible, because the IECs
are an instrument with which we can deal a blow to energy poverty.

Illuminating paraffin is the most commonly used and purchased fuel source
for low-income communities in the country. It is used in varying degrees in
almost half of all South African homes. Like all other fuels, illuminating
paraffin is a hazardous substance which, when not properly handled or used,
can result in unacceptably high levels of harm to humans, with financial
and economic consequences.

To address this problem, the department together with the Central Energy
Fund has embarked on a pilot programme to test the efficacy of new, safer
illuminating paraffin appliances in areas previously devastated by paraffin-
related fires. These areas are: Alexandra in Gauteng, with 350
beneficiaries; Ezinqoleni in KwaZulu-Natal, with 350 beneficiaries; Mbizana
in the Eastern Cape, with 150 beneficiaries; and Imizamo Yethu in the
Western Cape, with 350 beneficiaries.

The monitoring and evaluation consultants will issue a close-out report to
the department in June 2010, and I believe that we will also be reporting
back to this House on matters related to the outcome of this investigation
or pilot programme.
Chairperson, out of the 15 400 licences lodged in the petroleum industry so
far, 12 431 have been processed. For the 2009-10 financial year, 3 041
licences were processed. From 1 April 2010, all regional offices were
opened and running, and applications can now be lodged in the regions.

I have instructed the department to process licence applications within the
stipulated time of 90 days, with the ultimate aim of reducing that time.
The licensing of petroleum business activities also assists the department
to monitor and enforce the economic empowerment of historically
disadvantaged South Africans, as outlined in the Liquid Fuels Charter.

I also want to use the platform of this House to request members, through
their constituencies and also through engaging with municipalities, to
encourage municipalities to look at ensuring that people are not given
sites for trading in petroleum products before getting their licence from
the department. It happens at times, and then the licence application is
turned down, which creates a problem for the particular individual. This is
especially true of people who are just emerging in this particular
industry.

The national oil company, PetroSA, is pursuing a number of strategic
initiatives aimed at enhancing the national security of energy supply. One
of these initiatives is Project Mthombo, the main objective of which is the
construction of a crude oil refinery in Coega. My department is currently
evaluating information which will enable government to take a decision on
proceeding with the front-end engineering and design phase.

The GTL, gas-to-liquids, refinery is PetroSA’s main revenue generator and
supports a total staff complement of about 1 800 workers. It has generated
thousands of jobs in and around the Mossel Bay and greater Southern Cape
region, leading to a massive direct and indirect impact on the local
economy. It continues to provide support to the local business community
and has generated income through wages and salaries for most of the
families in this area.

There is a continued search for oil and gas resources, with the primary aim
of further sustaining operations at the Mossel Bay GTL Refinery beyond its
current estimated economic life. To this end, there is ongoing exploration
off the coast of Mossel Bay. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, hon Ministers and MECs, the president of the SA
Democratic Teachers’ Union, Sadtu, colleagues and members, I don’t know
when the hon Harris was appointed as the official timekeeper of this House,
but I see him rising every time. I don’t know if he has a new position or
portfolio that we don’t know about. [Interjections.]

Let me thank the Minister of Energy for being here today after getting up
from her sickbed to deliver this Budget Vote. That speaks of commitment and
we thank her for that. We wish her a speedy recovery from her illness.

This debate is all about new ways of doing things in order to improve on
them, especially new opportunities with a focus on the threat of global
climate change, such as alternative, cleaner and renewable fuels or energy
sources. This is very true regarding energy. Our brand-new Department of
Economic Development is presenting its first full budget before this
Council.

On behalf of the committee I want to thank and congratulate both Ministers
and their departments on the hard work they have done in preparing and
presenting these budgets under the present economic climate. They have also
done a sterling job in enlightening us on the content and details of these
budgets.

Both departments are affected by the quest to seek greener, cleaner, meaner
and other energy sources for our daily use and sustainable development.

In line with the ruling party’s Polokwane resolutions, emphasis is placed
on the utilisation of alternative sources and on the clear intent of our
government to find a way of gradually replacing fossil fuels with new and
better alternatives; and also to create green jobs to tap into the new
green economy. [Interjections.]

I know now why the hon Sinclair is making a noise, because his party has no
resolutions. [Interjections.] So that’s why he is making that noise, as
well as the hon Gunda, who doesn’t even have a policy.

I wish to commend the Ministers and their teams for the strides they have
made to advance the use of better technology as regards existing energy
sources, such as coal and liquid fuels emitting undesirable gases. The
focus on the preferred solar carrier for water heating or even wind energy
is much needed, but our country also has extensive coastal areas where wave
power could also be investigated, not to speak of thermal, ground or earth
energy from our vast land areas which could be tapped to our advantage.
[Interjections.]

Yes, hon Plaatjie, many countries have taken leading roles in the further
refinement and development of alternative energy sources, such as the sun
and wind, with technologies that are becoming cheaper and easier to
implement.

Minister Peters, under your guidance and leadership, South Africa may
become a world leader in harnessing natural powers such as the eternal
movement of our coastal waters and energy from below the surface of the
ground.
I wish to point to the objectives of driving back poverty and growing the
opportunities of a new, green economy. Yes, it is understandable that more
nuclear capacity is needed to supply the bulk demand, but to reduce the
demand-side needs by employing more alternative options for small-scale
individual and even remote users is the way to go, hon Gunda.

In this regard solar cookers and other safer and cleaner methods of
household use such as biofuels should be further explored to help the poor
and especially marginalised people on farms in remote areas, where people
up to now have had to prepare food using animal dung. This will go a long
way in assisting our women and more specifically marginalised African
women.

We can employ the latest technology or even improve on some internationally
developed gadgets to be used to improve the lives of our poor people in
rural areas and reduce energy poverty, but it can also create much-needed
job opportunities to promote decent work for our people.

In the past, South Africa was a world leader by developing and inventing
various products here. If we use the brain power that we already have, we
may even develop new products for the prime international markets to the
benefit of our people and our country’s economy. We may even consider
strategic partnerships to reach our goal also with other countries and
those neighbours within our developing region, hon Gunda.

Our government should also further investigate the possibilities of
agriculturally produced fuels, especially in the more arid or marginal
production areas, with crops that are less prone to the consequences of
climate change. [Interjections.]

I wonder, Chair, if the hon Gunda knows what climate change is, but we will
leave that.

We welcome the announcement of a solar park, but would like to see more
alternative uses all over our country. We also know that our electricity
sector is vulnerable and under pressure. With soaring prices and huge
dependency it is understandable that Cabinet resolved that 30% of new
energy generation should come from independent energy producers.

Mr J J GUNDA: Chairperson, I would just like to ask if the member will take
a question.

Mr F ADAMS: No, sir. Maybe next week, but not now, sir.

But we could also have more people becoming independent of grid supplies,
or at least reducing their dependency on it by consuming fewer units from
the grid. This is possible if people have installed their own mini
producers or have tapped into natural sources with alternatives such as
solar and wind technology.

It is also to be welcomed that feed-in back into the grid be investigated.
This will also ease the demand for more kilowatts to be generated as well
as the capital needed to finance very expensive operations. We also welcome
the proposed regulation by the hon Minister Peters of the price of
liquefied petroleum gas, LPG, or gas for residential consumers.

The hon Minister’s plans for abalone farms in stricken coastal towns are
most welcome. I urge the Minister to expand this cultivation programme to
benefit more towns that have a very high unemployment rate and to explore
other species, such as the large-scale production of mussels and even
crayfish — if the hon Plaatjie knows what that is.

New life could be given to agricultural and rural areas if some green
industries could be developed there. In this regard, stimulation of cottage
industries along international practice lines could assist many people in
the second economy to be mainstreamed.

Expanding rail transport holds enormous potential for rural development and
should receive priority to open up these areas economically.

Lastly, I want to thank everyone for the work done to fight and eliminate
the unacceptable and exploitative practice of price—fixing. I thank the
Ministers, the DGs and departmental staff who have always been available to
assist the committee, as well as the committee members for a good and
fruitful debate, as the Minister has already pointed out.

These Budget Votes are fully supported by the Select Committee on Economic
Development. I thank you.

Mr R A LEES: I approach this House with some trepidation. I am due to
debate the Budget Vote for a department that we believe should not exist at
all. Essentially we believe that there should be no funds appropriated for
the Department of Economic Development and that the department should be
stillborn and fade into history as soon as possible.

A year ago this department did not exist at all. Is there something new, as
hon Adams seems to say, that this department is doing, or is it simply
making up for the dysfunctionality of the Department of Trade and Industry?
There is no place in a modern global economy for the kind of centralised
economic planning and consequent economic ruin that characterised the now
defunct Soviet bloc, and still lingers on in today’s failed states such as
North Korea and Zimbabwe. There is far too much regulation already in our
economy.

Hon Chairperson, the more you treat people like children unable to control
their own destiny, the more they will behave like children and require the
services of a nanny state. This approach stifles initiative and condemns
people to lives of mediocrity.

What is required is a deregulation of the economy in such a way that
opportunities are created for people to take control of their own lives and
become drivers of economic growth and thus wealth in South Africa.

We have no doubt that South Africans of all communities and backgrounds are
capable of initiating new ideas and hard work. What they need are the
opportunities for them to achieve their potential. Few, if any, of our
people, wish to be dependent on social grants with no real hope of any
chance of self-fulfilment or advancement. All our people want a better life
for themselves and in particular for their children.

It should be self-evident that there are key areas which the state should
prioritise. Probably the most important of these areas is education. There
is no way in which we, as a country, can possibly compete globally with the
largely abysmal education system that we have in South Africa today.

There can be no doubt that economic development can only take place on the
scale that is required in South Africa if our people are healthy and an
excellent health system is in place. We agree wholeheartedly with the ANC
on this. Unfortunately the ANC has reduced health care in South Africa to a
state of near collapse with whoever can afford it clamouring for the
services of the private health care sector.

Then there is the rampant crime which our people face every day of their
lives. This includes fraud and corruption as well as violent crimes such as
hijackings, assault, rape and murder. No amount of gung-ho, “shoot to kill”
bravado will solve this crime crisis.

Hon Chair, the Department of Energy has as a result of poor planning had to
concentrate on stabilising and increasing the supply of electricity. In
order to achieve this ability and increase the supply of electricity, Eskom
was given the authority to build coal-fired power stations as well as the
Ingula Power Station near Ladysmith.

We are all aware of the involvement of Hitachi in the coal-fired power
stations, but we have been informed that Hitachi is also a supplier for the
Ingula Power Station. If this is true then this is an additional source of
profit for the ANC through Chancellor House, and yet another conflict of
interest.

The ANC must come clean with the people of South Africa and tell us exactly
the extent to which Hitachi is involved in the Eskom projects. In addition,
Hitachi must divulge the extent of dividends which will likely accrue to
Chancellor House, and thus the ANC, as a result of all the contracts
awarded by Eskom to Hitachi.

It is irrelevant what the ANC wants done with these dividends as it is
Chancellor House, as the shareholder, who will be due these dividends and
not any third parties who may or may not be nominated by the ANC to receive
them.

Eskom has also been given the authority to proceed with a concentrated
solar power, CSP, project, a commendable source of clean and renewable
energy. However, this simply puts more generation of electricity in the
hands of Eskom which already has a monopoly. If the CSP project is a
condition of the World Bank loan then it should be put on the market for
other players to enter the electricity-generation industry.

The most obvious solution for new generation capacity would be the sale of
existing power generators. However, this has been rejected and as a result
consumers are going to have to pay massive increases in the cost of
electricity.

Hon Chair, I have another four or five pages, but I see my time is now down
to 23 seconds and I cannot say much more. Thank you so much. [Applause.]

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Hon Chairperson and Ministers, according to Prof Haroon
Bhorat, using the Gini coefficient index as an indicator, South Africa has
overtaken Brazil as the country with the widest gap between the rich and
the poor. South Africa is now the most unequal society in the world and the
gap continues to increase.

This must be a wake-up call for all of us, especially the ANC government.
The government is doing something wrong and certainly failing the mandate
given to them by the electorate, a year ago today.

Chairperson, what are the realities of South Africa today? First, South
Africa moved in 16 years from a race-based to a class-based society, with a
majority of poor, neglected and forgotten citizens, who only become
important during the run-up to elections.

Secondly, South Africa is no longer a developmental state but a welfare
state, where the majority of especially the rural poor survive only on the
monthly grants paid by the SA Social Security Agency, Sassa.

Thirdly, the current spatial development frameworks and patterns are not
addressing or supporting the urgent and dire challenges of especially the
poor and the rural areas.

In striving to address these challenges, economic development and energy
are the flipsides of the same coin. This ANC has the privilege to decide if
this coin can be a valuable gold coin or a meagre 50c coin. Currently,
according to Bhorat, this coin is not even a 10c coin.

These two departments are indeed central and instrumental in building a
sustainable and prosperous nation. These strategic plans have the ability
in theory to enhance the five priorities in government’s electoral mandate.

Chairperson, the current realities, however, remind us that if the
government continues on the road they have embarked on, especially
regarding energy, more questions will remain than answers. The Eskom
monopoly, blackouts, secret deals, the Chancellor House debacle and the
World Bank loan are proof of that unfortunate legacy that seems to haunt
South Africa.

Alan Zarembo said, and I quote:

   Coal, the dirtiest fossil fuel, is the crackcocaine of the developing
   world.

On World Earth Day that we celebrate today, it is essential to acknowledge
that the future must be green. Alternate thinking and energy resources must
be the guiding imperatives that abort fossil fuels as the considered form
of energy.

The key focus of economic development on partnership-building with social
partners and within sectors is the right one, but productivity,
entrepreneurship, innovation and social dialogue must be the cornerstones
of these activities. Key to these developmental opportunities, Chairperson,
must be the energy needs of our country and region.

A relook at the spatial developmental framework of South Africa must put
the Northern Cape, as an example, on par with Gauteng in terms of economic
development. Gauteng’s economy must be stabilised, but we need to grow the
rural and marginalised areas of our country. Chairperson, only then will
the 10c coin that we currently have, according to Bhorat, be transformed
into a gold coin — even with a Mandela face on it! Collectively we owe that
to the poor and forgotten people of our country. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr B A MNGUNI: Chairperson, hon Ministers, colleagues, ladies and
gentlemen, it’s a great pleasure for me to debate the first ever budget of
this department that has a great responsibility for transforming the
economy that the country inherited from the neoliberals or after 40 years
of National Party rule.

We should take cognisance of the fact that the policy that we inherited was
capitalistic in nature and thus embraced the free market ideology.
Therefore, the department has its work cut out in turning around the
economy to address the socioeconomic ills that the democratic government
has been grappling with for the past 16 years.

We have a few programmes in the department, including the administration
programme. I should say that key appointments still need to be made, and
other vacant posts need to be filled for this department to run smoothly.
It is, however, encouraging that the department intends to use as few
consultants as possible in all of its activities in order to save money.

It is also noteworthy to mention that the Minister will ensure that he has
competent and skilled staff who will ensure that delivery is not
compromised.

I would, however, like to make the Minister aware that cadre deployment of
competent and skilled party loyalists to carry out the mandate of the
people as espoused in the manifesto is not a sin. It is a developmental
state that needs to implement policies that realise the objectives and
aspirations of the populace.

Hon Lees has had the guts to say that our economy is overregulated. He
forgets that we were able to weather the storm of a financial crisis
because our regulations were still in place. Most countries that went for
deregulation, that liberated the economy — wholesale liberalisation — are
today facing an economic crisis; they didn’t escape the storm of the
financial crisis.

However, because we as South Africa were careful about liberalising our
economy and we were careful about keeping some of the regulations in place,
we were able to weather the financial storms a year or two ago.

I should also point out that the programme on economic development is key
in order to make our economy viable. The bulk of the funds are put into
this economic planning and development and one of the core functions of the
programme is policy co-ordination. We are, therefore, looking forward to a
seamless policy implementation within and between government departments in
the near future as the department of policy development takes off.

However, it is worrying that most of the funds or the bulk of the funds in
this department are channelled or transferred through to the development
finance institutions, DFIs. Now, the DFIs have a history of not serving the
needy, of not serving the poor, because at the end of the day they are
chasing profit.

We do believe and hope that the mandate of these DFIs will be looked at and
that the funding models will be changed, so that they address the needs of
the poor and the economically downtrodden.

I think hon Sinclair is aware that his moving from the ANC to Cope was a
mistake. He is well aware that the ANC is central — or the majority of the
people are central — in making policy within the ANC. Cope still has to sit
down and attend their conference to have their policies in place.

I think it’s a hangover or, rather, he finds it very cold in Cope as they
are unable to come up with policies that can take Cope or this country
forward. The doors are still open so that he can come back home; he’ll be
much more welcome.

South Africa has never been a developmental state. He said that the
developmental state is no more, but I would like to make him aware that
South Africa has never been a developmental state. We took a conscious
decision when we took over this Fourth Parliament that South Africa needs
to be a developmental state.

Now, what is a developmental state? A developmental state is a state that
makes sure that its citizens, its populace, benefit from the economy of the
country. One of its key issues is to make sure that it deploys its cadres
into key government institutions to make sure that the policies of the
movement are implemented. So, we are not ashamed to say that the Minister
should look into cadre development, deploying cadres who are skilled and
competent to make sure that our policies are implemented.

Therefore, one should take solace in the fact that the government is in
good hands and has a visionary leadership that knows what the needs of the
people are. The leadership we are talking about is the people who are
sitting here, those who are in Luthuli House, who are looking into policies
to make sure that this country goes forward. Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr M B KHOZA (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members,
first of all let me express a word of gratitude from the KwaZulu-Natal
province for being able to take part in this policy debate on Budget Vote
No 27 on Economic Development.

We are meeting at a time when in KwaZulu-Natal we have had some exciting
things happening on the economic development front. We have the King Shaka
International Airport that is about to be opened. We are already beginning
to see the Dube TradePort, which has a 60-year vision, showing signs of
success.

We are also grappling with some of the challenges because we are forward-
looking in KwaZulu-Natal; and, finally, we are also now looking at post-
2010 sustainability issues because the reality is that we had a lot of
investment towards 2010.
I just want to share with the House that economic development actually
should not be taken for granted. South Africa is a country that has a lot
of contradictions. If you go to one part, you feel as if you are in a
developed country. When you go to another part, you feel, well, I am in a
developing country. But as soon as you move to the periphery, you actually
find that you are in an underdeveloped country.

Therefore, economic development should not be taken for granted, because it
is there to bridge that gap and to facilitate policy that is going to
enable those who were disadvantaged by racial capitalism to fully
participate in our trade and industry and not as survivalist participants.

I also want to say, Minister Patel, in your budget speech you stated that
some 5,8 million people are unemployed or no longer looking for employment.
Indeed, there is no way we can simply think that these people, without any
support from us as government, will be able to see the light of day. It is
important, therefore, that all budgets — the budgets of national,
provincial and local government – should make a difference.

I am very encouraged, and I know my province is very encouraged, that we
are beginning to see intergovernmental relationships begin to work. We are
no longer working in our own silos, but we have begun to leverage on the
strengths of all the different spheres of government.

We also have the challenge, though, that as you have said, we have R380
million that is transferred to agencies. This is also important to us
because even in KwaZulu-Natal, 65% of our economic development and tourism
budget goes to public entities.

What becomes important is how we do oversight of these public entities,
because at the end of the day it is clear that a large part of our
deliverables will be happening at that level where a lot of money is going
to. So, it becomes important that we actually begin to focus on that.

We are also encouraged by the fact that the department is focusing on a
development path. This is also important, because there are signs that an
economy that is driven by super greed has led us to the global recession
that we now have.

Therefore, it is very important for the state to be able to have a
balancing act where you balance the role the market forces can play but
also protect your own citizens in the way that we have done. Noam Chomsky
describes that as “profits before people”, and I would love to believe that
we as this government would like to put people before profits, because we
know that super greed can be catastrophic.
The KwaZulu-Natal government led by the ANC is putting people first. We
have a “one home, one garden” campaign. This campaign is very important in
revitalising people’s belief in themselves so that they become their own
liberators.

They have to recover from disillusionment and despair and see the beautiful
day that comes with being alive. Therefore, it’s very important that we do
not simply accept that people have become withdrawn. We should be worried
about why people are withdrawn and we should be finding something with
which to encourage them.

We also feel strongly that we need to invest in reviving the African
merchant who was squeezed out by apartheid segregation policies. There are
limited economic activities in most African townships. It is even worse if
you go to the rural settlements.

In order to grow a sustainable economy we need to focus on the areas where
most of our people reside and create economic activities in those areas. We
cannot speak of economic development if our people have to travel many
kilometres, sometimes hundreds of kilometres, and end up spending their
very meagre wages on transport rather than food.

Co-operatives are very important, but are meaningless if not coupled with
access to markets. Our lesson in KwaZulu-Natal is that we have had a 95%
failure rate of co-operatives. The study has come out very strongly in
making the point that the failure of those co-operatives was not because
they did not have the quality of produce, but the problem was access to
markets. Therefore, access to markets becomes a very important point.

I also want to share with you that I met a woman from KwaHlomendlini, in
one of the rural settlements in KwaZulu-Natal, who had singly farmed dry
beans that were almost filling half of her rondavel. These beans were not
stored properly, and most of them went to waste because they started to
have iinunu [worms].

Yet South Africa imports most of these dry beans; so now the challenge for
economic development is how we begin to identify these people who are there
and are making up the statistics of unemployment, because they are not
registered. They are registered as unemployed, but these people have the
skill and the ability.

However, they probably have inadequate or no exposure to how markets work
and how to send their products to the markets. We need to identify these
people in an organised fashion and we will certainly bring down
unemployment statistics. We may, in fact, review our definition of
“unemployed”.

Local economic development remains central in developing, growing and
sustaining our economy. Every investment or every disinvestment happens
within a municipal area of jurisdiction. I am glad that in our province the
premier, hon Zweli Mkhize, is very much involved with the municipalities.
MEC Mabuyakhulu is also working very closely with municipalities to make
sure that local economic development begins to become an expression of
provincial development.

I am encouraged by Minister Ebrahim Patel’s commitment, as was well
illustrated in his budget speech, that the Department of Economic
Development will promote workplace productivity agreements. It will foster
entrepreneurial endeavours in the economy, particularly those of black
entrepreneurs. I think that with regard to the black entrepreneurs, we
should really be declaring this a decade of black entrepreneurs so that we
begin to encourage that culture. To survive in the market one has to have
that resilience.

Finally, Chairperson, I want to remind us in this House that each one of us
has a responsibility to grow this economy and to sustain it. Remember, the
moment you employ one person you are already beginning to play a role in
promoting the economic activity in your area. You are also beginning to
reduce the statistics on unemployment. I thank you very much, Chairperson.
[Applause.]

Ms B V MNCUBE: Chairperson, hon Minister Patel has highlighted, throughout
his speech, the importance of employment creation and the plight of the
people in our country, who, through their inability to find work, cannot
support themselves or their families. This resultant unemployment of 5,8
million people affects the poverty status of people as well as causing
inequality.

The Minister has highlighted the precarious existence of South Africans,
with inadequate jobs and far too high a level of working poor. The 2009 ANC
electoral manifesto highlighted the importance of creating decent work
through inclusive, labour-absorptive economic growth.

The focus on decent work is an important approach of the ANC government,
geared at creating work and decreasing inequality while gradually
alleviating poverty.

Hon Sinclair, this is a result created by the previous apartheid regime of
the National Party to which you once belonged. You jumped to the ANC and
now to Cope.

The national department plays an important role in developing policies and
guiding the framework within which the provincial departments align and act
as the operating arms of the national department. The Gauteng provincial
department of economic development is fully aligned with the strategies and
policies as outlined by the national Minister.

The primary mandate of the Gauteng provincial department is to create
decent work, through inclusive, labour-absorptive economic growth that
promotes sustainable livelihoods and alleviates poverty and inequality.
However, the provincial government has been innovative, and bold in the
manner in which this priority is achieved.

The provincial department has acknowledged that there is structural
unemployment, where unemployment rates have never broached the 21% level in
the province, despite an average economic growth rate of nearly 6% over the
period 2005 to 2007. The recession has exacerbated unemployment rates and
poverty levels.

The department has focused on addressing the mandate of the provincial and
national government by focusing on transforming the provincial economy
through improved efficiency; sustainable employment creation; increasing
economic equity and ownership; investing in people and sustainable
communities; and social cohesion.

There are a series of short—term interventions as well as medium- to long-
term interventions that will be implemented over the next year and over the
medium term. The short-term interventions aim to address the structural
unemployment and the impact of the economic recession, while the medium- to
long-term interventions aim to progressively transform the Gauteng
provincial economy.

Hon Sinclair, do you hear what Gauteng is going to do?
The phasing-in is important, as is the vision to develop a growth path that
focuses on the primary and secondary sectors, on the formal and informal
sectors, on institutions ...

Mr K A SINCLAIR: Chairperson, I was just going to ask the hon member if she
is aware that many of the people who are sitting in the ANC were also
members of the National Party. [Laughter.]

Ms B V MNCUBE: Key short- to medium-term interventions include the
following. Firstly, there are the increased public employment programmes
that target people excluded from mainstream economic activity or formal
employment, particularly in rural areas, informal settlements and
townships. This contributes to an employment safety net and is a form of
employment guarantee.

Secondly, there are the youth employability programmes.

Thirdly, there are active industrial and sectoral development strategies to
support labour-absorptive sectors and sectors in distress, while
encouraging exports as well as localisation.

Fourthly, there is financial and nonfinancial support to small, medium and
micro enterprises, SMMEs, and co-operatives in the formal and informal
sectors of the economy.

Fifthly, we have pilot projects that focus on green jobs and green
technology investment in the areas of energy efficiency, waste management
and rural agricultural development and food security; and sixthly,
increased strategic, socioeconomic and bulk infrastructure investment,
encouraging infrastructure-led growth and effective spatial planning that
unites the economy.

Furthermore, the infrastructure investment needs to focus on developing the
necessary networks that bring people in the province closer together and
address the backlogs in service delivery.

Thus, much like the national department, the Gauteng provincial department
of economic development aims to promote a vision of an inclusive and
sustainable Gauteng economy that promotes a developmental and equitable
society, hon Sinclair. This is to be achieved through a series of short-,
medium- and long-term interventions that will set Gauteng on an endogenous
growth path that will create decent jobs and enterprise opportunities in an
economy that is innovating, inclusive and green. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Hon Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, this Ministry
needs to be more than just an economic think-tank. It must possess the
machinery and political will to ensure that the necessary interventions are
driven through all government departments.
Laat my toe om die Minister te bedank dat Nelie Kok ten minste aandag kry.
Ons het vyf jaar baklei. Die provinsiale regering het dit al die pad
geïgnoreer. Hulle het die potensiaal om vir hulself werk te skep, indien u
hulle werklik gaan help. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Allow me to thank the Minister for at least giving attention to Nelie Kok.
We have been fighting for five years. The provincial government ignored
this every step of the way. If you truly intend helping them, they will
have the potential to create jobs for themselves.]

Many government departments failed to implement the measures required from
the first industrial policy and created bottlenecks in the system. This
cannot be allowed to happen again for the simple reason that delays serve
only to worsen the inequalities in our society.

In this regard, I would like to quote Andile Mngxitama, the publisher of
New Frank Talk, who wrote in the Sowetan, and I quote:

   The truth is that most blacks experience increased poverty, disease, bad
   education and health care ... Economic racial inequalities lead to racism
   in the everyday interaction between blacks and whites. Basically, life
   for blacks remains an experience of humiliation.
I believe that the extreme wealth of a few black individuals does not make
the humiliating day-to-day poverty of 20 million black South Africans less
bad.

My onlangse ervaring in Limpopo met “Taking Parliament to the People” is
dat die mense wat in die omgewing van ’n myn bly nie mede-eienaars van die
minerale is nie.

Die Onafhanklike Demokrate glo dat die enigste manier om armoede te verlig,
is om mense aandeelhouers te maak in die betrokke myne waar hulle werk en
in die omgewing waar hulle bly.

Die Noord-Kaap het baie minerale soos diamante, ystererts en mangaan, maar
die mense het nie ’n aandeel in die rykdom van hul provinsie nie. Dit is
baie vreemd.

Al wat ons in die Noord-Kaap het om te wys vir die lang jare van mynwese,
is mense wat siek is van asbestose. Dit moet eindig. (Translation of
Afrikaans paragraphs follows.)

[My experience recently in Limpopo with “Taking Parliament to the People”
is that the people who are residing in the vicinity of mines are not co-
owners of the minerals.

The Independent Democrats believe that the only way to alleviate poverty is
to make people shareholders in the particular mine where they work and in
the vicinity where they live.

The Northern Cape is rich in minerals like diamonds, iron ore and
manganese, but the people do not have a share in the wealth of their
province. This is particularly strange.

The only thing we have to show for all the years of mining in the Northern
Cape is people who are sick as a result of asbestosis. This must end.]

This government that claims to be implementing policies according to the
Freedom Charter must prove that “The people shall share in the country’s
wealth!”

Where is the wealth of this country? It is only in the hands of the old
white elite and the new black elite.

Hoekom moet mense hof toe gaan oor hul eie rykdom, soos die Richtersveld se
mense? Hoekom moet ons mense in die hof gaan baklei? [Why do people have to
go to court for their own wealth, like the people of the Richtersveld? Why
do our people have to fight in court?]

It is the apartheid regime that has done it. So, I want to ask the
question: Hoekom moet die mense hof toe gaan? Dankie. [Why do the people
have to go to court? Thank you.]

Mr F ADAMS: Chairperson, this is a debate on energy and not mineral
resources.

Mr M C WALTERS (Western Cape): Chairperson, Ministers, hon members of the
NCOP, thank you for the opportunity to speak. Some things emerged during
the debate that I would like to bring especially to the attention of the
Ministers; both Minister Patel and Minister Peters referred to rural
families who are burdened by extreme poverty.

If there is one case of neglect by the ANC, it is the neglect of those
people. Thirty per cent of the highest-potential soil in South Africa is
situated in the former homelands. That ANC government — from Derek Hanekom
— has been given the technology to develop that land. With that technology
you could double South Africa’s maize yield; those people who are suffering
rural poverty can be helped very easily and cheaply with known technology.

However, that soil was created by the good Lord and needs to be developed.
Countries across the globe continue to struggle to rebuild their economies
following the worst crisis since after 1929. After the past 18 months many
people have been thinking about the issue of development and we have seen
some very good examples in the speeches today — they have been making their
voices heard!

A powerful new ideal has taken root and you have heard much of the green
economies. It is an ideal that says we will fight pollution; we will take
climate change seriously; we will intensify our efforts to identify and
produce cheaper forms of energy; and we will commit ourselves – all of us —
to building a better life for all, especially the poor people of the world.


At this point I would like to touch on the question of energy in our
country and the role played by Eskom in its production and distribution. In
February, at a media briefing to set out government’s view of the massive
tariff increases, national Energy Minister Peters fell prey to a serious
bout of what one could call gobbledygook.

After stating that the positives of the decisions far outweighed the
negatives, the Minister added that the time had come to consider energy
intensity in the relative context of the jobs that we can create, in
comparison to other less energy-intensive industries.

Then she said that without energy security, the levels of economic activity
necessary to create new jobs could not be achieved.
Perhaps the Minister needs to revisit the old Eskom plans for the Congo
River, the second largest river in the world after the Amazon. Its
hydroelectrical potential, as is known, is sufficient to power all of sub-
Saharan Africa and bring energy security to all Africans. This should have
been a major focus of the Nepad policy, but it has never been addressed.

I want to be quite blunt about this: The increases granted to Eskom will
prove to be calamitous for small, medium and micro enterprises. And, should
anyone have forgotten, let me remind you that SMMEs have long been regarded
as an essential element of the South African economy.

Indeed, recent studies have shown that small and medium enterprises,
especially, have overtaken the corporates in the provision of employment
opportunities for the people of this country.

My question is: Where to now for small businesses? Perhaps the national
government should tell us what they intend doing to alleviate the plight
that awaits those small businesses. What we are seeing here is small
businesses with their backs to the wall and with their knees squeezed tight
against a steel gate.

It would, therefore, simply not be good enough to advise them to use less
electricity. And it would be as tactless to pull out the tattered notepad
containing that overused, scribbled sentence that says: “Our electricity is
still the cheapest in the world”.

The question that the people of this province and South Africa want
answered is: When will our standard of living start to improve again?

Chairperson, I would like to raise another question about Eskom. In its
present form, in this day and age, should it be entrusted with the
responsibility of running the South African grid?

This is why I am asking: There is an increasing belief among proponents of
a green economy that Eskom is far too unwieldy to be an effective, modern
distributor of electricity. It was great for the 1980s, but in this second
decade of our third millennium, it has become like a sumo wrestler
sprinting against a Jamaican athlete.

At a time when energy institutions around the world have become renowned
for innovation and a commitment to finding green sources of energy, Eskom
continues to soldier on regardless. Perhaps it is time for those who judge
performance and who make these decisions to have another look at the model.


There is a good reason for being critical of Eskom, just as there is a good
reason for my party’s criticism of national government’s slow progress in
developing a green economy for South Africa — in spite of the encouraging
words that we have heard here this afternoon.

The DA acknowledges that there is some wonderful talent in South Africa,
and of course, especially in the Western Cape. We know that there are
thousands of people who want to give something back to this country. All of
us must encourage them to contribute by creating the conditions that will
enable them to continue playing a positive role.

We believe that it is crucially important to promote a can-do spirit in
South Africa and to unite to crush the will-take culture that seems to
continue to raise its head. The DA takes its role in opposition at national
level and as a governing party in the Western Cape very seriously. We do
not believe in criticising for criticism’s sake; wherever we can we will
try to offer alternatives.

The DA believes that the Western Cape has the potential to become the green
technology hub of Africa, especially with regard to alternative sources of
energy. There are a number of things that we believe count in favour of our
province.

If we look at how successfully wind has been used to generate electricity
in several countries around the world, it’s quite easy to understand why
people become excited at the prospect of generating wind-powered
electricity all along our West Coast.
That is not all: High energy, coast wave-generated electricity is a big
possibility; within 150 km of Cape Town we have the Karoo starting, with
its possibility for utilising the sun to generate electricity; and then bio-
energy as well.

The rise of a global green economy has sparked a number of international
developments of which I would like to mention just two. The first is the
traditionally poor and in some cases very poor countries, which have
embraced and developed green opportunities. The second is the way
information flashes across the globe.

Perhaps we can look at Bangladesh and the microcredit arena where Grameen
Shakti has launched a programme to bring renewable energy technologies to
rural households. Since its launch, Grameen Shakti has installed
photovoltaic solar systems in 205 000 homes across Bangladesh. Every month
an additional 8 000 homes are fitted out, and by 2014 they contemplate 7,5
million such homes.

Grameen Shakti has also installed 6 000 biogas plants which can utilise
dung and organic litter, and can generate gas for cooking as well as for
electricity and organic fertiliser.

The same thing has happened in Germany where 280 000 jobs have been
generated through renewable energy and offshore wind parks. Here we are
looking at another 30 000 jobs. The retrofitting of buildings has been
mentioned. I hope that the government and national government will pursue
that with great energy.

Recycling in the USA is a US$236 billion industry and certainly something
that South Africa must emulate and the government must stimulate to the
maximum of its capacity.

I would like to just quote Mark Swilling, a South African academic, when he
referred to what Gordon Brown had written:


   ... governments across the world have made green investment a major part
   of their economic stimulus packages. They have recognised the vital role
   that spending on energy efficiency and infrastructure can have on demand
   and employment in the short term, while also laying the foundations for
   future growth. ... the economies that embrace the green revolution
   earliest will reap the greatest economic rewards.

I think, for the sake of our children, Chairperson, that this is something
that the national government and all provincial governments should pursue
with the greatest energy. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr A J NYAMBI: Chairperson, hon Ministers, hon members, DGs, distinguished
guests, ladies and gentlemen, I will be failing if I do not assist you, hon
Walters. I was impressed that you were quoting and it is clear that you are
interested in learning.

I will pose questions to you as homework. Who created the current
challenges? Who created the homelands you are talking about today?

Hon Gunda, I was checking with the DG on that side and she was surprised:
“Who is this one?” You are the only one from one party who has never
attended our meetings. No wonder the confusion.

Hon Lees, what an insinuation about the department of Education! Yesterday,
we were told here that it is a fact that there is an overhaul of these
further education and training, FET, colleges. There is a serious focus on
engineering.

And hon Sinclair — hopping and jumping as he spoke here! My advice to all
of you is that here in Parliament you can register for a basic economics
class instead of blaming the department, and Parliament will pay for that.

Chairperson, it is an honour to be afforded an opportunity to participate
in this debate on this historic day. It is on this day last year that the
majority of the citizens of this country gave the ANC another opportunity
to lead the fourth democratic Parliament.

After going through the department’s strategic plan, indeed, we agree with
you, hon Minister, that the decision taken by the President in May 2009, in
this fourth democratic Parliament, to have a dedicated Energy department,
has imposed enormous responsibilities on you to take on your mandate with
the necessary dynamism and vigour.

Chairperson, allow me to quote the President of our country, His Excellency
J G Zuma, while addressing the Copenhagen Climate Change Conference. He
said, and I quote:

   Climate change is a practical matter for the developing world ...
   Developed countries are historically responsible for 80% of the current
   emissions in the atmosphere. Developing countries are most affected by
   climate change and are least capable to adapt to the impacts. As they
   justifiably pursue their own development paths, it is expected that
   developing countries’ emissions will increase.

In recognition of the reality of climate change, the ANC Polokwane
conference resolved to recognise that climate change is a new threat on a
global scale that places an enormous burden upon South Africans and
Africans as a whole.

In recognition of the undisputed reality, the conference resolved to set
target reductions of greenhouse gas emissions. This is part of the ANC’s
responsibility to protect the environment and promote sustainable
development, and to participate in sharing the burden with the global
community under a common framework for action.

The Constitution makes it important for the state to “... respect, protect,
promote and fulfil the rights in the Bill of Rights”, thus imposing upon it
the obligation to protect the rights of the citizens to a healthy and clean
environment.

In that regard, government is enjoined to ensure that the impact of climate
change is rolled back and that alternative forms of energy are forthwith
explored and added to the energy grid in a negation tactic progressing
towards the total elimination of fossil-fuel-based energy production. This
should be done either through coal combustion for electricity production
purposes or industrial production inventories.

In complying with that imperative, we are pleased with the strategic plan
and the speech presented today in taking the country forward despite the
challenges identified.

Hon members, the budget as presented is in line with what has been
identified by the ANC and the Minister of Finance, to mention but a few
examples: support for labour-intensive industries through policy
interventions, skills development, public employment programmes and a rural
development strategy.

The Minister of Finance, in taking these things forward, further
highlighted the obligation to assist industries to manage scarce resources
more efficiently and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions through the
appropriate pricing of energy. He saw this as a requirement for enabling
investment in sustainable technologies. In this regard, he said, and I
quote:


   Green economy initiatives will create new opportunities for enterprise
   development, job creation and the renewal of commercial and residential
   environments. This must play a part in our new growth path.


The demand for green energy in South Africa cannot be an opportunity for
other countries to increase their exports to our country, whilst turning
our economy into nothing more than a warehouse for assembling and
distributing finished goods. It is incumbent upon our government not only
to ensure that intermediary and final goods are produced by South African
firms, but also to ensure that the skills needed to produce such
inventories are produced and used locally.

In that regard, South Africa will indeed create jobs, attract investment as
a result of increasing her use of clean energy and in the same vein, be
able to ensure sustainable energy supply.

The ANC is committed to ensuring a sustainable economy, where all South
Africans, present and future, realise the right to an environment that is
not harmful to their health and wellbeing. In doing so, the question of
energy utilisation should be explored further in order to ensure that
posterity is neither burdened with energy liabilities nor deprived of
energy reserves due to overutilisation of energy resources.

The ANC is further committed to mobilising the public, business and other
players to act responsibly and save energy, both collectively and as
individuals, including through a mandatory national energy efficiency
programme.

Hon Minister, your strategic plan commits the department to the
continuation of the electrification programme to effect socio-economic
development, job creation and poverty alleviation as well as addressing the
past imbalances. The strategic plan views this programme as a vehicle for
the department to achieve universal access in formal households by 2014.
Indeed, on the programme of Taking Parliament to the People, what we have
seen and the outcry of the people of the Greater Tubatse Municipality in
Limpopo, will definitely be a thing of the past.

Energy plays an important role in the lives of the people who use it in
different forums for various purposes. However, the disparities in modern
energy provision brought about by the lack of access to infrastructure
impact largely on poor urban and rural people. In the rural areas, women
are the main users of fuel wood. Woodlands have been depleted in many areas
while in others they are under heavy pressure.

The campaign for communities to save energy through using few appliances
will assist the communities not only through savings in energy consumption
expenses, but also in lowering the demand for electricity. On the other
hand, human settlements, including the rural ones, should be electrified to
ensure their integration into the main economy. [Interjections.]

Chairperson, we indeed commend what has been done for the people of
Ezingolweni. It is indeed important that reliance on paraffin and other
such unsustainable yet expensive sources of energy should indeed be phased
out and replaced with universal electrification. In this regard, a case is
for the building of more production capacity by Eskom and other envisaged
players in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and be responsible
global neighbours. [Interjections.]

In conclusion, Chairperson, allow me to conclude by quoting the Minister on
her strategic overview statement ... [Interjections.] The ANC supports the
budget. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mr F ADAMS: Chair, on a point of order: Is it parliamentary for another
member to refer to a speaker and say that he is lying? Hon Gunda is
shouting here, saying: “He is lying”.

Mr J J GUNDA: Hon Chair, I did not say the hon member is lying. That is why
I asked him: “When?”

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Which member are you referring to?
Because I do not have the benefit of having heard hon Gunda. May I first
establish something? Hon Gunda, is it true that you said to the hon member
that he is lying? Hon members, can we just refrain from using words that
will undermine the decorum of the House and allow the member to conclude
his debate, please?

Thank you very much, hon member. May I, therefore, take this opportunity to
call on hon Minister Patel to conclude the debate. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: Hon House Chairperson and hon
members, a number of very helpful ideas and many supportive comments have
been made in the debate, and there appears to be a wide consensus on the
importance of the green economy.

Hon Adams has cautioned us to go beyond abalone. I am happy to report to
him that the programmes that we have in a number of areas will attempt to
focus on the broad range of aquaculture and we hope that this can be an
important part of job creation in coastal communities.

He also referred to the importance of acting firmly against price
collusion. I am happy to advise hon Adams and members that we took action
over the last number of years and eight motor vehicle companies have paid
R51 million in penalties as a result of the work of the competition
authorities.

Four airlines have paid about R108 million and three companies were levied
with penalties totalling a combined R340 million for fixing the price of
bread.

Hon Lees has said he is not convinced that we need economic development
departments. I am happy to advise that in the province where the DA is in
government, it does indeed have an economic development department. I am
also happy to report that that department has asked us to work closely with
it in addressing the economic challenges of the province.

More seriously though, hon Lees has raised the question about economic
planning. I would like to point out that we put ideology aside and look at
the facts out there in the world. Some of the fastest-growing economies in
the world, that of China, India, Korea and other countries, have very
substantial economic planning capacity that is available to the modern
state and, therefore, outperformed many economies that have not had that
capacity.

Finally, I would suggest to hon Lees most respectfully that simply
repeating the mantra of deregulation doesn’t constitute coherent policy.
The experience out there in the world has been that countries and
governments have to grapple with the right balance between the state and
the market.

To find that balance is an evidential issue; it is based on the evidence
before us. Indeed, the simplistic cause for deregulation lies at the very
heart of the global economic crisis. The failure of government to
effectively regulate financial markets has caused enormous damage to growth
and to our joint efforts to address the challenges of poverty all over the
world.

I have taken note, hon members, of the various comments that have been made
with regard to particular provinces. In respect of the Northern Cape, I
would say to hon Sinclair that the province is depending very highly on the
primary sector. We need more balanced economic growth in the Northern Cape,
but we have to do this while being mindful of the locational and physical
challenges of the province.

We think there is an enormous opportunity for a major energy initiative. My
colleague, Minister Peters, has spoken about the work that her department
and others are doing to bring a large solar generating capacity on stream.
We are now conducting studies to see how feasible this is.

A number of members have spoken well about the challenges of jobs. The hon
Mnguni and hon M B Khoza have elaborated on aspects of this. I would like
to make a point in support of what the hon Khoza has said. Take a
photograph of Sandton and Lubala and compare them: one country, two
realities.

What that points to is that economic growth, important as it is, is not
sufficient. We need high and sustained economic growth. You need
development policies that ensure that the growth takes place equitably
across the country and that growth draws in opportunities for decent
employment for the poorest South Africans. I believe the comments made by
hon Khoza are particularly appropriate to that challenge.

You have also pointed, hon Khoza, to the importance of the economic
agencies in KwaZulu-Natal and elsewhere. We have a challenge as far as
economic agencies are concerned. Economic agencies are part of the
machinery that is available to the public sector, but some degree of
disconnection has begun to develop between the plans of Cabinets, whether
it is a national Cabinet or a provincial cabinet, and the programmes and
activities of many of the agencies. We need to find ways in which we can
reconnect these so that we develop accountability.

Accountability would have at least four or five characteristics to it.
Firstly, it would be to ensure that we have proper and tight oversight.
Ultimately, the shareholder, the public sector, must take responsibility
for the agencies that act in the name of the public.
Secondly, there must be clarity on the mandate; if the agency knows what it
is that the government expects from them and what their shareholder
expects, then their conduct must be aligned to the requirements of their
mandate.

Thirdly, we need to address the funding models of a number of the agencies
to ensure that we have the sustainable capacity to finance the
industrialisation and other economic development challenges. We have done
some work now, looking at Brazil and Germany, to see what the underlying
industrial funding model is that these economies are using to grow their
manufacturing sector faster.

Germany is arguably the world’s most competitive and advanced manufacturing
sector. So, we are learning from their experience and seeing how we can
catch that experience and share it with our development finance
institutions, DFIs, and how we can get the Industrial Development
Corporation, IDC, and other institutions to benefit from that.

Finally, it requires a regular evaluation of the impact of our development
agencies at national, provincial and municipal level. Also, perhaps we can
share a lot more of the joint work on this issue.

Hon Walters made two comments; one was on the importance of the green
economy and I’m glad that hon Walters is supporting the government’s
thinking on the green economy. However, hon Walters has said, or certainly
implied, that rural poverty had been caused by what he calls “the neglect
of the ANC”. This is a stunning denial of our history and disrespect for
the facts because it implies a model that says that under apartheid, before
the ANC came into power, there was a wealthy, prosperous and happy rural
population in the homelands.

The reality is sadly not so. We sit with the legacy of migrant labour, poor
infrastructure, weak skills and land dispossession. Our challenge as
government is to reverse all of that. If we are saying, and if our paid
people are saying that we must make this a greater priority than it has
been in the past, then as the government we agree completely.

We have five priorities and we have elevated rural development to one of
those five. We have created a dedicated Ministry to address this issue and
we are working collegially to strengthen rural development.

In conclusion let me say that the challenges that we are facing cannot be
addressed only at national level. They require fundamentally a better and a
more effective system of intergovernmental co-operation and co-ordination.
When national, provincial and local government work well together; when we
take our separate resource envelopes and we try to find ways in which we
can synchronise that; when we find ways of avoiding waste and duplication
between the three levels of government, we can release the resources to
address the challenges of our people.

We owe that to the people of Lubala, we owe it to the people of Dimbaza and
we owe it to the people in each of your provinces. Thank you very much.
[Applause.]

The MINISTER OF ENERGY: Chairperson, I think I need to indicate here that I
thank all the participants; and particularly the chairperson of the select
committee for the way in which he drives the work that is intended to make
it possible for us to do what we have set ourselves to do: to create a
better life for all.

In particular, in this instance we are saying that we would work with all
the progressive forces to make it possible that we can do much more to
improve the lives of our people.

Chairperson, I would be failing in my duty if I did not indicate also what
the department is doing in relation to issues of the targeted groups like
gender and the youth. I just want to indicate here that the department has
started facilitating aggressively to show the participation of young people
and women in the energy sector.

I need to indicate that because of the work that the department is doing in
the energy sector, and by also encouraging the skills development programme
and so being able to produce quite a number of young people who are
interested in the nuclear sphere, we are going to be the host of the
International Youth Nuclear Congress, which is going to be held immediately
after the World Cup in South Africa.

This will bring all the young people who are interested in the nuclear
field together on the shores of South Africa to make it possible that we
can discuss the future of nuclear energy and make sure that we can produce
electricity; that we make it possible to use nuclear energy for medicinal
interventions and to get people fresh water and sustain household food
security.

The department is also pleased to announce that it has already started to
enjoy the benefits of its efforts in facilitating the empowerment of women
through their participation in an energy and oil project in Bethlehem. This
project is called the Bethlehem hydroelectric power scheme and was duly
launched by the Deputy Minister of Economic Development, Ms G L Mahlangu-
Nkabinde.

I also want to indicate here, ladies and gentlemen, that we are committed
to ensuring that as South Africa we participate in ensuring that we make a
success of this green economy. Those who were monitoring the economic
developments around the economic meltdown would have realised that stats
indicated that more jobs were created in the energy sector whilst the other
sectors were shedding jobs. It would be wrong for us as South Africa not to
grab this opportunity with both hands.

I want to indicate once more that it seems that some of the members, when
they don’t belong to the ruling party, become selective in their listening.
I just want to say that listening is a skill. If you listen you will hear
well.

I don’t know why, hon Lees and hon Walters, you speak about Eskom’s
monopoly. We have said it several times — including last year when the
President said it in his state of the nation address when all of you in
this House were present — that we are establishing an independent system
and market operator to be almost like a competitor to Eskom. This is
because we are trying to break the monopoly of Eskom, a state entity.

Where have you seen that government actually says that they realise that we
cannot have a state entity being a referee and a player! We are going to
create another entity that is going to buy this power from the independent
power producers. This will make it possible for everybody and every
stakeholder to have access to the grid.

So, I just wanted to indicate that we are busy with legislation to make it
possible that this state entity is established. We did indicate that within
the next six months we are going to have an interim arrangement that will
make it possible to start signing up the power that is generated through
the wind and other energy sources that will be coming to the fore.

As I have said, I will indicate here that listening is a skill. We did
indicate that we have done the feasibility study with the Clinton Climate
Initiative in the Northern Cape for concentrated solar power. We are going
to make it possible for the independent power producers also to
participate, because if we create an industrial solar park we will be
creating one zone where everybody will participate.

This is almost like creating a Coega in the Northern Cape, but for solar
power in this instance. So, whoever is interested would not be doing
environmental assessments because it would have been done for the entire
industrial zone. We are saying that we are also creating this opportunity
for all those who are interested to come and buy into this initiative.

The Minister of Trade and Industry released the new Industrial Policy
Action Plan Part 2, Ipap 2, within which are located issues related to the
green economy. The Minister of Water and Environmental Affairs has released
indicators of when exactly the green economy policy documents will be
released so that we will then be able to know the exact areas that have
been identified for these green initiatives.
This is because a green economy is an indication that we are alive to the
environment, we do want environmental sustainability and we want to protect
the environment for generations to come. We know that we are custodians of
this earth for the generations that are yet to be born.

We, therefore, are responsible leaders who are saying, “What can we do so
that we don’t have the challenges that we have today that were created by
climate change, because of reckless industrial development?”

We are actually saying that it would be wrong for us not to learn from the
mistakes of the developed countries, in terms of driving development
greedily and selfishly. As my comrade has said, super greed created the
challenges that we have today. So, we are saying that we need to be
responsible and think about those who are still going to come after us.

When we were holding the Climate Change Conference here in Cape Town, there
was a child who told us that he doesn’t want to go and live on the moon or
somewhere else on a planet that he doesn’t know. And so he asked us to
protect this planet so that even his grandchildren could also live on
mother earth – a nine-year-old! So, it is up to us as leaders to make sure
that we are alive to the challenges of the environment.
The hon Walters also spoke about the majestic Congo. Remember that we are
in South Africa and the biggest rivers we have in South Africa are the Vaal
and the Orange Rivers. We are also working together with the Department of
Water Affairs to make it possible that going forward – whatever dam
development there is – we are going to ensure that there is integration in
terms of hydroelectric power generation.

However, we cannot have a situation where we as South Africa can say that
we are going to bulldoze our way into the Congo and build a hydro scheme
there. We need the partnership of the Congolese and that is why we are
working together with the other four countries, including the Congo, to be
able to develop the Western Power Corridor, Westcor, initiative. We are
working with them.

I am saying that we are doing it because we want to make sure that within
the Southern African power pool, South Africa is an equal partner with the
DRC and the other Southern African Development Community, SADC, members. We
would like to make sure that all the water on the continent and
particularly in the region would be used for the benefit of creating
energy.

However, we cannot just go in there without getting the support, without
working together with the Congolese, because we cannot only focus on using
that water for hydro schemes. We need to be able to look at a continental
or a regional integrated plan.
Now, on the 29th there will be a meeting of the Ministers of energy in the
SADC region. One of the key agenda items will be Westcor, under which Inga
3, the Kunene River and the majestic Congo fall; so it is important that
you understand that issue.

You would also remember that in the case of the Amazon River no single
country can benefit from it without making sure that the  seven other
countries that share the waters of the Amazon River also benefit from it.
So, members should not come to the House and raise issues that they know
are not true.

Chairperson, I just want to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson
of the select committee, members of the committee, departmental officials,
my colleagues in Cabinet and President Zuma for his foresight in leadership
to ensure that energy can be central.

We know that energy is the lifeline of all socioeconomic development
imperatives. Without energy one would not be able to give birth to a
healthy child, and without energy one would not even have a decent funeral.
So, it is important that you understand that from conception to the grave
we would be part of your daily life.

That is why it is important that when we debate and participate here we
should remember that this is about people’s lives and the life of
economies. And it is about making it possible that we can grow the economy.
That is why in working together with the Minister and his team we are going
to make it possible to create the number of jobs that we set for ourselves.
We set ourselves a target of 10 million jobs in the next couple of years
that will come directly from energy.

It is important that we understand that energy will make it possible to
live, but that it can also contribute to the quicker degradation of the
environment. That is why we say that it is important that we become
holistic, integrated and look at every other aspect of our daily lives.

I want to thank members for participating in this debate. We should also
continue with the debate about electricity generation in South Africa, and
about how much it costs before we can come here and talk about Hitachi as
if we are so fixated on Hitachi.

Hitachi gave their story; why don’t you listen to them? Why don’t you
listen to Chancellor House? Why don’t you go to the ANC and get their side
of the story about this thing? [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

                             APPROPRIATION BILL

                               (Policy debate)
Vote No 36 — Transport:

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson, hon members and the MECs who have
been able to come here, the MEC for transport in the Western Cape, hon
Carlisle; the MEC for transport in KwaZulu-Natal, hon Willies Mchunu; and
the MEC for transport in the Eastern Cape, Ms Barry, I thank you very much
for gracing this debate.

It is now only 49 days to the start of the World Cup. This is an African
World Cup. To begin with, all 53 African heads of state will be part of
this World Cup. They have been formally invited.

Secondly, for the first time in the history of Fifa, six countries from
Africa will be participating in the World Cup. Plans are already under way
for the transportation of general spectators from Algeria, Cameroon, the
Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and Nigeria when they arrive in South Africa, and
throughout the tournament. Already the six African Ministries of transport
participating in the World Cup are co-ordinating plans on how all the
spectators will be transported. This will be finalised in Ghana next month
when we meet all the participating countries from Africa.

A number of participating teams will be using SADC member countries as base
camps. This has vast transport implications and will culminate in an update
at the SADC Ministers of transport meeting to be held in Maputo next month.
Through the Local Organising Committee, we are co-ordinating with all the
participating countries to ensure smooth and efficient transportation of
fans.

As you know, Chairperson, the backbone of any World Cup is the massive
participation of the host country. In this regard South Africa will not
disappoint and transport will not disappoint.

A command centre based in Gauteng with co-ordinators in all the nine host
cities will be operating by the end of May. Two days ago, President Zuma
officially opened the O R Tambo International Airport upgrade. This is a
R2,3 billion investment. Later that day, we launched the country’s
transport plan for the World Cup.

The transport plan is a statement of our readiness to transport fans to
stadiums in all nine host cities and to all corners of our country, during
and after the World Cup. After the World Cup, the infrastructure left
behind must change forever the way we travel for leisure and business.
After the World Cup, infrastructure and services left behind must benefit
the rural and urban poor in urban and rural areas.

Notwithstanding the progress we have made over the the 15 years, we are
facing challenges with regard to the maintenance of our secondary road
network. Nothing best indicates a country’s state of development than the
condition of its roads. The following figures indicate how much we still
need to do to become a fully developed country.

The numbers give a summary of schools which are without any road access in
South Africa in 2010. In the Eastern Cape 859 out of 5 401 schools are not
accessible by road. In the Free State 28 out of 2 472 are not accessible.
In Gauteng — which of course is our developed province — out of 2 202
schools, only 2 are not accessible by road. In KwaZulu-Natal, out of 5 331
schools, 403 are not accessible by road. In Mpumalanga, out of 1 793
schools, 17 are not accessible. In the Northern Cape, out of 473, 9 are not
accessible. Out of 4 131 in Limpopo, 129 are not accessible. In North West
out of 2 257, 47 are not accessible. Lastly, out of 1 577 schools in the
Western Cape, 16 are not accessible by road.

Add to these figures a total of 31 clinics in the country which do not have
reliable access by road: 21 out of 695 in the Eastern Cape, five out of 485
in KwaZulu-Natal and some provinces have one or two clinics without access
by road.

In addition to the lack of access roads, we have challenges with regard to
maintenance backlogs. The total paved and gravel network at provincial
level is 184 816 km. At least 40% of this network has reached a crisis
point. The total paved and gravel network at municipal level is 339 849 km.
We are developing a means to quantify the backlog at the municipal level so
that we can have accurate localised numbers. What we know is that our
country needs R75 billion over the next five years to arrest this decline.

This year we are addressing these challenges by implementing an integrated
national maintenance programme and a rural transport strategy for South
Africa. This is not a new programme. Successive Ministers of Transport from
1994 have spoken out for the increase of the budget for road maintenance.
The absence of roads defines who we are, either as a developing country, a
developed country or an underdeveloped country.

This leads me to the next intervention that we are making — the provision
of road infrastructure in our rural areas. The rural access improvement
programme is part of a comprehensive rural transport strategy for South
Africa which aims to do the following: to build bridges and nonmotorised
transport facilities; to develop and implement the integrated public
transport networks for regular transport services; to develop and upgrade
the airport network with a proper road-link infrastructure; and to
revitalise rural railway operations by expanding rail passenger services
and freight operations to the rural areas.

Furthermore, through the Expanded Public Works Programme, we will
contribute to job creation through the implementation of labour-intensive
projects. To kickstart this process, we have secured initial funding of
R1 billion dedicated to rural road infrastructure. We will also be
institutionalising our rural infrastructure and services portfolio through
the establishment of a dedicated agency.

This, hon MECs, will be over and above what you have in your budgets. A
project management team and unit have been appointed to drive this
programme.

In many municipalities and provinces we have identified the lack of
dedicated funding for road maintenance, poor asset management and capacity
challenges as the causes of poor road conditions. Insufficient investment
in maintenance of the road infrastructure is a huge challenge. To address
this, we are planning to develop a ring-fencing mechanism through the
creation of a maintenance fund. Road maintenance cannot happen by accident.

This strategy is not only about sourcing additional funding for
maintenance, but also about ensuring that existing funds are used for the
purpose they were intended for. The strategy is also about better
management of our road assets. The advantage of this programme is not only
that it will arrest the decline of our infrastructure, but that it will
also create thousands of jobs in the process.

The Department of Transport has the responsibility to address access and
mobility challenges facing learners who daily walk more than 3 km in a
single trip to school. The primary project beneficiaries are learners in
rural, semirural and peri-urban areas who have no access to public
transport. Provinces are required to prepare business plans for the
identification and selection of schools. They are also required to enter
into agreements with municipalities to put control measures in place. The
Department of Transport will procure and distribute bicycles to the
provinces.

South Africa experienced a rail tragedy yesterday. On behalf of our
government and our people, we would like to express our sincerest and
heartfelt condolences to the families of the bereaved. Yesterday I was able
to trace two of them and I spoke to the survivors. Personal safety remains
a priority to ensure that rail continues to regain its market share in the
public transport sector. So far, our co-operation agreement with the SA
Police Service has seen the roll-out of more than 2 000 rail police
officers in our provinces.

We have to come to terms with the fact that the passenger rolling stock
fleet has reached the end of its economic life. The average age of the
coaches is between 35 and 40 years, with a maximum economic life of 46
years. Ours is now far beyond this lifespan. Let us state this very
clearly: If we do not act now, that is, to recapitalise our rail fleet, the
urban passenger rail system could collapse in all our cities within the
next decade.

An efficient, reliable and affordable public transport system is at the
centre of our transformation agenda. Our role as government is derived from
our belief that the provision of public transport is primarily a public
responsibility, and not for gain.

We use various instruments: licensing, municipal transport planning and
subsidies to ensure universal access for commuters. The operating license
is the central instrument for government to ensure reliable, efficient and
affordable public transport. This responsibility has been executed by
provincial licensing authorities.

We have decided to restructure the licensing system such that our
interprovincial operations are licensed through the national regulatory
authority, the national transport regulator. Metro councils with capacity
will be tasked with the licensing responsibilities within their cities.

With reference to the recent strikes by some taxi operators we must state
the following. Whilst we acknowledge that taxis provide the public operator
services for gain, we must emphasise that they provide an essential
service. It is a contract between operators and the commuters. It is
because of this principle that withdrawing services by operators without
due consideration for commuters’ interests is unacceptable. We want a
pledge which commits all of us on procedures and instruments regulating our
rights and responsibilities.

It is against this background that in March 2007 Cabinet approved the
public transport strategy and action plan. It is this pledge that we will
be finalising with my colleagues in the provinces. It will then be signed
between us and the taxi industry.

If someone has a problem with some traffic officer, what has that got to do
with Mrs Molefe who is travelling from Diepkloof to town? It has absolutely
nothing to do with that person. We cannot use our people with disrespect.
For example, a taxi operator cannot have a quarrel somewhere and then leave
people stranded. That is totally unacceptable.

Phase 1 of the action plan targets 12 cities and six districts for initial
implementation. Because the transformation of public transport is
incomplete without taxis, a national joint working group has been
established. The national joint working group has the mandate to address
all matters of concern to the taxi industry.

Moving violations remain among the greatest threats to road safety. We all
know drinking and driving, and speaking on the cellphone while driving are
threats to road safety. However, to send an SMS while driving is more
dangerous than speaking on the cellphone. Twenty-one per cent of crashes
are due to this malady.
An average of 40 people die on our roads every day and this cannot be
treated as a normal situation. The Department of Transport and the Road
Traffic Management Corporation, RTMC, will intensify efforts on tight and
visible law enforcement.

This year we are implementing the Administrative Adjudication of Road
Traffic Offences Bill which removes road offences from the court system,
unless one chooses to have his or her matter considered by the court.
Traffic offences will be dealt with administratively. This is already
having an effect.

By the end of May we will have formed community road safety councils in all
nine provinces. The community road safety councils will help us create
safer environments through road design, enforcement and education.

Through partnerships with the Ministers of Basic and Higher Education, we
are intensifying road safety education in our schools. All 18-year-olds in
South Africa must have a driver’s licence and help us introduce a new
culture of driving on our roads.

In line with this, by July we will have appointed a new service provider
for the tamper-proof card licence which will be integrated into the
country’s identification system. These developments in transport will in
time move South Africa from being a developing to a developed country.
I would like to thank the department, Deputy Minister Jeremy Cronin, the
portfolio committee, and the select committee for the assistance and the co-
operation we have received over the year.

I thank the director-general, Mr George Mahlalela, and his staff for their
work and dedication in delivering transport infrastructure and services to
our people. We also acknowledge the role played by the chief executives of
our entities, the managing directors, chairpersons and boards of all our
agencies in the delivery of our transport programme. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr H B GROENEWALD: Thank you, Chairperson, hon Minister, hon members of the
NCOP and guests.

The way the Select Committee of Transport was treated by the Department of
Transport during their presentation regarding the strategic plan is
unacceptable. Neither the Minister nor the director-general was available
when the committee was addressed. Fortunately the deputy director-general,
DDG, did the presentation to the committee, and I must say she did well
under the circumstances.

The statement made by Sake24 in Rapport last Sunday is horrific for any
person who uses our roads in South Africa. An audit done by the SA National
Roads Agency Ltd, Sanral, shows that 80% of South African roads are older
than their lifespan of 20 years. It costs government – ie the taxpayers –
more than R75 billion to maintain 300 000 km of roads in South Africa.
According to the audit, gravel roads in South Africa are even worse than
the tarred roads.

The time has come for local government and provincial authorities to take
responsibility for roads in their areas and get the necessary skills to
keep roads in a good condition.

The Deputy Minister, Mr Jeremy Cronin, also said that the information
Sanral used in their audit was from the provincial and municipal
authorities. He also mentioned that the money allocated for roads and
maintenance from government to local authorities has not been used for
these specific purposes, but for many other priorities.

The DA wants to know from the department: What happened to the
responsibility and control mechanisms to allow the South African economy to
slip to where it is now by sheer mismanagement of the maintenance of South
African roads, caused by the loss of both financial and human skills? Any
delays on road maintenance can cost up to six times more than the general
cost when it is done timeously.

Despite this, Sanral is doing a good job in keeping our national roads in a
reasonable condition, obviously at the cost of the motorist. There is no
such thing as free roads, but for how much longer can we carry on delaying
every time that a section of road reaches the end of its lifespan and needs
reconstruction?

Hon Minister, the DA approves of what you and your department have been
saying about the dedicated road fund. After all, this has been part of our
DA policy proposal to your Ministry for a number of years now. The time has
come to consolidate all fund streams into this fund. This, Minister, is the
only way forward.

Sanral must do the necessary audit of road conditions and, as engineering
skills at provincial and local government levels do not exist, Sanral with
their higher skills based on experience would be able to optimise both
scarce human and financial or capital skills required to keep our roads
safe and pothole free.

The Minister and the Deputy Minister made mention in their forewords of the
strategic plan and the role transport is playing in the economy of South
Africa and how much money has been spent on roads, airports and other
infrastructure and around cities hosting the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup
event.

What about the roads in our rural areas? These are the places where we need
sustainable growth to help our people who stay there to make a living. The
economy is dying in the rural areas because contractors are not willing to
get into the areas where the roads are in such a bad state. Public
transport is not available and people must get to their workplaces on foot.

In provinces like Limpopo, Mpumalanga and the North West province, roads
have totally disintegrated and it is better to travel next to the roads as
opposed to on the roads. The whole road project budget for the North West
province of R525 million for the year 2009-10 has been spent in three
months! How is this possible? We are hardly touching the tip of the iceberg
in this province.

The DA started a pothole campaign in the North West province recently, just
to remind government how dangerous it is to use roads in such a bad
condition and to tell government to do their job properly. I’m sure that
those of you who travelled in those parts will love our beautiful DA
warning signs.

The Taxi Recapitalisation Programme is definitely not on schedule. Many
taxi owners are unhappy with the progress in this programme. With only 10
142 taxis being scrapped, it seems to the DA that this programme will never
end, and that the budget for scrapping taxis is increasing year by year.
Something new and innovative must be done, and the money rather put into a
public transport programme such as the BRTs.

The DA believes that subsidising public transport is essential and happens
in most countries in the world. [Time expired.] [Applause.]
The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): I now call upon the hon member Carelse.

Mr R CARLISLE (Western Cape): Thank you, Chair. No disrespect, but my name
is “Carlisle”.

It gives me great pleasure to follow on the previous speaker, and
particularly to follow on my hon national Minister. I also recognise my MEC
colleagues from KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape.

One of the earlier Ministers speaking here said one of the problems - he
mentioned certain politicians, but I think it applies to most politicians —
is that we don’t listen. Now I wonder how many of you listened carefully to
what the national Minister had to say, because that was one of the most
serious and concerning speeches I have ever heard in politics.

He said a number of things, but he said two things specifically. He said
that R75 billion was required to bring the maintenance backlog into some
kind of manageable form and to that he could contribute an extra R1
million.

He went on to say — let us take it that this is very clearly with regard to
Metrorail and our whole passenger community service – that if we do not act
now, that is to recapitalise our rail fleet, the urban passenger rail
system could collapse in all our cities within the next decade.

I cannot overstate to members in this Place how serious those two
statements are. I happen to know that they are factually correct. I believe
that they go far beyond the boundaries of party politics. There is no place
here to score political points.

We listened earlier to debates on economic development. Let me tell members
economic development is not worth a fig if your transport systems fall
apart. Don’t even waste your time with it. And what we are witnessing and
what the hon national Minister of Transport is telling us is that our
transport systems are falling apart.

Now the importance of this body, sir, is that it’s a transversal body as
far as the country is concerned; and I would hope that every member within
this body will be asking himself or herself, “How do I work with my
colleagues here regardless of their party affiliation to try and change the
situation which the national Minister of Transport has put to us?”

How do we bring pressure to bear on the National Treasury to change the
spending priorities? Because as any of my colleagues here who have been to
parts of Africa and Central America, as I have, know, when transport goes,
the economy goes and everything else goes with it.
Let me just supplement certain of the things that the hon Minister said. He
said he had inherited a gaggle of public entities and that his inheritance
was in many cases chaos or corruption or both. His passion for road safety,
which I share, is blunted and destroyed by the failure of the justice
system to bring consequences to bear on the killers on our roads.

I want to concentrate, as in a sense he did, on the key area of public
transport. Now, our apartheid cities make public transport a very difficult
thing. They provide us with the longest commutes in the world. They make
our cities upside down because whereas normal cities are highly
concentrated in population terms at the centre and it declines outwards,
ours go the other way. Therefore, in Johannesburg the dense concentrations
of population are far out and they have to be brought in. Only public
transport can bridge that apartheid divide.

However, if we look at patterns of mobility, and this is where I believe
this House has a key role to play, what we are seeing is the use of private
transport. This is largely restricted to the middle, upper middle and upper
classes — largely white but also obviously including other population
groups. That pattern is on the rise.

There is huge congestion. The hon Minister has spoken about maintenance. In
fact, that’s where the funding is going: on huge periphery roads,
particularly in the Gauteng area. We are not prepared to have them here,
okay.

So what we are doing is putting the money where the private transport is
and yet the imperative of public transport is to provide mobility to those
who do not have their own transport. And so we have to bring pressure to
bear on National Treasury to begin to shift that priority from the creation
of these massive periphery roads into the needs of Soweto and Khayelitsha
and Mabopane’s public transport. That’s where the shift has to occur.

With regard to the situation with public transport, the hon Minister spoke
of rail so I can speak about a few other things. The situation is such that
the subsidy, the Dora, Division of Revenue Act, grants from Transport are
effectively declining for the three areas that have a bus subsidy, and the
department looks upon the subsidy as an expense when in fact it’s an
investment that grows the economy of this country. Bus transport is in
decline in every single city in South Africa; in some it has virtually
disappeared — like eThekwini.

Taxis will never be able to take up that total shortfall that is occurring
in our public transport. They themselves are faced with overtrading, with
overcompetitive attitudes, and congestion is killing them as surely as it
is killing the bus trade.

Train and rail needs to be the backbone, sir. We have, certainly in the
Western Cape, in the area of Johannesburg, Tshwane and Ekurhuleni, a very
good rail network; no question about it, that can carry millions of people
to work.

We are, however, short of 8 000 coaches and motor coaches, and very few are
being built. At the current rate of building it will take about 70 years to
make those up, by which stage the whole situation will be out of control.

We cannot cope without rail in South Africa and the situation that is now
being created by this is appalling. If you travel from Khayelitsha into
Cape Town, which is the busiest commuter line and has the heaviest volume
in South Africa, higher than Mabopane, then you have trains that are meant
to carry 2 300 people that are carrying in excess of 4 200 passengers. And
I must tell you, the conditions under which the commuters travel are an
outrage to their human dignity and human rights. It is a situation that we
have to change. As I say, it goes beyond petty party politics.

Virtually every commuter coming into Cape Town or into the employment areas
— and not only in Cape Town, but also in the other metros — is almost
inevitably late for work no matter what they do. Buses and trains in Cape
Town run on average about 40 minutes late. In some of the other metros it’s
much worse than that.

It’s pointless to talk about economic development and deregulating Eskom if
we can’t make our transport systems work. So, we are faced with this: There
is no magic about a public transport system. It’s not difficult to run. The
legislation is there, the skills are there. We have the manufacturing
capacity in South Africa to build what we need at Capital Park, but we do
not have the money. But the money is there!

I don’t want to talk about where some of the money went — the money is
there, the country has the money to do it and it has no alternative but to
spend money here.

What we have to do between ourselves is to establish how we change the
spending patterns and the spending priorities so that the people may move
and enjoy the freedom which they deserve.

Mr M P JACOBS: Chairperson, hon Chief Whip, hon Minister of Transport and
my hon fellow Members of Parliament, allow me to start by quoting a clause
from the ANC manifesto which says –

  ... work together with the farming community to improve the living
  conditions of farm dwellers, including the provision of subsidised house
  and other basic services.

My entry point in this debate is rural development with a specific focus on
the development of roads and public transport. It would be a disservice to
our rural people if we fail to connect them with where the economic
activity is located. Their linkage with the civilised world is through the
provision of well-deserved infrastructure and the construction of good
roads and bridges.

During our oversight visit to Mpumalanga, we visited Mbekeni, a village
which is more than 30 km from Nelspruit. It is a remote area that is
isolated from civilisation.

The only road that links them with Nelspruit is badly constructed and
without a bridge. During the rainy season pupils cannot go to school.
Teachers, who are commuting daily, can’t reach their schools. When we asked
them what their personal needs were, they responded by requesting us to
provide them with a constructed road, a bridge and public transport that
would link them with the civilised world, because all their other needs
would be addressed by the first one.

From where I’m standing, I can hear their call and feel their desperation
back at Mbekeni. It is against this background that we are making a humble
request to the Minister to accede to their request.

We promised to be their voices and articulate their aspirations to
Parliament to the best of our abilities. We hope that when we go back to
Mbekeni village next year we will not be empty-handed. The Minister has
said he has allocated R1 billion for road construction in rural areas. I
think they will get their slice.

The youth is the future of this country. We cannot talk about any rural
development that excludes them. We must be duty-bound to ensure that they
are at school on time daily and learning.

Schools in many rural areas are still inaccessible to them. They have to
walk from one farm to the other, from one village to the other in order to
access education. As the ANC, we are therefore making a public clarion call
that the Minister should provide them with scholar transport. It should not
be left to the discretion of provinces to make choices.

National education allocations should be reinforced and the department
should monitor the implementation of this service. The provision of scholar
transport goes hand in hand with economic empowerment.

We hope most of the scholar transport owners who come from farms and
villages will be afforded the opportunity to benefit from this economic
activity. It would be rural economic empowerment in the true sense of the
word.

Although the department came up with the Shova Kalula initiative, it has
its own shortcomings, constraints, challenges and limitations. No audit has
ever been made of the bicycles that were issued. There is no maintenance
plan. The bicycles are of no assistance during the rainy and cold seasons.
The intention was good, but has not achieved its desired results. The
department needs to review this initiative.

We are approaching the Fifa World Cup in June. We are concerned about the
safety of our people who are using the Airlink company for their flights.

We recently experienced a nasty incident at Limpopo airport during the
period of Taking Parliament to the People when an Airlink plane failed to
take off due to the failure of the ground power supply. This resulted in
members missing their connecting flights.

The second incident also took place in Limpopo, still involving an Airlink
plane which took off but immediately landed again due to a technical fault.
We feel that its operation for the World Cup should be reviewed and their
planes should be airworthy.

We have come far with the World Cup preparations and we cannot allow our
country’s name to be tarnished by one unscrupulous, irresponsible and
greedy operator, whose intention is to destroy our dream of hosting a
spectacular World Cup that will be remembered for many years to come. We
call upon the Minister to review their licence because that will be a good
thing to do.

Therefore, we support this Budget Vote. A o bokwe. [Let it be praised.]
[Applause.]

Mr T W MCHUNU (KwaZulu-Natal): Chairperson, on 13 April 2010, Minister
Ndebele presented his budget speech in the National Assembly. He
highlighted all the activities that government had initiated to ensure that
our transport system provides a seamless, multimodel transport service
throughout the duration of the World Cup to facilitate movements to all
parts of the country.

Today, he has shared his views with this House. In KwaZulu-Natal we fully
concur with the Minister. We certainly regard 2010 as a unique year in many
ways. It will go down in history as yet another significant turning point
for South Africa and the African continent.

We are also doing our part as the department in ensuring that this World
Cup is a success, particularly with regard to public transport matters,
road infrastructure development and safety initiatives on our roads, to
mention but a few. However, Minister, we also agree with you that we must
take cognisance of the fact that our planning must go beyond the World Cup.

Our department is operating in the midst of budgetary cuts and recessionary
pressures on the national coffers. Notwithstanding that, we cannot shy away
from discharging our duties and responsibilities.

Our budget seeks to strike a balance and we seriously want to share this
with the House. We want to strike a balance between building  new road
infrastructure and the maintenance of the existing infrastructure. That is
very important. There is nothing that you can overlook.

Those who have lived where roads are good will never think about expanding
into new areas which have never had road infrastructure before; not through
any fault of their own, not through the fault of this government, but
through the fault of the history and the legacy of all the political
parties before.

Therefore, there is no question of us not concentrating on building new
roads in the rural areas. We would like to share with this House that our
road infrastructure has been allocated R3,72 billion. Of this
infrastructure budget, R1,9 billion is for the construction of new roads
and R1,6 billion is for the maintenance thereof.

A serious challenge facing our department is the ongoing floods which can
never be anticipated. Due to the budget constraints and the increase in
volumes of traffic, the rehabilitation and periodic maintenance programme
is falling behind. Our road network is deteriorating at a rapid pace and
additional funding will be required to ensure that our road network is
conserved in an acceptable manner.

To crown it all, more than 70% of our road network is also beyond its
design life and if not attended to immediately, it will end up in a state
of disrepair. In the long run, it will cost the government 18 times more to
construct these roads if they are not attended to urgently.

The state of our roads combined with high traffic volumes, overloading of
heavy vehicles, poor drainage and high levels of rainfall contribute to the
high occurrence of potholes, especially in our province. Our department
receives only R1,6 billion of the required annual funding of R3,2 billion
for maintenance. This shortfall increases the backlog at a rapid rate.

It would require at least an additional R2 billion over a three-year period
and R2 billion to bring the road network back to the required minimum level
of service. Therefore on that score, Minister, we are extremely excited
about your idea of forming a road maintenance fund. We are extremely
excited, especially if it is designed to help us in the provinces and in
the municipalities because that is where the backlogs are.

What I would like to say to my colleagues who have spoken before me is that
instead of being negative, we should be applauding what the Minister is
doing now. He is beginning to address all these issues that we are all
complaining about. We should not present them in a negative manner at all
times.

What I’ve also noticed is that one of my colleagues is beginning to remind
me of what’s happening in many legislatures – time and again the DA claims
that it’s been their policy all the time and, therefore, the ANC is now
implementing it.

I regard that as a very clever way of trying to find answers where you do
not have answers. You cannot have policies that are older than those of the
ANC. The ANC is older than you. You are new. Your policies are just
policies that are copied from the policies of the ANC. You do not have new
answers. That’s the story you must relate. You just don’t have new answers.
We have policies that are a foundation for democracy that have been
introduced since 1994.

As I have indicated, Minister, this year is unique in many ways. It is also
momentous in that it marks the 20th anniversary of former President Nelson
Mandela’s release from prison. We remain anchored in his principles of
peacemaking as we, together with the leadership of the taxi industry,
facilitate conflict resolution and peacekeeping within this industry.

Like you, Minister, we hold the view that the taxi industry depicts black
economic empowerment at its best. Therefore it’s closer to our hearts as
government. It is on that score that the issues of instability in the
industry have been elevated to the level of the Justice, Crime Prevention
and Security cluster so as to ensure that a comprehensive and an integrated
strategy of dealing with taxi violence is achieved.

We can also share with this House that to support the transformation and
development of the taxi industry within the province, we have allocated
R6,5 million which will be controlled by the government. The R6,5 million
will be run through the Public Finance Management Act, PFMA, and so we
don’t suspect any wrongdoing at that end.

To this end, we are also prepared to support you, Minister, and the
department to deal with the subsidies of buses, because all of these are
legacies. When we deal with the buses, you must remember how these bus
subsidies were allocated in the past.

They were never allocated by the ANC government. Before that they had
excluded millions of people in South Africa. When we deal with these
legacies within the context of the shortage of funds, people must
appreciate that. The best that you have done we applaud and we cherish it,
Minister.

Regarding road safety, again, it is our concern and view that government
has over the years embarked on a number of road safety initiatives; yet
road accidents, crashes and fatalities continue. Our department plans to
take road safety initiatives a step further by opening a platform for a
symposium where communities and ordinary people will share with us what
their ideas are in trying to curb this ongoing saga.

I want to say that in keeping with the government’s response to
unemployment, we also continue to create job opportunities through the
implementation of the Expanded Public Works Programme. This programme
emphasises the need to focus on our investment in social infrastructure in
a manner that addresses severe conditions of underdevelopment and
entrenched poverty.

That is why we have programmes such as Zibambele, which has been
instrumental in creating a number of jobs within the tight economic
environment, focusing especially on youth and women. Our Zibambele
programme is still the key to eradicating poverty. Thanks go to you,
Minister, for the introduction of such a good programme during your time as
MEC in the province.

The Vukuzakhe programme is one of those that are designed to help emerging
contractors, to provide opportunities and to empower them through the
transfer of skills to all historically disadvantaged communities.

In conclusion, in the light of the budget constraints mentioned above, we
continue to provide access to and advocate the safety of all our road
users. We firmly believe in working together with our communities to
realise our departmental vision of prosperity through mobility. I thank
you.

Mr Z MLENZANA: Chairperson, hon Minister, hon MECs, hon members, good
afternoon. I greet you in this august and honourable House which always
demands equal respect with any other House of Parliament. I’m happy that
the Minister is here in person, unlike on the 14th when we saw the Select
Committee on Public Services being undermined by his department.

I greet you today, the 22nd of April, the day which marks a year after the
people of South Africa endorsed, through their votes, that there needs to
be a patriotic, nonreactionary opposition party which will not deviate from
the principles of the Freedom Charter and the Constitution of this country.
Hence I stand here today representing that political party, Cope.
[Interjections.]

On a more serious note, it was on this day last year that Comrade Gerald
Yona was gunned down in Port Elizabeth. May his soul rest in peace. Comrade
Ntandazo Gewu suffered stray bullet injuries in Mount Frere. All this was a
process of intimidating people because of the victory of Cope.

Njengenkwenkwe yasezilalini, andizokuthetha zinto zasezidolophini. [As a
rural boy, I will not talk about urban issues.]
As a rural boy I want to see an integrated rural road development programme
in action. This would include, but not be limited to, the declassification
and reclassification of roads as informed by municipal integrated
development plans, IDPs, the Provincial Growth and Development Plan, PGDP,
the Integrated Sustainable Rural Development Programme, ISRDP, and the
Comprehensive Rural Development Programme.

The consideration of road construction and maintenance – I agree with you,
Minister – should be high on our agenda. Through that we will see rural
economic development and improved rural access in action. A well-
constituted and integrated public transport system, eg the Bus Rapid
Transit, BRT, and scholar transport, is the answer if you want to deal with
the ills of our nation. Hence Cope agrees with the Minister in calling for
the upgrading of the existing infrastructure and promoting the use of rail
for freight and passenger services.

Cope advises that the scholar transport function should be implemented
uniformly. There should also be a tailor-made overarching national policy
on scholar transport. The scholar transport function should in its totality
reside within your department as your department has the capacity in terms
of all operations.

In conclusion, I have deliberately left out some issues, particularly those
that relate to accidents on our roads because, as the Minister would know,
I have taken the matter up with him. So, I will follow up on my question to
which he has replied.

I don’t want to be seen here as someone who is posturing as if we do not
interact. The same with hon Barry; I have deliberately left out issues
around the Eastern Cape because it is not that we don’t interact. I have
time and I know where to interact. I thank you, Chairperson. [Applause.]

Mufumakadzi L MABIJA: Mudzulatshidulo, Minisiṱa, Vho Sbu Ndebele,
vhalangamavunḓu vhoṱhe vhane vha vha hone fhano ṋamusi, dzi MEC dzine dza
vha hone, vhatatisei vha NCOP, vhashumeli na vhaeni vhoṱhe vhane vha vha
ngeo nṱha vho ḓaho u ri thetshelesa ṋamusi, ndi khou vha losha. Ndo vha na
mashudu mavhi vhukuma ngauri ndi vho tou nga ndo vha ndi na Minisiṱa
mulovha musi vha tshi khou ṅwala tshipitshi tshavho ngauri vho tou kanda
henefhaḽa he nda vha ndi tshi khou ṱoḓa u kanda hone. Zwine nda nga amba
zwone ndi zwauri vho tou mvala mulomo nga guḽuu. Ndi ḓo tou kanda henefhala
he vha kanda hone, ndi tshi khou ṱuṱuwedza. (Translation of Tshivenḓa
paragraph follows.)

[Ms L MABIJA: Chairperson, Minister Sbu Ndebele, all the premiers present
today, MECs who are here, hon members of the NCOP, staff members and all
the visitors sitting in the gallery who came to listen to us today, I greet
you. I am very unfortunate as it looks as if I was with the Minister
yesterday when he wrote his speech, because he has mentioned exactly what I
am going to say. All I can say is that he has taken the words out of my
mouth. I will just anchor and motivate what he has said.]

Chairperson, the ANC promised a better life for all. That is why,  following
decades of neglect and racially skewed transport legislation,  planning  and
development, South Africa has embarked on a process of improving the  public
transport infrastructure.

This initiative stems from the  realisation  that  public  transport  has  a
significant role to play in enhancing rural  and  urban  mobility,  reducing
road congestion, decreasing the impact on the  environment  through  harmful
emissions and serving the economy.

In line with its conception of transport as the heartbeat of South  Africa’s
economic growth and social development, the ANC-led government, through  its
Medium-Term Strategic Framework, has committed the Department  of  Transport
to  revamp  the  public  transport  infrastructure  to  ensure  that  it  is
accessible, efficient, reliable and affordable.

Vho Minisiṱa vho no ḓi zwi sumbedzisa na u zwi ṱanḓavhudza nga vhuḓalo
zwauri vha khou ṱoḓa u ita mini. [The Minister has already indicated and
explained in full what he intends to do.]
Transportation systems in the country are characterised by and riddled  with
both intra- and intermodal inherited and acquired problems. To this  effect,
various transport components of the current transport systems  are  operated
and regulated by different governmental agencies and  private  operators  in
all three spheres of the government.

In most cases there is little co-ordination amongst  those  responsible  for
the operation of various components of both rural and  urban  transportation
systems. This has  resulted  in  each  agency  and  operator  attempting  to
improve those elements  under  its  jurisdiction  without  consideration  of
efficiency and effectiveness of the overall rural and  urban  transportation
systems.

At times, this has been at the expense of  other  elements  of  the  various
modes of transport. It has also resulted in the  exclusion  of  alternatives
or modal system operations that do not have institutional sponsors.

A typical example is the lack of co-ordination in many urban  areas  between
agencies responsible for providing operating infrastructure  facilities  and
public  passenger  transport  systems.  Another  example  is   the   general
inability of the taxi industry, Metrorail and  bus  operators  to  plan  and
operate their transport systems in an  integrated  manner,  crippling  South
Africa’s transportation systems. The hon Minister has already indicated  how
he is going to integrate the transportation systems.

Some  communities  live  in  remote  areas  where  accessibility  is  almost
impossible throughout all four seasons.

Ndi ḓo fha tsumbo nga ha madalo e ra vha nao ngei ha Sekhukhune, he ra wana
uri nḓila dza hone dzoṱhe dzi na matombo nahone dzo tshinyala vhukuma. U
tshimbila nṱha ha matombo hu na uri u tshimbile badani. Ro dovha hafhu ra
ya u dalela muṅwe muvhundu une wa vha na mulambo muhulu. Masiani oṱhe a
mulambo hu na tshiendedzi tshine tsha vhidzwa u pfi ‘segwaigwai’. Vho
Groenewald na Vho Tau vho ita na u tshi ṋamela vha tshi khou ṱoḓa u pfa uri
tshi tou itisa hani.

Sa izwi Minisiṱa Vho Sbu vhe muthu ane a shuma lwa shishi, ndi khou ṱoḓa u
vha humbela uri vha sedze-vho na shango ḽa ha Sekhukhune. Zwi nga vha
zwavhuḓi arali hu tshi nga tshintshiwa ‘segwaigwai’ ha tou itiwa buroho ya
vhukuma u itela uri vhathu vha kone u pfuka vha tshi bva kha sia ḽiṅwe vha
tshi ya kha ḽiṅwe; vha tshi ya u vhona mashaka, u renga vhurotho, na zwiṅwe-
vho.

Hangei ha Sekhukhune hu na mimaini ine ya swika henefha kha 40 na miṅwe
miswa ye ra pfa uri i khou ya u thomiwa, ine ya nga swika henefha kha ṱahe.
Nga fulufhelo ḽine nda vha naḽo kha Minisiṱa, ndi khou humbela uri vha ite
zwauri havhala vhathu vha songo sokou bwa lupfumo fhasi mavuni, vhathu
vhane vha dzula henefho tsini vha si na na dzibada, zwa u ḓimvumvusa,
dziburoho na dzinḓila, ngeno lupfumo lu tshi khou bva lu tshi ya nnḓa ha
Afurika Tshipembe. Vhathu vhane vha khou dzula henefhaḽa u mona na
Sekhukhune, ho lalaho lupfumo, vha sa khou vhuelwa nga tshithu. Vhathu vha
ha Sekhukhune vho sinyuwa vhukuma. Muṅwe na muṅwe o zwi vhona zwauri vhathu
vha khou sinyuswa nga zwi pfalaho. Ndi khou humbela Minisita uri heḽi
fhungo vha ḽi sedzese nahone vha ḽi dzhiele ntha.

Ndido dovha hafhu nda amba nga bada ya N1 ire henengei Limpopo. Vhuponi ha
Levubu, hu na buroho yo waho. Zwino ri tshi khou amba, zwo no vha na
miṅwaha mivhili yo wa. Vhathu a vha khou pfesesa uri a i lugiswi ngani
ngauri muvhuso u na tshelede. Vha tshi ita mugaganyagwama zwi amba zwauri
vha tea u lugisela nayo. Ndi khou tou sumbedzisa-vho uri kha vha zwi
dzhiela nṱha zwauri hu na houḽa muratho wo waho, nahone zwino wo no
fhirelwa nga tshifhinga.

Hu na iṅwe hafhu yo waho ine ya vha vhuponi ha Khalavha. Na yone yo no
fhirelwa nga tshifhinga. Zwine wa nga amba zwone ndi zwauri mushumo une
muvhuso wa khou ita kha sia ḽa vhuendi ndi muhulwane. Ndi nga si vhuye nda
ṱwa ndi tshi khou ambesa nga hazwo sa i zwi Minisiṱa vho no ḓi zwi
sumbedzisa zwoṱhe. A hu na ane a nga hanedza uri zwi nga si itee ngauri vha
tshi vhuya vha zwi pulana; zwi amba zwauri vha ḓo zwi ita, nahone vho no ḓi
thomisa. Musi vha tshi vhewa sa Minisiṱa, vho tenda uri vha ḓo zwi kona.
Ndi na fulufhelo ḽa uri vha ḓo zwi kona.

Ndi khou ṱoḓa u humbela Minisiṱa uri vhuḓifari ha vhareili vhashu, na ...
[Tshifhinga tsho fhela.] [U vhanda zwanḓa.] (Translation of Tshivenḓa
paragraphs follows.)

[I will give an example from our visit to Sekhukhune, where we found that
all the roads have rocks and are in bad condition. You drive on rocks
instead of the roads. We also visited another area where there is a very
big river. On both sides of the river, there is a form of transport called
“segwaigwai”. Mr Groenewald and Mr Tau even rode on it just to test how it
is.

Since Minister Sbu is a hard worker, I appeal to him to also focus on the
Sekhukhune area. It will be good if “segwaigwai” can be replaced by a real
bridge so that people will be able to cross from one area to another, to
visit relatives, to buy bread and other things.

There are more or less 40 mines in Sekhukhune and we have heard that
another nine new mines are going to start operating. With the confidence I
have in the Minister, I request you to make sure that those people do not
only dig the wealth from the ground when people who live near these areas
have no roads, entertainment facilities, bridges and paths, while wealth is
being taken out of South Africa. People who live around Sekhukhune where
wealth is abundant are gaining nothing. The Sekhukhune community is very
angry. Everyone knows they have valid reasons to be angry. I appeal to the
Minister to look into this matter seriously and give it first preference.

I will also speak about the N1 highway in Limpopo. In the Levubu area,
there is a collapsed bridge. As we speak, it is two years since it
collapsed. People don’t understand why it has not been repaired, because
the government has money. Please include it also in your budget. I’m just
trying to bring to your attention that there is a bridge that collapsed a
long time ago and has not yet been repaired.

There is another one that collapsed in the Khalavha area. It too needs to
be repaired. One can only say that the government is doing a great job with
regard to transport. I won’t say much since the Minister has already
explained everything. Nobody can say this is impossible, since you have
planned it; it means you will do it and you have already started. When you
were sworn in as Minister, you agreed that you will deliver. I am confident
that you will deliver.

I want to request the Minister that the behaviour of our drivers, and ...
[Time expired.] [Applause.]]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr R J Tau): Thank you, hon Mabija. I must state
that I found it quite interesting that when the hon member started speaking
in Tshivenda, it was only the hon Mofokeng and I who did not go for the
interpretation — taking into account that it was the Free State and the
Northern Cape. Everybody else went for the interpretation! [Laughter.]

Ndo tshi guda hangei Limpopo. [I learnt it in Limpopo.]

We hope that all members will do the same when participating in debates in
this House.

Ms G BARRY (Eastern Cape): Chairperson, hon Minister of Transport, hon MECs
present, all hon members of the NCOP, government officials, distinguished
quests, ladies and gentlemen, today we are going to bring the hon Minister
good news from the Eastern Cape regarding the integrated public transport
system that the hon Minister spoke about previously.

The debate takes place a few days after a historic agreement was concluded
between government, the bus and taxi industries and the Nelson Mandela Bay
Municipality, which marks the turning point in the provision of public
transport services to our people.

Taxi operators and operations, as we know it, will be phased out because
they will become part of an integrated public transport system which will
be operated on specific timetables and will make use of a variety of
vehicle sizes from articulated and standard buses to minibuses, as part of
the ANC-led government’s effort to provide a safe, reliable and affordable
transport system.

They will form five co-operatives and, as the Eastern Cape government, we
will be supporting them in sourcing funding for these co-operatives as well
as with any administrative services that they would need in order to run
these five co-operatives.

On behalf of the Eastern Cape provincial government, I would like to take
this opportunity to express our sincere appreciation for the Dora, Division
of Revenue Act, allocation of R148 million from the Department of Transport
for the Algoa Bus Company in the Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality. But I
would like to reiterate the words of the MEC of KwaZulu-Natal to the hon
Minister, to seriously consider the extension of the allocations to bus
passenger services in rural areas, because it is in provinces like the
Eastern Cape where the majority of our people who really need this service
reside.

Already on the other side, the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa is
currently implementing a coach refurbishment programme to improve its
rolling stock fleet in the Eastern Cape. A total of 17 coaches have been
targeted for refurbishment. Ten coaches will be destined for the Nelson
Mandela Bay Municipality to be used during the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup.
Special train services will be made available between Uitenhage and Port
Elizabeth on match days. And renovations at North End station, which is
closer to the new stadium, will have been completed by then.

Hon Chairperson, we have successfully implemented the national Department
of Transport’s special regulations for the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup, in
terms of the National Land Transport Act, Act 5 of 2009. Public transport
operators were advised to visit the district offices of the Department of
Transport to apply for the special operating licences for this event.

Through our Blue Skyway Aviation Strategy, we have been able to commence
with the first phase of the upgrade of the Mthatha Airport in order to
ensure that this airport adds value to local economic development and
improves access to the Wild Coast, which is an internationally renowned
tourism destination.

This upgrade will further enable the airport to receive more flights,
including evening flights. These developments have prompted Airlink to
introduce a flight service on the route between Port Elizabeth and Mthatha
on Fridays as from 26 February 2010. This means that three of our airports,
ie East London, Mthatha and Port Elizabeth, are now ready to contribute to
the provincial growth and development plan of our province and our 2010
Fifa Soccer World Cup plans.
The remaining challenge is to make sure that all four airports, including
Bhisho Airport, complement each other. Our main intention is to have an Air
link between Cape Town and Mthatha via Bisho. An important goal is to link
Port Elizabeth to Mthatha via Bhisho with the service geared for faster
movement between these three areas.

Port Alfred-based 43 Air School continues to train student pilots at the
Bhisho Airport and we are now challenged to build more accommodation
complexes for this airport. Chairperson, it is gratifying to bring to the
attention of this House that the airport is fast becoming the top training
airport for pilots in Africa.

Regarding rural development, the award-winning Kei Rail project continues
to inspire our efforts of “Moving Back to Rail”. Due to our high safety
standards, the Department of Transport has been granted a rail safety
permit by the Railway Safety Regulator for the next three years from 2009
to 2012.

Today we are running a daily service between AmaBhele and Mthatha with an
average of 12 000 passengers per month. In the last financial year this
project has already created 370 employment opportunities in activities such
as track maintenance, train operations, traffic management and other
general maintenance of coaches and station buildings.

In an effort to improve the mobility and accessibility of our communities
in the eastern part of our province, we have allocated R23,675 million for
Africa’s Best 350 Ltd Bus Operations. It is worth noting that this
allocation is insufficient considering the challenge of access to public
transport experienced by our rural communities, especially when they want
to access government services like hospitals, clinics, schools and pension
points.

This year we expect 24 new buses to commence operations in Butterworth and
15 additional buses to operate in the Lusikisiki area. We have allocated
R39,209 million for the Mayibuye Transport Corporation, and its operations
are 90% rural. There is a dire need for a greater injection of funds into
this corporation in order to enhance its capacity through the refurbishment
of its fleet and to ensure that its services reach more rural communities.
May I just add that this corporation may go under if there is no additional
intervention by government.

With regard to nonmotorised transportation, currently we have 18 containers
that were converted into bicycle shops and distributed in all districts to
service bicycles that were distributed through our Shova Kalula Bicycle
Project.

The communities themselves have identified suitable candidates, who were
trained to become sustainable bicycle shop owners or managers. Through our
community-based transportation programme, we have been able to create 21
451 work opportunities for the poorest of the poor and exceeded our target
of 18 000 work opportunities.

This achievement puts the department in the lead nationally in creating
jobs through the Expanded Public Works Programme, EPWP, in the 2009-10
financial year. In recognition of this achievement, the department is in
line to receive an amount of R17 million in terms of the EPWP Incentive
Grant for exceeding performance targets.

Our community-based transportation programme was recognised by the national
Department of Public Works and was the recipient of the Komoso Award for
developing and implementing the best innovative project in using labour-
intensive methods in the entire country.

In the new financial year, because of the transfer of the roads, we will
only create 801 work opportunities in the construction of pedestrian paths.
We will increase our road rangers from 240 to 450, we will concentrate on
the maintenance of our junior traffic training centres and we will also be
concentrating on the maintenance of public resting places.

I think it is worth noting that the Eastern Cape was the first province to
establish the provincial road safety council, which is a structure that
seeks to make road safety everybody’s responsibility, and this year we are
going to ensure that 507 500 children and 7 829 adults are reached through
the road safety education programme.
With the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup around the corner we have increased our
number of provincial traffic officers to 719 and they include a 187-member
roving special operations task team that will be specifically focusing on
tournament traffic enforcement operations. And in partnership with South
African Breweries, SAB, we are going to launch the Eastern Cape’s first
alcohol testing centre in Port Elizabeth shortly before the start of the
2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup tournament. [Applause.]

Mr E XAYIYA (Gauteng): Chairperson, hon Minister of Transport, members of
the NCOP, ladies and gentlemen, today, in this House, I am speaking on
behalf of the MEC for roads and transport in Gauteng.

The Gauteng government heralds the plan that our government will execute in
the current Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, MTEF, period. These plans
have been carefully laid out to meet the national outcomes highlighted by
our President in his state of the nation address.

We are, therefore, confident that the plans brought to this House today
will not only be the signposts of what we will achieve, but also of what we
have done and still intend improving upon in our service delivery models.

The Minister in his Budget Vote elaborates extensively on the preparations
for the 2010 Fifa World Cup soccer tournament. As the transport fraternity,
we will concern ourselves with the mobility of both local and international
fans and spectators. As the Gauteng province we welcome the Minister’s
budget speech and assure you that we have developed a transport plan for
2010 that is aligned to the plans tabled by the Minister. We have developed
a transport plan that identifies the core network relevant to provincial
transport operations and which considers the main internal and external
linkages in and out of the province.

We have also taken into consideration that it had to be relevant to land-
based transportation movement. The conception of our plans is based on
three levels of transportation networks. These are as follows.

The interprovincial services which we envisage will be provided by the
national Department of Transport, but the Gauteng province will do the
planning for the services that will be provided to ensure integration with
provincial and intercity services in the province.

The intercity services will be provided by the province itself. Local or
intracity services will be provided by the cities at two levels, namely
high frequency services that will operate from a primary network, and a
feeder and distribution system to be provided either by buses or accredited
minibus taxis, thereby maximising coverage.

Unlike the 2009 Confederations Cup, our concept for the 2010 World Cup will
be different given that the profile of the spectators is that of
international visitors with prebooked travel packages and direct access to
the stadium’s precinct. We intend to provide less of the Park and Rides
than we did previously during the Confederations Cup.

Our concept largely focuses on a strong rail backbone system supported by
services rendered through the other three spheres of government. Hence the
formation of institutional structures called the 2010 transport provincial
forum to play a co-ordination and alignment role, so as to ensure a
seamless delivery of transport through the province during this World Cup.

We have classified routes into categories that will cater for our citizens,
our visitors and spectators. The most important routes are the protocol
routes that will cater mainly for our VIPs and teams. The tourist routes
will be focusing on our main tourist destinations in Gauteng, such as the
prestigious Dinokeng and Cradle of Humankind, including the world-renowned
Vilakazi Street and other destinations or offerings.

Despite the Gautrain project, which is not specifically meant to service
the 2010 soccer tournament, we will be opening the O R Tambo International
Airport route to Sandton in order to give transport services to the
visitors from the airport to Sandton.
On public transport, the Minister reiterated the importance of public
transport and, therefore, I wish to endorse the statement by highlighting
some of the programmes that the department has been engaging on in order to
integrate land transport functions with land use and economic planning.
These programmes ensure that transport demand is managed and our
investments used effectively.

Because of the importance of transport in the economy of the country, we
have decided to advocate for the promotion, regulation and development of
an integrated public transport system. This system seeks to incorporate the
transformation of the bus and taxi industries, as well as the integration
of the Gautrain, into a public transport network and commuter rail system.

The transfer of the bus services functions from the North West province
into Gauteng, after the demarcation process, has enhanced our bus
transportation services because this has not only resulted in increased
subsidies, but has actually promoted transportation services offered in
those areas.

Regarding the taxi industry, we support the engagements that have taken
place in the National Joint Working Group and the minibus-taxi industry.
These have made positive contributions and inspired new initiatives that
aim to grow the industry. This process will result in the growth and
empowerment of those who were previously excluded from the broader public
transport offerings, especially as they relate to other supported modes.

This Ministry has the responsibility to ensure road safety. That actually
means that all spheres of government involved in carrying out transport
functions are required to act upon the Minister’s initiatives, like working
with the Minister of Basic Education to intensify road safety education in
our schools.

The department has come up with a plan aligned to the national call of
providing every learner in high school with the opportunity to matriculate
with a valid South African driving licence. Our proposed concept will
concern itself mainly with all learners in high schools situated within our
20 Priority Township Programme in Gauteng.

We intend employing and training approximately 100 driving instructors on a
permanent basis, thereby ensuring the sustainability of this programme
while also creating job opportunities that are long-term based. In assuming
this huge responsibility we will ensure that all the intended objectives,
as indicated by the Minister, are realised, especially regarding the
bookings and testing backlogs.

Regarding road infrastructure, the Minister and broader society’s concerns
about the backlog of road maintenance is noted. I must indicate that we are
now working on strategies to overcome this challenge in a cost-effective
and sustainable way.

The capital project programme of the Gauteng department of roads and
transport has, in the period 2009-10, completed three of the major projects
namely Phase 2 of K29, Malibongwe Drive, P174, and Phase 2 of the K15
route. Beyers Naude, Cayman Road and Voortrekker will continue and be
carried over to the 2010-11 financial year.

All projects concluded by the department are Expanded Public Works
Programme, EPWP, compliant. Five hundred and fifteen jobs were created and
20 subcontractors were given the opportunity to work on the projects in
line with the promotion of SMMEs. They targeted 60% of the projects on
women, 40% on youth and 2% for people with disabilities.

The issue of corruption is a concern in all spheres of government because
it does not only hinder service delivery, but also slows the responsiveness
of government to its citizens. A draft strategy on risk and anticorruption
in Gauteng has been prepared, mainly to deal with the corruption at the
driving licence testing centres, DLTCs, in Gauteng, a situation that has
been viewed as spiralling out of control.

As interventions, we have planned to increase random inspections at DLTCs
by the compliance unit from the community safety department; conduct
monthly audits at these centres; randomly take tests over from examiners;
and randomly make changes to the booking schedules and the deployment of
the department’s representative for daily observations and report writing
at the call centre.

We also envisage electing a policy management committee that will address
all legislative policies, procedures and administrative gaps that exist
within the business unit following the above-mentioned principles. These
are some of the areas that the strategy will cover and this will be
forwarded to the national department as it is soon as it is finalised.

We, therefore, endorse the budget tabled by the Minister of Transport in
the National Assembly and express our appreciation for the ongoing support
that we receive from the national Department of Transport. We would also
like to use this platform to assure the National Assembly, the NCOP and the
people of South Africa of our continuous effort to provide transport
infrastructure and services that are not only effective and efficient, but
also advance the agenda of enhancing Gauteng City Region’s global
competitiveness. I thank you very much. [Applause.]

Mr M P SIBANDE: Hon Chairperson, hon Manzankosi and hon members, all
protocol observed.

Ayahlokoma amahlokohloko inhlokomo ebangelwa ubunyoninco bomkenenezo
wemvelo. Ayajangaza ayatanasa kuhle kwamaqembu aphikisayo ngenxa yamathuba
enziwa uKhongolose wabantu ngempela i-ANC. Baxakekile oxamu amathe abuyele
kwasifuba ngenxa yesivinini umkhumbi kaNoah,i-ANC belu, ogijima ngaso
ukuletha izinguquko ikakhulukazi ezimpilweni zabantu abampisholo. Phezu
kokuba bona ogombela kwesabo behlulekile ukuletha izinguquko eminyakeni
engama-342 eyedlule. Ngingakhohlwa ukudlulisa umyalezo ophuthumayo
kulamabhoxongwana azelwe ngonyaka owedlule ukuthi bezalwa nje sebekwazi
ukukhaphela okaMsholozi ngoba sebezibona bewumbimbi ohlelweni lokuthi
uMsholozi abukeke njengendoda okungafanele siyethembe.

Ngizothanda ukwazisa lemisheshelengwana ukuthi imizamo yabo yezinkomba
zokungamethembi uMsholozi ibhuntshile. Umyalezo wami uthi: badlala ngegeja
kuziliwe. Abogawula babheke ngoba bayinyathele emsileni. Ngizothanda
nokukhumbuza iNdlu yesiShayamthetho ukuthi kulo nyaka ka-2010 enyangeni
kaMbasa ziyodela izimfamona futhi ziyohlala zibhocobele ngokuba bonke
abantu baseNingizimu Afrika nomhlaba wonke wonke jikelele usahlonipha futhi
usalugubha usuku lokukhumbula umholi wabantu uThembisile Chris Hani,
sohlala simukhumbula njalo nje kuze kubuye indodana. (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The yellow weaver birds are making a noise because of the din caused by
the sound of nature. They are boastful and walk in a contemptuous manner
like the opposition party on account of the real Congress of the People,
the ANC. The traitors are desperate and disappointed because of the speed
at which Noah’s ark, the ANC, is moving, fast in bringing changes to the
people’s lives — mostly black people. These capitalists failed to bring
about change in people’s lives in the past 342 years. Let me not forget to
pass an urgent message to these scoundrels who formed a party last year,
who have the guts to betray Msholozi because they see themselves as an
alliance in the move to show a vote of no confidence in him.

I would like to tell these informers that their efforts in displaying their
distrust of Msholozi have failed. My message is: They are playing with
fire. They must be careful because they have angered him. I would like to
remind the National Assembly that this year, in April 2010, the jealous
people will remain lethargic because all the people of South Africa and the
whole world will still commemorate the day of Thembisile Chris Hani, the
people’s leader; we will commemorate his death until the second coming of
Christ.]

The apartheid transport policy deprived the majority of people of South
Africa in transport matters and has led to the payment of huge transport
subsidies; exposed commuters to vast walking distances; failed to regulate
the kombi taxi industry adequately; largely ignored the country’s
outrageous road safety records; paid little attention to the environmental
impact of transport projects; and facilitated transport decision-making
bodies that were unwilling, unfocused, unaccountable and bureaucratic.

An effective publicly owned passenger transport system is what the ANC is
promoting, which includes integrating road, rail and air transportation.
Privately controlled passenger transport must be effectively regulated and
controlled.

The ANC transport policy ensures that ...

Kukhona oke wakhuluma ngenqubomgomo yenye inhlangano, nansi-ke eye ANC.
[There is someone who talked about a certain party’s policy — here is the
one for the ANC.]

... it promotes co-ordinated, safe, affordable public transport as a social
service, to ensure that the system is flexible enough to take into account
local conditions, in order to make the best use of the available transport
infrastructure as far as possible.

We promote accountability for the service that is provided: We provide a
transport system that takes into account the transport needs of disabled
people; clearly defines the responsibility of the various authorities and
ensures comprehensive land use and transport planning; promotes road
safety; revives subsidies for both operating and capital costs and provides
funds for long-term planning; as well as facilitating high-density
development to ensure efficient use of public transport.

Ngingakadluli lapho ngizothanda ukukhumbuza uMnu Ngoqngqoshe we-DA ukuthi
... [Before going further I would like to remind the DA MEC that ...]

... he said that economic development in this country is worth nothing.
That does not surprise us because some of them were part of collapsing our
economy.

The majority of our people are unable to afford private transport and are
dependent on public transport. Given the need for increased mobility costs
and the environmental impact of accommodating the private motorists, the
future emphasis must be on the provision of safe, convenient and affordable
public transport.

Commuters are being encouraged to use public transport and should be
actively discouraged from using cars. The revenue raised by way of a
dedicated tax levy must continue to be used to direct the benefits of the
provision of public transport.

Rail transport must be extended, not in the urban areas, but in rural areas
in particular, where our people are most vulnerable and do not have the
financial ability to pay for other forms of transport, thereby locking them
into a geographically defined area. Rural areas require more frequent
public transport and improved facilities at affordable costs.

Bese ngiyabuya futhi kubaba uMlenzana. Uyabona, okuningi kwenu akusethusi
thina ngoba i-Cope yenza lokhu edume ngakho iyaphuma ihambe. EPolokwane
naphuma nahamba, makumele kukhulunywe niphuma nihambe, eNdlini
Yesishayamthetho naphuma nahamba, ngesonto eledlule kunomhlangano naphuma
nahamba. Nezingane zenu mazingazalwa kusukela manje zizoba ophuma bahambe.
(Translation of isiZulu paragraph follows.)

[Let me come back to the issue of Mr Mlenzana. You see, most of what you do
does not scare us because Cope is doing what it is famous for — it stages
walkouts. You staged a walkout in Polokwane; when we ought to talk you
stage a walkout; in the National Assembly you staged a walkout; last week
in the meeting you staged a walkout. You must not give birth to any
children from now on because they will stage walkouts.]

Lines must act as feeders to rail service as prime movers if rail is not
available. Taxis must act as feeders to bus and rail services, as prime
movers if neither rail nor bus services are available. The subsidisation
...

Mr D V BLOEM: It’s just a point of clarity; I don’t understand the member
when he’s talking about “march out”, maybe he can explain.
The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, you just
want to stand up and talk.

Mr M P SIBANDE: Wenze kahle. Awuthi ngidlulise nakhu futhi okunye. [Well
done. Let me mention this again.]

During our oversight visit to Gauteng and Mpumalanga and Taking Parliament
to the People in Limpopo, as well as the visit by Parliament to host
cities, the following recommendations by the people were raised.

Isiphakamiso sokuqala, abantu bacela ukuthi eMpumalanga kunomgwaqo
ohlanganisa iPienaar neKwanyamazane ibhuloho lakhona seliyoqeda unyaka
akucaci kahle ukuthi ubani omelwe ukulilungisa, ingabe uhulumeni
kazwelonke, wesifundazwe noma wasekhaya. Esikhundleni sokuthi balungise
umgwaqo kunaleyo nkulumo-mpikiswano.

Okunye futhi ukuthi kunendlela eya eMpakeni edlula ngaseMthethomusha
iyadabukisa, uma ngabe imvula ina akungeneki kanti futhi nakwi-Bus Rapid
Transit, i-BRT, abantu be-BRT bamatekisi abayali futhi abayivumi kodwa
bacela kube nokuqguqguzelana ukuthi sisebenzisane kakhulu. Okunye
abakucelayo kwi-BRT ukuthi bacela ukuthi kunamagatsha amaningi phakathi,
abaxhumanisi, nokuyinto edla imali eningi kakhulu uma sekukhulunywa ngalabo
bantu. Ngalokho bacela ukuthi sengathi singabona ukuthi kungenziwani
ngalezo zindaba. Bese ngiyabuya ngiyaqhubeka ngithi ... (Translation of
isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[The first proposal from the people is that there should be a road in
Mpumalanga that connects Pienaar and Kanyamazane. The bridge has been left
incomplete for about a year and it is not clear who is supposed to fix it —
whether it is national government, provincial government or local
government. There is debate around the issues instead of attending to the
problem.

The route that goes to Mpakeni which goes past Mthethomusha is
heartbreaking, since it is a no-go area when it rains. With regard to the
bus rapid transit system, the BRT, the taxi people neither accept nor
reject it but they request that the parties concerned should be encouraged
to work together. What they also request from the BRT is that since there
are many branches in between, envoys require a lot of money if you talk
about those people. With that, they request that we should consider what to
do with those issues. Let me continue and say that ...]

... the planning of transport in metropolitan and major urban areas must be
in accordance with the urban and metropolitan growth management plan. This
should guide the financing of infrastructure improvement and the payment of
operating subsidies for public transport. Travel nodes should not compete
against each other in urban areas, but rather transport provided must be
integrated.
In rural areas provincial government and district councils need to ensure
that transport plans take into consideration the need for extensive road
building and improvement.

The issues of road safety education, enforcement and road engineering are
critical, and road safety must be given the priority it deserves. The
transport authority must be charged with the task of reducing accidents and
must be given funds to achieve that goal.

For all public transport services to be fully integrated, their functioning
must be co-ordinated and/or regulated. These operations must be accountable
to the public and responsible for the provision, co-ordination and funding
of all public transport and infrastructure necessary for public transport.
Policy development should be especially addressing the current problems
such as unco-ordinated tariff structures, duplication of services and
conflicts as a result of different forms of ownership.

With respect to other forms of transport, international conventions and
treaties determine part of the legal framework for sea and air transport.
Infrastructural development must, however, be extended through democratic
consultation with various stakeholders.

The ongoing harmonisation of infrastructural, legal and operational aspects
of the Southern African regional transport system must continue to be a
priority and the work with cross-border transport has to be strengthened.

Ngingachithi isikhathi, siyikomidi loMkhandlu weziFundazwe siyaseseka
isabelomali sakho futhi siyacela ukuthi sengathi abantu bamatekisi
bangasebenzisana nathi futhi imihlangano le ehanjwa nabo yaziswe
emphakathini ngoba abanye babantu bayabushintsha ubuso ngenkathi kuyibo
bodwa. Nakubo abantu bamatekisi sithi abahloniphe, angeke sikuvumele ukuthi
bakhiphe izimvume baphinde basebenzise izindlela okungezona ezabo ngoba
zidala ingxabano.

Kodwa noma kunjalo, sicela ukuthi kuxoxiswane mhlawumbe uma kulokhu
kuphenywa kuboniswane ukuthi kungenziwa liphi isu kungaze kulimaze iNdebe
yomhlaba ka-2010 ezoba khona lapha eNingizimu Afrika. Ngalokho siyaseseka
kakhulu isabelomali sakho. [Ihlombe.] (Translation of isiZulu paragraph
follows.)

[Let me not waste time. As the committee of the National Council of
Provinces, the NCOP, we support your Budget Vote. We also request that the
taxi people work with us and that these meetings that are held with them
should be announced to the community, because some of the people change
their tune when they are alone. The taxi people must also show respect; we
shall not allow them to issue permits and use routes that are not theirs,
because that causes some wrangling.

In spite of that, we request that there should be some talks whilst there
are investigations on what plans can be made so that it does not affect the
2010 World Cup which will be hosted in South Africa. With that we fully
support the Budget Vote. [Applause.]]

The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Chairperson and hon members, thank you very much
for a very stimulating debate, both in content and spirit. It is much
appreciated.

Perhaps I should just start with housekeeping matters. To the hon member Mr
Groenewald I would like to say that if he would just take the time, he
would find out that we have been part of the struggle to create a
democratic system of governance. We cannot be part of not respecting those
structures.

With regard to the meeting that the hon member was talking about – that is
why Mr Carlisle didn’t talk about it – if he had just found out from the
hon chairperson of the select committee, he would have known that it was
set for a Wednesday.

Wednesdays are Cabinet days, and therefore particularly the Deputy Minister
and I were both in Cabinet on that day. The DG, Mr George Mahlalela, was in
Johannesburg, dealing with the taxi conflict. Had he not gone there, it
would have disrupted so many other lives.

It was not because of disrespect to the committee. Why should we suddenly
say that if you are sitting on this side, you will disrespect somebody
sitting on the other side? There would be no need for that, and one doesn’t
operate in that way. So, let’s put that one to rest.

Thank you very much, hon members, and I appreciate the input that Mr
Carlisle made. We are encouraged that the member succinctly outlined the
key challenges facing public transport, and we really appreciate
particularly his understanding that there should be a meeting of minds on
matters that deal with the reconstruction of our country.

It’s quite a critical thing to do. Apartheid was one of the most successful
experiments in human engineering. It separated people and communities and
caused devastation in the lives of people. Our government now, and
particularly Transport, must be able to overcome the ravages of apartheid,
by saying that just as apartheid used transport to divide people, we must
use transport to unite people. That is quite a critical point for all of
us.

Let me then just outline the key issues that we have been presenting and
which one appreciates that the members have supported. Firstly, we achieved
our freedom in 1994, but for many of our people 1994 has not yet arrived,
because they live in the back of beyond. School kids aged 8, 9, 10 and 11
years travel 9 km to 10 km per day.

It must be a matter of concern to all of us, and we should ask ourselves
what we can do about it. Therefore, the provision, in the first instance,
of roads is critical. We should be able to say that it is April 2010. Where
should we be in April 2012, in terms of this table that you have presented
here, which is far from being a complete picture of the backlogs that are
there? Just to connect clinics and schools, if you look at the thousands
that you were counting here for each province, it is a state of emergency
for all of us.

Therefore, what do we do? That’s why we say a dedicated fund, ringfenced to
actually deal with that matter, is necessary. It won’t affect competencies
and powers of authorities, whether they be local, provincial or national,
but we must work in a co-ordinated fashion to say that we should be at a
specific point by 2012. We should have reached so many schools and so many
clinics, so that it can be taken for granted that you can drive a car or go
there by public transport and so forth, and that there will be no day when
you cannot reach a school or a clinic.

That is a state of emergency for us, and it is something that we need to
put on the table and say, together with the entire transport family, which
is made up of MECs and all the people dealing with matters of transport,
that this is where we are going to be doing what we will be doing in the
next two years. We operate in terms of outcomes.
We entered into an agreement with the President, hon Jacob Zuma. Each one
of us said that we in Transport are going to do one, two, three. Up to now,
one has not said things that one is not going to be able to do, and my
colleague MEC Mchunu will know that we set ourselves tasks, and we then
move.

If the tasks are higher than what you’ve set, then you go and strive
further. We are going to do that. If we then say that this is what we are
going to do, those bridges that you are talking about, those inaccessible
clinics and schools that we are talking about, let’s put them on a
programme and say that this is what we are going to do within this time and
mobilise all the necessary forces.

The fortunate part of it is that we in Transport don’t just spend money. In
spending every R1 000, R100 000, R100 million, we are creating jobs in the
process. We create jobs in that people are employed as they build, but we
also give out those contracts.

We are able to do that programme in a very transparent manner, in a manner
that is envisaged by our policies. We say that that is a piece of road that
we are going to do; we are doing 100 km here. You and you and you are
forming a co-operative to do 10 km of that or 20 km of that; you, this
group or community, are going to maintain those roads. And that is what we
are going to do.

Secondly, the major issue that all of us should be united on is road
safety. The carnage on our roads is just not acceptable. I saw that
mudslide in Brazil. It is a natural phenomenon, and there were those clouds
that happened and stopped the flights and so forth. These are natural
phenomena.

However, you cannot have a situation where each day you are going to ask
how many people have died and get the answer that there are 27, Minister.
An hour later there might be 29, and two hours later, there might be 36.
This happens each day, and it cannot be allowed. It is not a natural
phenomenon.

It’s a carry-over from apartheid days, from when we disregarded human life,
and said, “I must show my macho side” and all that. What needs to happen is
that now we say that it must stop. It will stop due to using enforcement.

As my colleague, Ms Barry, is doing in the Eastern Cape, as my colleague,
MEC Mchunu, is doing famously in KwaZulu-Natal, we need to say that there
is zero tolerance, and zero tolerance must be zero tolerance.

We will tighten that. Just the first six months is going to show it,
because once you obey one set of laws, you will obey other laws as well.
You might be troublesome somewhere else but on the road you are not going
to be troublesome, because we are just going to lock you up. That is what
is going to happen.

People are going to know that the licence that you have is now in our
legislation — the Administrative Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences Act
is precisely meant to ensure that road offences are not part of the 11 000
traffic cases that are waiting here. It is going to be done in a manner
that says there shall be consequences for not obeying the law.

Colleagues, I want to thank you very much for supporting this budget. [Time
expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

    FREEDOM DAY: CELEBRATING OUR SHARED PURSUIT OF A UNITED, DEMOCRATIC,
                      NONRACIAL, NONSEXIST SOUTH AFRICA

                          (Subject for Discussion)

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Chairperson, hon
Ministers and all protocol observed, today is an important day as we debate
Freedom Day under the theme: Celebrating our shared pursuit of a united,
democratic, nonracial and nonsexist South Africa.

Freedom Day is a reminder of the struggle for a free and just South Africa,
which culminated in the first democratic elections, on 27 April 1994. On
this day, South Africans of all races embarked on a new and common project
to build their country, guided by the values enshrined in the interim
Constitution and later in the Constitution adopted in 1996.

As we are preparing to commemorate Freedom Day next week on Tuesday, 27
April, firstly, we should not forget that Freedom Day marked the start of a
democratic process in which South Africans came together to chart the way
forward for their great country; secondly, we should not forget that as
public representatives we have the responsibility to always remind South
Africans about the importance of Freedom Day and what it means for our
country and, thirdly, we should not forget that 16 years into our
democracy, our country boasts of the many inroads it has made towards
transforming our society.

As such, we must take pride in that, in line with our Constitution and
political objectives, we have, firstly, established a new society that is
based on democratic values, social justice and fundamental human rights and
secondly, laid a firm foundation for a democratic and open society in which
government is based on the will of the people and where every citizen is
equally protected by law.

We have worked hard to improve the quality of life of millions of South
Africans, and have built and continue to build a united and democratic
South Africa that is able to take its rightful place in the family of
nations. This is evidenced by our hosting of the Fifa World Cup, 40 days
from now.

Freedom Day is a time for us to reflect on and celebrate the journey that
we travelled to achieve our freedom and democracy. As we prepare to
commemorate Freedom Day, we cannot help but remember all those who
personified the sacrifices of our people in the fight for the realisation
of our freedom.

Amongst the many recognised and unsung heroes and heroines, we recall the
then president-general of the African National Congress, a Nobel Peace
Laureate and a leader renowned for his immense contribution to the fight
for nonracialism, and that is Nkosi Albert Luthuli. He defined the march to
freedom, where there was no oppression of one race by another, as the most
exacting and colossal one.

At the height of apartheid, he reminded peace-loving South Africans that
the success of the struggle would only come if we face the threat of racism
with indomitable courage and tenacity of purpose. We must build a
formidable force of freedom lovers on the basis of a broad freedom front.

The colossal struggle for freedom that Nkosi Luthuli spoke about has given
our country countless possibilities. Examples abound in the development of
our communities, economic front and promotion of African solidarity and
development.

The living conditions of many or previously marginalised South Africans
have improved significantly, and democracy has become a defining picture of
our political life. Government is working hard in ensuring access to free
quality education for all. Quality health care services are being extended
to benefit even the poorest of the people and, as we speak, the task of
creating decent work and sustainable livelihoods for our people is one of
the priorities of government.

As a result, in 2010, South Africa still needs a formidable force of
freedom lovers, as Nkosi Luthuli said. The difference is that while the
task at hand is still a colossal one, it has since shifted to improving the
quality of our freedom.

In improving the quality of our freedom, we need, amongst other things, to
work hard at facilitating better relations amongst the people of South
Africa without regard to race, sex and language differences.

As President Jacob Zuma said when he took office last year, we cannot
afford to be cynical about the changes that are facing our society. Rather,
through our collective efforts, we must promote social cohesion and help
engender a sense of patriotism.

In this regard, we would like to see Freedom Day being celebrated by young
and old South Africans of all races and not just by the previously
marginalised section of our population.

As we are preparing to commemorate Freedom Day in our provinces, next week,
we must not forget to remind South Africans, young and old, about the
debilitating injustices of the past, the real opportunities of today and
the limitless possibilities of tomorrow.

Some of the people seated here will remember that there was a time when all
of us used to sing the song, We shall overcome. To others’ ears that was
nonsense. But as the ANC, we’ve ensured that the sacrifices of the young
and old, for the freedom of our people, are shared equally. And I say,
never forget where you come from. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs E C VAN LINGEN: Hon Chairperson, MECs, colleagues and guests, many
important freedoms are protected by our South African Constitution. And our
Constitution is the supreme law of the Republic.

The Bill of Rights contains our rights and freedoms, as herein protected,
specifically referring to the freedom and security of the person; the
freedom of religion, belief and opinion; the freedom of expression; the
freedom of association; the freedom of movement and residence; and the
freedom of trade, occupation and profession.

So, we have a Constitution and a Bill of Rights to protect our freedom in
South Africa. It is a freedom which many of us believe we have fought for;
a freedom from racism and oppression; a freedom for equality of education;
a freedom to be an equal citizen of South Africa and freedom of speech. I
don’t want to hear you labelling me a Nationalist because I never was one.
[Laughter.]

To protect our Constitution and our rights, we have an independent judicial
system, which is vested in the courts, and I quote from the Constitution:

   The courts are independent and subject only to the Constitution and the
   law, which they must apply impartially and without fear, favour or
   prejudice.

We have had a serious number of violations against our freedom as South
African citizens and it is growing daily. It started with the arms deal,
and I quote Helen Zille:

   The criminal justice system has been perverted as an instrument for
   persecuting political opponents and protecting political allies.
This abuse of the system is continuing on a daily basis. [Interjections.]
Maybe I must look at you, hon Adams, so that you can hear me nicely.

The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development, Jeff Radebe, should
be asked what his views are on the constitutional prescriptions for his
department where prosecutorial excellence, independence and labour rights
should be the order of the day. Why are the functions of the Asset
Forfeiture, Specialised Commercial Crime and Priority Crimes Litigation
Units fragmented and placed at a provincial level?

Why is the institutional independence of the National Prosecuting
Authority, NPA, reduced by moving its administration to the Department of
Justice? Why is there such a concerted effort to reconstruct the NPA? Why
is there this continuous rush to purge effective members in the justice
system? Is it to protect the ruling elite from prosecution?

Die Burger van vanoggend verwys op bladsy twee daarna dat die Minister nie
bewus was van die herstrukturering van die Nasionale Vervolgingsgesag nie
en dat hy nie deur adv Menzi Simelane in die saak geken is nie. Ons wil
graag glo dat hy iets hieromtrent gaan doen. Ons maan egter dat, ten spyte
van die feit dat dit vanjaar die jaar van aksie is, ons weinig aksie tot
dusver gesien het. (Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)
[Page two of this morning’s Die Burger makes reference to the fact that the
Minister was not aware of the restructuring of the National Prosecuting
Authority, and that Adv Menzi Simelane did not consult him in this regard.
We would like to believe that he will do something about this. However,
despite the fact that this year is the year of action, we would like to
caution that we have seen very little action as yet.]

Our Constitution, as the supreme law, states in section 165(3) and I quote:

   No person or organ of state may interfere with the functioning of the
   courts.

It continues in subsection (4) and I quote:

   Organs of state, through legislative and other measures, must assist and
   protect the courts to ensure the independence, impartiality, dignity,
   accessibility and effectiveness of the courts.

But how is the Minister enforcing this through his leadership and oversight
role? Is he protecting the freedom of the South African citizens and
equality before the law?

Our Constitution also rules that freedom of expression does not include
incitement of imminent violence or advocacy of hatred that is based on
race, ethnicity, gender or religion, and that constitutes incitement to
cause harm.

The fact that a court interdict has not silenced the ANC Youth League’s
leader and the fact that the ANC leadership cannot take charge and
responsibility to enforce discipline, to protect our rights and freedom, is
a clear indication that there is a severe lack of leadership and
accountability within the ANC.

Freedom in South Africa is threatened by the lack of political will to
enforce the supreme law, the independence of our judicial system and its
processes.

We are approaching a quagmire of a failed state, with tenderpreneurs for
self-enrichment of the elite of the ruling party, with corruption and with
cadre deployment, where the law and order of our Constitution only applies
to ordinary citizens and taxpayers. These things threaten to violate our
constitutional freedoms.

The DA will continue to protect our Constitution and the independence of
our judiciary. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr D B FELDMAN: Chairperson, hon MECs, hon members, “Celebrating our shared
pursuit of a united, democratic, nonracial and nonsexist South Africa” —
frankly speaking, there is no reason why we are not united.

Fifty thousand years ago human beings left Africa to populate the world.
The great Ice Age had wiped out life everywhere else. The remnant of 5 000
or so people who helped to save humankind lived in Africa. That is why
every human being today carries a gene of an African mother.

Over the past few centuries people seem to have forgotten this. Our world,
therefore, saw racial oppression of one race by another. Today, Mr Obama is
the President of the United States; today black and white govern South
Africa together. Even so, unfortunately, race is deeply imbedded in the
consciousness of many people; not only white people, but black and brown as
well.

The laager, however, is no longer a safe place in the world to live. We
therefore need to see the bigger picture. Climate change, globalisation,
and resource depletion put all of us in vulnerable positions. We need one
another like never before. The lesson of four millennia of history is that
we must live co-operatively.

Whatever we hope to achieve in international relationships will depend on
what we achieve in our national relationships. In recent weeks, Ventersdorp
brought to the surface what we had all hoped had gone away. Clearly, our
journey of the past 16 years left many people at the station from which we
departed. This means that this honourable House must, therefore, add active
nation-building to its agenda. Every city, town and village should engage
in a programme of bringing people together.

A common curriculum should inform the nature and manner of discourse. We,
in Cope, believe there is considerable goodwill to work with, but very
little common understanding. We also believe that all leaders, whether
adult or youth leaders, should sign a charter based on our constitutional
principles and values. Let this House take the lead in this. Racist and
sexist conduct in behaviour offends against our constitutional principles.

We need to educate our people to appreciate our Constitution, which is why
we need to frame the question of democracy, unity, nonracialism and
nonsexism within our constitutional context. People in the country, all of
the people, must be encouraged to buy into the Constitution, and encouraged
to take ownership.

Cope believes that this House has a big role to play in furthering an
acceptance of the Constitution by all South Africans. This must be done in
the letter and in the spirit of the Constitution. Ventersdorp is a wake-up
call. We have a great solution and we must make it work for us. Long live
our Constitution. Thank you. [Applause.]

Mr S S MAZOSIWE: Chairperson, I’m privileged to take part in this debate,
which narrates the story of our nation and the resilience of our people in
triumphing over apartheid. This day remains an outstanding hallmark of our
people’s determination to fight for their liberation, and is one of the
most solemn chapters in the history of our national liberation struggle.

This debate takes place in a month when our movement commemorates the lives
of some of its illustrious fallen sons and daughters, whose lives remain so
dear in the hearts of our people. In this regard, I would like to pay
special tribute to Comrades Oliver Reginald Tambo, Solomon Kalushi
Mahlangu, Leslie Massina, Thembisile Chris Hani, Violet Seboni, Dr Molefi
Sefularo, and many more unsung heroes and heroines of our movement who lost
their lives in the month of April.

We also pay tribute to many of our people who lost their lives as they
stood firm in their conviction and bold in their deeds, when they
confronted the might of armed apartheid forces. I am sure that their
spirits join us today in recognising the journey that our nation has
travelled under the leadership of the ANC.

Our freedom came at the highest price. We cannot forget the hundreds of our
people, including women and children, who died at the hands of the police,
inside and outside the country, as well as the victims of the apartheid
state-sponsored violence that engulfed our townships during the period of
the state of emergency.

Again, I just want to contextualise this debate, and if I could be allowed
to take this opportunity to convey our condolences to the family of Comrade
Dr Molefi Sefularo, who recently passed away in a tragic accident. Comrade
Molefi Sefularo was one of the warriors of the national democratic
revolution and a patriot of the people of South Africa.

We can confidently say that when the roll call is read on the parade ground
he will be among those present, and ready to work for the ANC. May his soul
rest in peace.

On 27 April South Africa will celebrate 16 years since the dawn of
democracy in our country. In the past 16 years, the lives of our people
have undergone a dramatic change, and for the better.

Umama obethetha apha, uMama wethu uMam’ uMemela uwucacisile lo mba. Ngale
mini ... [The lady who was speaking here, the hon Memela, clarified this
issue. On this day ...]

... I remember vividly that I was deployed by the ANC to monitor voting
stations in the Eastern Cape, in the Queenstown, Lady Frere, Tarkastad,
Whittlesea, and Sada areas. It was an historic day. We were learning how to
run elections for the first time as the ANC inside the country. I will not
forget the days I was deployed in that area.

The ANC-led government has made significant strides in addressing the
challenges facing our people. We have taken active steps to ensure the
protection and progressive realisation of their rights. We have moved
decisively to redress the social imbalances created by apartheid. We have
broadened access to basic services such as housing, electricity, clean
water and health care.

We are proud that about 19 million of our people now have access to clean
water and almost 11 million have been provided with sanitation, with the
number of households using the bucket system reduced from more than 605 000
in 1994, to just under 113 000 currently.

We have built over three million RDP houses, providing shelter — a roof
over their heads — to almost 11 million families. We did not build open
toilets for our people, the majority of whom are women. Our movement has
taken bold steps to dismantle apartheid settlements, and ensure that our
people are given decent houses.

I heard Mr Carlisle talking about the human settlements that were created
by apartheid. I have been to the kind of human settlements that were
created by apartheid. I know what they are. In Fort Beaufort, where I grew
up, we had so many houses in the township, had more than 3 000 people
living in them, and had about 10 toilets provided for us by the apartheid
government.

It was bad! It was a nightmare to live in that township. I grew up in those
conditions. I know what apartheid means. I know what apartheid has done to
our people, to our families in this country. We will never forget how
brutal that system was.

We have also made huge progress in the provision of basic health care to
our people, including the construction of clinics and hospitals in the
rural areas, most of which had no facilities before the advent of
democracy. We have seen an increased proportion of households with proper
sanitation facilities. Clearly, these are signs that our nation is on a
course to dismantle the pillars of apartheid.

The ANC-led government has also been working very hard to address the
challenges of poverty in which many of our people live. Currently, our
nation has the most comprehensive social security system in the world. More
than 13 million people receive social grants.

A few years ago, I visited an overseas country – I think it was either
Thailand or Bangladesh. When we were asked about what government was doing
to assist poor people, even in Africa, for that matter, in terms of things
like social security systems and the like, they were surprised and asked
what we were talking about. So, I’m saying that this country is one of the
best in trying to make sure that its people are taken care of.

We remain committed to sending a clear message to those who criticise our
caring government for continuing to seek more ways to protect our people
from the bondages of poverty. We want to say to our people that we care,
because we, the ANC, understand their conditions better than those who
benefited from the opulence of systemic protection by the apartheid regime.

As the ANC, we’re aware that much more still needs to be done. We are aware
that some of our people are still battling with some of the most inhuman
conditions and face the harshest living conditions of poverty and
unemployment.

Our nation is faced with some of the challenges that we never anticipated
when we fought against apartheid. Our people are held to ransom by those
who continue to steal the resources for self-enrichment. Incidents of
corruption in both the private and public sectors in our country seem to
have reached disproportionate levels and have reinforced the view
postulated by the great epic work of the late Mazisi Kunene in his poem The
Rise of Shaka, when he said:

   Those who feast on the grounds of others often are forced into gestures
   of friendship they do not desire.
Let me say without any hesitation that the ANC is committed to fighting
corruption. We view corruption as a blatant violation of the rights of our
people and as an intolerable crime. Perhaps this is where the problem lies
in our country: When the ANC government is open and sets up laws and
systems to uproot corruption; when the ANC government talks about
corruption ... [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr R CARLISLE (Western Cape): Thank you, Madam Chair, for allowing me to
take part in this debate.

I was very interested in what hon Feldman had to say because, strangely
enough, that had come into my speech as well. I do think it is important
that we take note of that. It is easy to get up here and make racial
distinctions, you know: If you are white you were apartheid, if you are
black you were struggle.

It’s easy to make those distinctions, but it actually fails to take account
of the most extraordinary thing about ourselves and our country. That is,
very simply, as Mr Feldman said, that mankind came into being in this
country. We know now without doubt that the first men and women, from whom
every human being in the world is descended, lived here in South Africa
first, and, if we go back far enough, then I will find that my ancestral
mother is the same woman as your ancestral mother.

It is so important that we who live in the cradle of mankind should accept
that we are human beings, no different from one another.

It is also important that we recognise that here, in this, the beloved
country, long before anyone anywhere else was, was first the family, was
language, was culture, was fire, was technology, and most importantly, was
compassion, ubuntu.

We need to know how special we are. Whenever I am asked to welcome a
conference of people who have come from overseas to do whatever – to talk
about trains or transport or whatever it is they are going to talk about –
I always say to them: You have come home to Africa. Because that is what it
is: They have come back, after so many years. And when they come – in
hopefully their hundreds of thousands in five or six weeks’ time – we
should say: You have come home to Africa.

In this Chamber, about 54 years ago – I was alive then, long before most of
the members were born ...

An HON MEMBER: How do you know these things?

Mr R CARLISLE (Western Cape): I know, because I was alive.

An HON MEMBER: Where were we?

Mr R CARLISLE (Western Cape): Unborn, I’m afraid, but I’m sure that you
have made up for it ever since! [Laughter.]

There was a debate in this Chamber – it was then the old Senate – and, on
the decision of the Senate, the few coloureds who were on the common
voters’ roll were removed. That was the last straw ...

An HON MEMBER: And what did you do about it?

Mr R CARLISLE (Western Cape): What did I do? Well, let me tell the hon
member what I did. Before she was born, I was being interrogated by the
Special Branch – which was the predecessor of the Security Police – because
of my pursuit of a South Africa in which all South Africans would be equal.
Before you were born! [Applause.]

But, in this Chamber the decision was taken to remove the coloureds from
the roll after a previous decision had removed those few blacks from the
common voters’ roll. From there we rolled forward to 4,5 million forced
removals over the next 36 years; to 12 million imprisonments for pass
offences; to 100 000 detentions without trial; and to 25 000 violent
deaths.

It is important that we, looking back to that black day in South Africa’s
history, recognise how we comport ourselves as representatives of the
public. It is very important.

I would like to invite hon members from here to come to my legislature.
Come and visit us.

An HON MEMBER: Where is that?

Mr R CARLISLE (Western Cape): The Western Cape. I would like to invite you,
because I believe that freedom is the business and responsibility of every
citizen. Freedom and truth must transcend collective loyalty and party
affiliation.

The reason that I would like to invite you is that there is no better
example of this than the Western Cape provincial legislature, where robust
debate and ruthless oversight have made it one of the most free and
democratic assemblies on earth. [Applause.]

The DA and the ANC fight each other savagely in the House, but, together,
they fight corruption and maladministration even more savagely.

When the ANC government of Premier Lynne Brown came to power, they stopped
a number of questionable and dubious projects, and they shone bright lights
into dark places where the rats lived. The cause of South Africa was served
in that legislature, because some brave people put freedom and truth above
party.

Of course, I did not agree with everything that the ANC did; far from it.
But I publicly salute those of its members who put freedom and truth first.
They were true South Africans.

Finally, I want to come to those millions of South Africans ... and hon
Mazosiwe referred specifically to this and I want to follow up on what he
said. I want to come to those millions of South Africans who are not free:
Those who are enslaved by hunger, want, unemployment, homelessness and
despair, those that cannot be freed ... [Interjections.] ... and shouting
at me won’t make them free.

There are many reasons for this enslavement. Much lies in our oppressive
and racist past; some in our current legislation. All those things are
difficult to change and much has been done. This, every politician here,
regardless of party, knows: Every rand stolen in corruption, every rand
wasted in mismanagement; every rand lost in crooked contracts to
tenderpreneurs; every rand lost – and they amount to billions – was stolen
form the poorest of the poor. Those billions could have housed the
homeless, educated the illiterate, transported the poor, created employment
and provided better health care for the sick.

Let me conclude with this: There are two iron laws of freedom. The first
one is: If some of us are not free, none of us is free. Nobody should know
that better than South Africans. The second is: Where corruption
flourishes, freedom cannot flourish. [Applause.]
Mr J J GUNDA: Chair, hon members, allow me to speak from the heart today.

It is strange that today the DA wants to teach us a lesson while the DA was
part of the suffering and our people are still poor. It is strange today
that people want to talk about suffering while they don’t know anything
about what it is to suffer.

We, as black people in this country, have a beautiful heart. We have
forgiven these people for all the wrong things they have done to us, and
yet these very same people want to come and tell us how we should live our
lives.

They are the reason why some of our dads, moms and aunts never went to
school. They are the reason. They must stop this thing of trying to tell
black people that they are better than us. They are not better than us.
[Applause.]

Another thing I want to say today is: Freedom Day is not something that I
hear. I have paid with my life.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Gunda, just hold
on. May I please know why the gentleman is up?

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Agb Voorsitter, is dit reg dat ’n agb lid die Huis
mislei? Is dit parlementêr? [Tussenwerpsels.] [Hon Chair, is it correct for
an hon member to mislead the House? Is it parliamentary? [Interjections.]]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member! Hon member,
I would prefer not to answer that, because it is my right, but you know the
truth in your heart. Continue, hon Gunda.

Mr J J GUNDA: Chair, let me just put things straight today.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Agb Voorsitter ... [Hon Chair ...]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon member, please do
me a favour. Could you sit down, because I am not going to answer the
question you are posing to me because, really, to me, it’s not relevant.
Continue, hon Gunda.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: It’s not relevant?

Mr J J GUNDA: Madam Chair, thank you. Let me just say this one thing. When
our black brothers were on death row, I was part of the Upington 26 ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hold on, hon Gunda,
Okay, can you say what you want to say, Mr Lees?

Mr R A LEES: Madam Chair, with all due respect, and on a point of order: A
question was put to you by a member of this Council and, on a point of
order, you need to rule whether that question is correct or incorrect.
Please rule.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): If it is not
antiparliamentary, I’m not going to be drawn into it. It is not
deliberately against the policies. Continue, hon Gunda.

Mr J J GUNDA: Thank you, Chair. Let me say, I wonder how these people will
explain this: You go and visit your friends, standing up for their rights,
they were on death row, you were shunted around by these people, telling
you what to do. And yet, we paid. Some of our mothers and brothers paid for
this freedom. This freedom did not come cheaply.

I don’t want these people to come and tell us that this freedom is cheap.
It is because of the goodness of our hearts that these people are still
here today. It is not because we are bad people.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon Gunda, hold on! Mr
Faber, what is your problem? [Interjections.] Order, members! Let me hear
what the gentleman has to say.

Mr W F FABER: Madam Chair, I would just like to ask Mr Gunda who “these
people” are that he is referring to, as we are a democratic party. Thank
you.

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Reference is made to
people who know the truth. Continue, hon Gunda.

Mr J J GUNDA: Thank you, Chair. Let me just say this to you, Chair. I am
sorry, you can just see the attitude in how they stand up and speak because
they don’t understand the word — what it is to suffer and the word ubuntu.
They don’t know it.

They have never even heard the song of what we did in the struggle years.
They do not know what it is to sleep and your mom and dad are woken up at
night, the door is kicked open, and a light is shone on your mom and dad.
They don’t know those things. They don’t know the humiliation; they have
just heard about it. They have never seen it with their own eyes.

Today, all I want to say is: On Freedom Day, let us remember the heroines
and heroes of this country – the people who paid with their blood. We are
free today because we have said to ourselves — and I agree with what you
have said, Madam Chair — we shall overcome. We have overcome and we will
always succeed. We will never turn back. [Applause.]

Mr D V BLOEM: Chairperson, I just want to ask Mr Gunda what he had for
lunch today. [Laughter.]

Mr J J GUNDA: Chair, I just made up my mind that I would speak from my
heart on Freedom Day. I want to say this today in this House: People must
remember. The world, today, marvels at freedom in South Africa because they
thought we would have bloodshed. They did not know that these black people
in this country understand the term “human being”. They were human beings
all these years. That’s why we could forgive the people who oppressed us.
We have forgiven them; we have even given them a million chances. Up till
today, they reap the benefits.

Let me just say this one thing. You see the companies. Look at BMW, Audi,
Mercedes Benz, etc ... They have grown. In apartheid years they never sold
so many cars. So all I want to say is that, on Tuesday, let us remember the
heroes and the heroines of this country. Thank you. [Applause.]

Ms M P THEMBA: Hon Deputy Chairperson, hon members ...

... modiri wa lebala, modirwa ga a lebale, [the doer forgets, but the one
to whom it is done never forgets,]

Umenzi uyakhohlwa kodwa umenziwa akakhohlwa. [The perpetrator forgets but
the victim does not forget].
I will ask hon Mabija to tell me what it says in Tshivenda, but not now.
[Laughter.]

Chairperson, I am actually disturbed by hon Van Lingen on the theme,
“Celebrating our shared pursuit of a united, democratic, nonracial and
nonsexist South Africa”. Until when are you, as a woman, going to be on the
opposite side when we should be sitting down as South Africans, especially
as South African women, discussing issues?

Through which glasses are you looking at South Africa? If you could also
explain, but not today, when you say Minister Radebe is removing effective
people from the justice system, who is effective and what criteria are you
using or why do you come to that conclusion that that person is effective?

Chairperson, this theme recognises our collective responsibility to work
together in all spheres of government, all sectors and formations of our
society towards a prosperous South Africa. It recognises our collective
duty to unite our people and work tirelessly to dismantle all forms of
discrimination and shy away from our atrocious, divided past.

Chairperson, as we were preparing for the elections last year, while
travelling across the country, our people told us stories that are crucial
in assisting us to reflect on the path that our nation has travelled since
1994. Many of them told stories of how their families are still ravaged by
the brutalities of the past — detentions without trial, disappearances of
family members in detention, the hanging of those opposed to apartheid,
imprisonment because of which many of them lost all opportunities for
advancement and how family members were forced into exile.

Many women told us stories of how their lives were affected by apartheid.
They have recounted stories of how their lives were destroyed by forced
removals and banishment through the Group Areas Act and many other laws
that made their lives unbearable.

After the elections, the ANC recognised the need to realign all government
policies to ensure that there are policies on women, especially on those
women in rural areas. We agreed on a strategic approach that led to the
creation of a new Ministry for women, which was tasked with the
responsibility of ensuring a co-ordinated approach towards the advancement
of women in our country.

We have made it clear that this Ministry has a duty to forcefully implement
its mandate and ensure that all government departments, provinces and
municipalities ensure the protection of women. We have no time for petty
talk and misguided political talk.

Chair, it is saddening that after 16 years on our democratic path, we see
some acts of racism, racist undertones and commentaries about black people.
We continue to read stories of women who are brutally murdered within the
walls of their homes by those they regard ... [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Mr Carlisle, the three
of you there, can you please be respectful. Someone is still busy talking
to all of us and we want to take in the message. Please be with us.

Ms M P THEMBA: Thank you, Deputy Chairperson. The current context of the
conditions of women in South Africa can be assessed in relation to a number
of factors and issues that have been raised by women in the fight against
apartheid.

Central to this is a list of demands that was drawn up by the Transvaal
Federation of South African Women for submission to the convenors of the
real Congress of the People for incorporation in the Freedom Charter in
1955. It was titled, What Women Demand. It listed several factors that have
informed the ANC’s policy on gender equality and the empowerment of women.

Chair, after a robust consultative process, the women of South Africa made
the following demands: the right to vote; four months’ maternity leave with
full pay for working mothers; compulsory free and universal education from
primary school to university; proper houses; indoor sanitation; a water
supply and proper lighting in their homes; the right to own property; and
the list goes on.
In the last 16 years of democracy in our country, the ANC has moved with
speed to redress the footprints of apartheid and patriarchal relations. Our
legislative and policy framework does not only enforce gender equity, but
also protects the advancement of women with the aim of redressing past
imbalances and discrimination.

A number of laws and policies were passed to empower women to improve the
quality of their lives and open up space for their voices to be heard on
matters concerning their lives. Most importantly, opportunities for women
to have access to basic services and social, economic and political
opportunities have been actively promoted.

We are aware that in some provinces, like the DA-led Western Cape, women
are still regarded as unworthy of leadership positions and that some public
leaders have no shame in publicly stating that the position of women is in
the kitchen.

Chairperson, the private sector is one of the sectors where the leadership
of apartheid is still most prominent despite many initiatives since 1994.
Women’s position in the business sector remains weak and many women are
marginalised and subjected to sexist tendencies.

Helang, nako e a tsamaya. [Time is running out.]

We have seen the advancement of policies that are targeted at women’s
empowerment at the frontiers of poverty in our country. We have seen an
expanded focus on the improvement of the livelihood of women and mothers
through the system of social grants and other poverty alleviation
programmes.

We are proud that the participation of girls in education in South Africa
is one of the highest in the world. Our nation has reached its commitment
in implementing the Millennium Development Goals with regard to expanding
educational opportunities.

Chair, you will agree with us that eradicating gender inequality and
addressing factors such as respect, dignity and freedom should not be
resting on the shoulders of only the government and the ruling party. It
also remains the duty of the businesses, community, civil society and every
citizen in this country. That is why we say that in working together we can
do more. And surely we will achieve more if we undertake a shared pursuit
of a united, democratic, nonracial and nonsexist South Africa.

Ke a leboga. Thank you.] [Applause.]]

Dr M B KHOZA (KwaZulu-Natal): Hon Deputy Chair, members of the House, the
previous speakers are prompting me to just comment on one thing before I
read through what I have prepared.

You see, the process of decolonising the mind is not just the
responsibility of the formerly colonised. The former coloniser also has to
decolonise the mind. Therefore, even when we talk about realising a
nonracial South Africa, both sides have to work on it. If we don’t work on
it together, there is no way that we can realise it.

We need to avoid the temptation of letting freedom be influenced by our
ideological convenience and probably trying to excuse the past. Let us not
make it a crime for black people to speak out about the pain they went
through. Even today, on the National Geographic and Discovery Channel, on
DStv, digital satellite television, we still talk about what happened to
the Jews during the Second World War.

An HON MEMBER: Exactly!

Dr M B KHOZA (KwaZulu-Natal): That’s because we don’t want a repeat of the
past. Therefore it is very important for us to remember that we all have
the responsibility to work at this.

In KwaZulu-Natal, we have learnt the hard way that freedom is not an event,
but a continuous process that has to be improved upon on an ongoing basis.
We have had to reflect on our past, and critique our present. Through this
process of self-assessment and dialogue we have come to understand that it
takes two to tango.

Most of you would know that we had civil war in KwaZulu-Natal. We had
violence that was portrayed as black-on-black, and yet we know that it was
an apartheid-sponsored war. Therefore, we have learnt that you have to
sometimes swallow a bitter pill and allow the process of reconciliation.

The hon member who spoke before me has made me remember that, by the way,
as women today we can claim that we are free, but it doesn’t mean that the
struggle is over. This is because freedom is a continuous process, although
freedom is the outcome of the struggle. Both of these things are a
continuous process.

We owe our rights as women to women like Mkabayi kaJama, a Zulu matriarch,
who played a critical oversight role on at least three Zulu kings to
protect her nation against the abuse of power. This she did without any
colonial influence.

When women speak about their rights, these are not rights that they are
borrowing from the colonisers or the missionaries; they were also
intellectuals in their own right. Ingcuce — the young maidens – today speak
of pro-choice and we think this pro-choice just came now, but we had
ingcice during the 1800s. There were young Zulu maidens who revolted
against King Shaka’s policy of forcing young women to marry older men.
[Interjections.]

Those women died; yet we speak of pro-choice today. Let us remember women
like Charlotte Maxeke; she was a philosopher, a real revolutionary, a
visionary. Our history books are doing a disservice to this woman who was
the first African woman to receive a BSc degree in 1905.

This woman spoke about African unity long before the founding of the
Organisation of African Unity. We talk of her only when reducing her role
to one of liberating women, but she was actually talking about the
liberation of the continent. She saw the importance of unity.

On this particular day I also want say we must not forget Pixley Ka Seme.
Today we are speaking as a nation because it was he who actually challenged
all the ethnic groups to say, ”Let’s come together; we are not going to win
this war if we fight as ethnic groups, as tribes, but let us unite and
build a democratic country”.

Today we stand here in this Parliament and all of us have been exercising
that right to speak freely. In 1964, that was unheard of. Now you have just
made a deep testimony. All of us have been speaking freely since then. As
South Africans, we also have to stop underplaying the role that has been
played by the ANC Women’s League.

Women like Lilian Ngoyi, who was the first woman to serve on the national
executive committee, NEC, of the ANC – we sometimes think that things in
the ANC have always been equal, and the reality of the situation is that
there are struggles within struggles – should not be forgotten.

We also have to learn that national reconciliation does not just come
because you have allowed people to speak about the pain of the past. For
pain needs healing, and healing is a process. We have had to learn from
Comrade Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela that national reconciliation cannot be
founded on bitterness; neither can you notice that freedom is on your
doorstep if you think selfishly, for only those who are selfless understand
the true meaning of freedom.

I just want to close with this quote from R V Selope Thema, who had this to
say about Pixley Ka Seme:

   After finishing his studies in America and England, this ambitious young
   African thought of returning to South Africa, his fatherland. The free
   life of the United States and Great Britain, with its pleasures and
   happiness could not hold him. He realised that the knowledge that he
   acquired was not only for his self-aggrandisement and enrichment, but
   also for the upliftment and the emancipation of his downtrodden people.

Let us remember on this Freedom Day that we have to fight corruption
because it is a counterrevolutionary force. It is antichange and it is
taking us backwards. [Applause.]
Mr T E CHAANE: Hon Chairperson, and hon members ...

   I have had to separate myself from my dear wife and children ...

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Order! Just wait. Hon
Rantho, hon Mazosiwe, I call for order, please. Continue, member.

Mr T E CHAANE: On 26 June 1961, at a London press conference, Nelson
Mandela had this to say:

   I have had to separate myself from my dear wife and children, from my
   mother and sisters, to live as an outlaw in my own land. I have had to
   close my business, to abandon my profession and live in poverty and
   misery, as many of my people are doing.

He pledged that —

   I shall fight the government side by side with you, inch by inch, mile by
   mile until victory is won ... I will not leave South Africa, nor will I
   surrender ... The struggle is my life. I will continue fighting for
   freedom until the end of my days.

Indeed, this was a long walk to freedom, a journey well travelled. It is an
ideal he lived to achieve. This was a journey encouraged by stories and
tales of many victories, of many battles fought by our ancestors, Dingani,
and Bambata, Squngati and Dalasile, Hintsa and Makana, Sekhukhune and
Moshoeshoe, who became the pride and glory of all Africans for defending
our fatherland.

It was a journey born out of love, passion, loyalty and dedication to the
emancipation of our people through fearless yet bitter struggles led by our
heroes and heroines like Albert Luthuli, Oliver Tambo, Walter Sisulu, Ahmed
Kathrada, Joe Slovo, Steve Biko, Lilian Ngoyi, Moses Kotane, Winnie Mandela
and Chris Hani plus many more, who laid down their lives to secure our
freedom.

These were men and women of character who lost everything for our freedom,
and whose losses can never be measured or compared. Today I stand here as a
free son of the soil. Yes, I am indeed free, free from the bondage of
apartheid, from the chains of brutal oppression by the then government of
the few by the few, from laws of tyranny that declared our people and
forebears terrorists, killers and slaves in the land of their forefathers,
laws that made them inferior because of the colour of their skin.  Those
are the laws of brutality that forced masses of our people out of the
country, and millions to their early graves.

As we celebrate our hard-won freedom it becomes critical to remind each
other never to cease remembering and retelling the story of our struggle.
Blade Nzimande was right when he said:

   How we go forward into our future is very much determined by how we
   recall our past.

He was right when he further said that our 1994 democratic breakthrough was
the outcome of a protracted struggle over many decades, if not centuries.
It was the outcome of a hard-fought victory for change in the balance of
forces. Those who distort our past hope to disarm and demobilise us in the
present and we will never allow that.

We celebrate this freedom, because it was fought for and won for us not to
abuse it but to build a better future and better life for all. We celebrate
because we have achieved more in just less than 15 years than any of our
oppressors ever achieved during their 300-year reign of terror.

We celebrate because of the many things that we have achieved. A lot of
speakers today have given statistics of things that we have achieved. I am
not going to repeat that. The facts will speak for themselves.

As we celebrate, we are conscious of the challenges that our country is
still facing. We are confident and positive that with the plans and
leadership we have, victory is certain. Our pace might be slow, but the
truth is that the slow movement of a tiger is not a mistake, but a
calculated accuracy.
A mother will never forget a child on her back. The ANC has not forgotten
its people. We are alive to the reality that the freedom we are celebrating
did not only bring about positive change, for sooner than we had expected,
the draconian forces of racial hatred began to rise.

The demon of self-enrichment and greed is fast creeping in to reverse our
gains. We should all stand firm and fight all these things with all we
have. We must all unite against poverty, hunger, disease, unemployment and
crime.

In the true spirit and sense of reconciliation and ubuntu, I challenge the
critics of the ANC, in particular the DA and its white supporters, and all
those whose minds accepted the distortions of our history to jump off their
high horse and stop criticising the very party that created the freedom
platform they are today abusing.

I want to give you advice from Mahatma Gandhi, who once said:

   To believe in something, and not to live it, is dishonest.

I challenge you to be true and honest to the belief that we share a common
pursuit of a united, nonracial, democratic country. Stop criticising and
not offering alternatives. Remember the North American Indian proverb that
says, that before you criticise a man, you must first walk a mile in his
moccasins, hon Groenewald.
I challenge all those who want to rob us of our rich history and distort it
by telling repeated lies about the cause of killings of farmers — as if our
townships and suburbs are immune from such barbaric acts of criminals — to
tell the nation the truth.

This truth is that as long as the DA continues to shout slogans during
elections like, “ANC gevaar!” [“ANC threat!], “Stop Zuma!”; as long as
Afrikaners continue to hold high the apartheid regime flags and sing De la
Rey; as long as white farmers continue to treat our people badly, killing
them and saying they mistook them for baboons, pigs and guinea fowls; for
as long as our people are killed by being thrown into lions’ dens alive; as
long as they are called “kaffirs” and are subjected to abject poverty and
misery; as long as the lives of white farmers are seen as more valuable and
important than those of black farmworkers; as long as our courts allow a
situation where when a white person who has killed a black person such a
white person is declared mentally unstable, and blacks are treated as the
only people capable of being murderers; and as long as blacks still live in
appalling and hazardous conditions as we see here in the Western Cape
settlements, the struggle continues.

The people will ask questions, and stories will be told. The people will
feel at a particular point that they have been generous enough, and that
they have been provoked, they have been robbed and will think that it is
justifiable for them to fight back. That will not help us in our peace and
reconciliation mission.
So, stop playing a blaming game, but play your part. Stop abusing
reconciliation and the generosity of black people and please play your part
because we deserve better. You are not fit and capable to lecture us on
what our people want, for yours is nothing but a skewed and selfish
political agenda.

During his treason trial Nelson Mandela said:

   We of the ANC had always stood for a nonracial democracy, and we shrank
   from any action which might drive the races further apart than they
   already were.


But the hard facts are that for every one step that we move forward to
close the gap, the majority of our white people move three steps away to
widen the gap.

Despite all these things, Mandela taught us that the ANC, as the mass
political organisation, could not and would not undertake violence because
its members had joined in the express policy of nonviolence.

ANC leaders have always and up to this age prevailed upon the people to
avoid violence and pursue peace through peaceful means. On the contrary,
the same white community and their political leaders are failing to master
this and at any slightest act of crime they advocate war instead of peace.
It is in a period like this that one would expect the DA and FF Plus
leaders to provide leadership instead of making a meal out of the death of
a farmer.

Mr M J R DE VILLIERS: Deputy Chairperson, can I rise on a point of order,
just to say to Mr Chaane that the DA is a liberal democratic party.

Mr T E CHAANE: Chris Hani’s assessment of the prevailing conditions is as
prophetic and relevant today as it was when he said:

   We as the ANC-led liberation alliance have nothing to fear and everything
   to gain from a climate of political tolerance. We do not fear open
   contest and free debate with other organisations. Open debate can only
   serve to uncover the bankruptcy of our political opponents.

And today’s debate has demonstrated just that. On that note I want to say
to all these other parties, wake up and take the challenge. I thank you.
[Time expired.] [Applause.]

The DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON OF THE NCOP (Ms T C Memela): Hon members, thank you
very much for these deliberations. English speakers will actually agree
with me when I say that the fangs of the truth have sharp edges.

Let’s celebrate Freedom Day in a holistic manner. I can actually say openly
that I am very proud to be a black South African woman. If the scars of the
past history could be seen on our faces, many people seated here would not
even like to look at us.

I am thus pleading with everybody here to say that we, as the ANC, are very
proud of having walked that rough path with pride and being able to accept
the losses we experienced during the days of the struggle.

Debate concluded.
The Council adjourned at 19:19.
                                  ________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORS

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Draft Bills submitted in terms of Joint Rule 159

    (1)    Geoscience Amendment Bill, 2010, submitted by the Minister of
         Mineral Resources.


      Referred to the Portfolio Committee on Mining and the Select
         Committee on Economic Development.

TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Science and Technology

    (a)     Southern African Development Community (SADC) Protocol on
        Science, Technology and Innovation, tabled in terms of Section 231
        (3) of the Constitution, 1996.

COMMITTEE REPORTS
National Council of Provinces

1.     REPORT  OF  THE  SELECT  COMMITTEE  ON  CO-OPERATIVE  GOVERNANCE  AND
TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS ON BUDGET VOTE 3: DEPARTMENT OF CO-OPERATIVE  GOVERNANCE
AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS (CoGTA)

The Select Committee on Co-operative  Governance  and  Traditional  Affairs,
having considered Budget Vote 3 of CoGTA, reports as follows:

1.    Introduction

1.2   On the 16th April 2010, the Committee met with the  Department  to  be
      briefed on their  medium-term  budget  and  strategic  plans  for  the
      2010/11 financial year. This was done as part of the Committee’s  role
      in  conducting  parliamentary   oversight   and   ensuring   executive
      accountability, especially with regards to budget expenditure  of  the
      Department.

2.    Background

2.1   The Department’s officials that appeared before the Committee for  the
      briefing on the budget included Mr T Faba  (Acting  Director-General),
      Ms T Mketi (Deputy Director-General for Monitoring and Evaluation) and
      other departmental officials. The main objective of the meeting was to
      allow the Department to brief the Committee on its 2009/10 medium term
      budget, priority projects per programme and how it intends to  address
      the challenges encountered with  regards  to  realising  its  expanded
      mandate.

3.    Departmental Budget Vote

   1. An apology was given for the absence of the Minister  and  the  Deputy
      Minister due to their regional and  international  engagements.  Ms  T
      Mketi presented the Departmental Budget Vote and focused on  the  five
      key  strategic  priorities  and  deliverables  of  the  Department.  A
      breakdown on the budget’s economic classification with respect to  the
      departmental programmes and public entities was also presented to  the
      Committee (See table below).

|Programmes                        |2010/11      |2011/12     |2012/13  |
|1. Administration                 |188,131      |197,680     |205,088  |
|2. Policy, Research and Knowledge |50,076       |51,383      |53,081   |
|Management Support                |             |            |         |
|3. Governance and                 |43,570,837   |50,076,543  |56,850,59|
|Intergovernmental Relations       |             |            |0        |
|4. National Disaster Management   |41,563       |42,750      |44,222   |
|Centre                            |             |            |         |
|5. Traditional Affairs            |70,863       |80,793      |85,292   |
|TOTAL                             |43,921,470   |50,449,149  |57,238,27|
|                                  |             |            |3        |


   2010 MTEF Allocations as in the Estimate of National Expenditure (ENE).

   2. The five departmental strategic priorities presented to the  Committee
      included the Department’s contribution to building  the  developmental
      state in national,  provincial  and  local  government;  strengthening
      accountability and clean government; accelerating service delivery and
      supporting the vulnerable, improving the developmental  capability  of
      the  Institution  of  Traditional  Leadership  as  well  as  fostering
      development partnerships, social cohesion and community mobilization.

4.    Departmental Strategic Priorities

(A)    Priority  1:  Contribution  to  building  a  developmental  state  in
      national, provincial and local government


   1. The main thrust of the above-mentioned strategic priority  is  on  the
      implementation  of  Local  Government  Turn-Around  Strategy  (LGTAS),
      legislative reforms and spatial planning. The aim being to  strengthen
      the capacity of municipalities by supporting them in  the  development
      and implementation of municipal specific turn-around strategies.
   2. In terms of the implementation of LGTAS the Department aims to play  a
      significant part in  building  a  democratic  developmental  state  by
      strengthening intergovernmental planning  and  co-ordination  for  the
      LGTAS. It will provide support to the provinces to improve performance
      of municipalities in signing performance agreements and  co-ordinating
      the review of Siyenza Manje Programme.  The  Department  also  intends
      providing support to the municipalities on  disaster  risk  management
      and risk reduction, and co-ordinating and rolling-out the  support  on
      the LGTAS.

   3. In terms of legislative reforms, the Department informed the Committee
      that it will  be  developing  disciplinary  code  and  procedures  for
      section 57 managers; developing regulations on human resource  systems
      and procedures; developing green paper on co-operative governance  and
      reviewing councillors’ remunerations and ward committees institutional
      arrangements.

   4.  Within  the  framework  of  development  and  spatial  planning,  the
      Department  informed  the  Committee  that  it  will   be   developing
      differentiated approach to municipal financing and  planning  support.
      The review on legislation on  land  use  planning  and  management  in
      planning law  will  be  conducted.  During  the  financial  year,  the
      Department will also provide geographical information system technical
      support  to  provinces  and  municipalities,   and   co-ordinate   the
      finalization of national legislation on spatial and land use planning.



(B)   Priority 2: Strengthen accountability and clean government


   5. The central emphasis of  the  above-mentioned  strategic  priority  is
      oversight and accountability and ethics management. The aim  being  to
      strengthen and build the administrative, institutional  and  financial
      capabilities of municipalities in order to restore their institutional
      integrity.

   6. In relation to oversight and accountability, the  Department  informed
      the Committee that it will be reviewing municipal performance  awards;
      improving governance and reduce red-tape in  the  district  family  of
      municipalities; supporting provinces on  implementation  of  municipal
      performance regulations.

   7.  In  relation  to  ethics  management,  the  Department  informed  the
      Committee that it will be developing ethics management  in  provincial
      CoGTA Departments  and  local  government;  combating  corruption  and
      promoting integrity; fighting corruption and promoting good  financial
      management and supporting the review  of  anti-corruption  legislation
      relating to local government.


(C)   Priority 3: Accelerate service delivery and support vulnerable


   8. The main  focus  of  the  above-mentioned  strategic  priority  is  on
      capacity building, national  disaster  management,  access  to  basics
      services, and functionality of ward  communities  and  community  work
      programme.

   9. In relation to capacity building, the Department  stated  that  it  be
      developing a framework for the deployment of professionals and  scares
      skills, supporting  the  implementation  of  HIV/AIDS  framework,  and
      implementing  the  classification  and  national   capacity   building
      framework. Within the framework of disaster management, the Department
      indicated that it will be conducting an assessment  on  disaster  risk
      and vulnerability, reviewing  fire  services  legislation,  supporting
      municipalities  on  disaster   risk   management,   and   implementing
      contingency plans in provinces and all host cities.

  10. In terms of access to basic services, the Department  stated  that  it
      will  be  accelerating    households  access  to  free  basic  energy,
      conducting audit on municipal infrastructure grant reviewing the local
      government  equitable  share  formula,  as  well  as   promoting   and
      facilitating municipal service  partnership  and  developing  standard
      national indigent register  and  ensuring  70%  functional  ward  base
      cooperatives.

  11. In relation to the functionality of  ward  communities  and  community
      work, the Department indicated that  it  will  be  providing  capacity
      building for ward committees, utilizing the community works  programme
      to  support  the  establishment  of  co-operatives   in   each   ward.
      Furthermore,  it  intends  ensuring  the  creation  of  57  368   work
      opportunities  through  the  community  work  programme  as  well   as
      strengthening the functionality  of  ward  committees  and  developing
      policy framework on community development programmes.

(D)   Priority 4: Improve  developmental  capacity  of  the  Institution  of
      Traditional Leadership


  12. The main thrust  on  the  above-mentioned  strategic  priority  is  on
      internal capacity and capability  of  the  Department  of  Traditional
      Affairs,   research,   policy   and   legislation   development    and
      institutional support. The Department aims to do this by improving the
      vertical and horizontal co-ordination and alignment, by reviewing  the
      Intergovernmental Relations Framework Act  (2005)  and  other  related
      legislation, interventions, and oversight support programmes.
  13. Concerning the internal capacity and capability of the  Department  of
      Traditional Affairs, the Department stated that  it  will  ensure  the
      development  and  approval  of   organizational   structure,   provide
      accommodation, resources and  new  furniture,  develop  and  implement
      communication and marketing strategy to popularize the Institution  of
      Traditional Leadership and Khoi-San Leadership. Furthermore,  it  will
      also facilitate the signing of Memorandum  of  Agreement  between  the
      Department and the Department of Traditional Affairs.

  14. In relation to  research,  policy  and  legislation  development,  the
      Department stated that it will develop regulations on the relationship
      between municipalities and traditional councils so  as  to  facilitate
      sustainable development and service delivery, facilitating development
      of policy and legislation regarding initiation, Ukuthwala, traditional
      healing as part  of  indigenous  knowledge  system  and  provision  of
      remunerative benefits and tools of trade  for  traditional  leadership
      and traditional councils across provinces.

  15. In terms of institutional support and  co-ordination,  the  Department
      indicated that  it  will  develop  and  implement  skills  development
      framework and facilitate the launch of the SADC  Kgotla.  Furthermore,
      it will  ensure  that  840  traditional  leadership  institutions  are
      supported  on  policies  and  legislation  impacting  on   traditional
      leaders, and conduct  skills  audit  for  all  levels  of  Traditional
      Leadership.

(E)   Priority 5:  Foster  development  partnerships,  social  cohesion  and
      community mobilization

4.17  The main deliverables emphasised by the Department in support  of  the
      above–mentioned  strategic  priority  included  the   development   of
      national support programme for  associated  institutions;  putting  in
      place effective and efficient ministerial and  media  liaison  system;
      provision of communication support to public participation activities;
      building developmental partnerships with  regional  and  international
      development institutions and conduct departmental publicity  programme
      on Siyenza Manje and Operation Clean Audit.

(F)   Priority 6: Strengthen the organisational capacity and  capability  of
      the department to deliver its mandate

4.18.       The main deliverables emphasised by the  Department  in  support
      of the stated strategic priority included the review  of  departmental
      strategic  planning  process,  implementation  of  project  management
      approach, development  and  implementation  of  internal  audit  plan,
      providing and  enhancing  legal  and  ICT  support  and  developing  a
      national support programme for all associated institutions.

(G)   2010 Medium Term Expenditure Framework (METF) Allocations

  19. The 2010 METF  allocations  focused  on  departmental  programmes  and
      public entities. The Departmental programmes  allocated  in  the  2010
      METF included  the  Administration,  Policy,  Research  and  Knowledge
      Management  Support,  Governance  and   Intergovernmental   Relations,
      National Disaster Management Centre and Traditional Affairs.

  20. The Public Entities allocated in the  2010  METF  allocation  included
      South  African  Local  Government   Association   (SALGA),   Municipal
      Demarcation Board (MDB), South African Cities Network, Commission  for
      the Promotion and Protection of  Rights  of  Cultural,  Religious  and
      Linguistic Communities, Commission on Traditional Leadership  Disputes
      Claims and National House of Traditional Leaders.
5.    Committee Observations

5.1   The Committee is of the opinion that there are many stakeholders  such
      as SALGA that can contribute to achieving the  Department’s  strategic
      objectives. The Department should work more closely with them both  to
      transform them and tap into their knowledge, experience and resources.



5.2   In moving forward, the Department should  also  lead  and  co-ordinate
      support initiative of various institutions  such  as  the  Development
      Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA) in  order  to  improve  the  impact  of
      public  resources.  Having  considered  the  Budget  Vote  3  of   the
      Department as an accountability and oversight mechanism, the Committee
      has observed that the Department 2010/11 budget was  inline  with  its
      strategic priorities over the medium-term.

5.3   The Committee has  further  observed  that  the  Department’s  2010/11
      Performance Plan is configured towards amending section 100 and 139 of
      the  Constitution,  including  the  processes  established  by   these
      sections. This was based on the Committee recommendations in the  last
      sitting of the NCOP in order to ensure that they  find  expression  in
      the Department’s statutory frameworks.

6.    Recommendations

   1. In the interest of co-operative governance, the  Committee  recommends
      to the National Council of Provinces as follows, that  the  Department
      of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs should:

        6.1.1    Submit to the Committee the Departmental Funding Model  on
              Ward Committees.
        6.1.2     Forward  the  Committee  with  a  comprehensive  list  of
              municipalities that have been placed under section 139 of the
              Constitution.
        6.1.3    Submit to the Committee a progress  report  on  the  White
              Paper on Co-operative Governance.
        6.1.4    Submit to the Committee the Departmental  5-year  National
              Strategic Agenda.
        6.1.5    Submit to the Committee  the  Departmental  Framework  and
              Guidelines on Disaster Management Strategy.
        6.1.6     Table  to  the  National   Council   of   Provinces   the
              departmental Local Government Turn-Around Strategy.
        6.1.7    Facilitate a workshop with the  Select  Committee  on  Co-
              operative  Governance  and   Traditional   Affairs   on   the
              Department’s Local Government Turn-Around Strategy during the
              Third-Term of 2010 parliamentary session.
        6.1.8     Table  quarterly  reports  to  the  National  Council  of
              Provinces on the implementation of the Department’s strategic
              policy priority areas, as well as challenges encountered.


6.2   The Committee  recommends  that  the  National  Council  of  Provinces
      should approve  Budget  Vote  3  of  the  Department  of  Co-operative
      Governance and Traditional Affairs.

Report to be considered.


