---
title: 'Joint Sitting - 18 August 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
section: parliamentary
category: Joint Sitting
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/joint-sitting/parliamentary-debates-JS-2010-08-18
---

WEDNESDAY, 18 AUGUST 2010
                                    ____

                        PROCEEDINGS AT JOINT SITTING
                                    ____

Members of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces
assembled in the Chamber of the National Assembly at 14:00.

The Speaker of the National Assembly took the Chair and requested members
to observe a moment of silence for prayers or meditation.

                               MR M G P LEKOTA

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that Mr M G P Lekota had earlier in the day in the
Speaker’s Office been sworn in as a member of the National Assembly.

                                JOINT SITTING

                               (Announcement)

The Speaker further announced that the President had called the Joint
Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces in
terms of section 84(2)(d) of the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa, read with Joint Rule 7(1)(b), in order to debate the successful
hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

             DEBATE ON SUCCESSFUL HOSTING OF 2010 FIFA WORLD CUP

The PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC: Hon Speaker, hon Chairperson of the NCOP,
Deputy President of the Republic, Kgalema Motlanthe, hon Deputy Speaker,
hon Deputy Chairperson of the NCOP, Ministers and Premiers, Deputy
Ministers, hon members, MECs and mayors of host cities, the SA Football
Association president, Mr Kirsten Nematandani, chairperson of the 2010
Local Organising Committee, Dr Irvin Khoza, and members of the committee,
the entire soccer fraternity, His Grace Archbishop Desmond Tutu, fellow
South Africans, it is slightly more than a month since the final whistle
that ended the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup tournament. We gather today to
celebrate this outstanding African success story. There could not have been
a better platform to thank South Africans for this outstanding achievement
than in Parliament before the elected representatives of our people.

Six years ago, when we won the rights to host the tournament, the task
seemed too huge. Many wondered if an African country could make a success
of the biggest sporting event in the world. Indeed, others even suggested
that there should be a Plan B, as they could not believe we were capable of
pulling off such a massive project. Working together as South Africans, we
have proved that we are a nation of winners. It is only fitting, hon
Speaker, that we spend time today discussing this phenomenal, historic
achievement.

According to Fifa, more than 3 million spectators attended the 64 matches
of the tournament. This was the third highest aggregate attendance behind
the 1994 Fifa World Cup in the United States, and the 2006 Fifa World Cup
in Germany. [Applause.] This figure includes the millions of people who
watched World Cup games at Fan Fests, fan parks and public viewing areas
across the country and in various cities around the world. It has also been
acknowledged that our fan parks were so huge that they resembled mini-
stadiums, something which did not happen in other host countries.
[Applause.] Government recorded that more than 1,4 million foreigners
visited the country during the tournament. The systems which we had put in
place to control the movement of people worked seamlessly and efficiently.

But our people, black and white, are the true stars of the tournament. The
proud display of our rainbow nation flags did not only demonstrate that we
have the brightest and most beautiful flag in the world, but also
demonstrated amazing patriotism. [Applause.] The World Cup tournament
revealed that South Africans are capable of working together in unity. It
also proved that they are proud to be South Africans. When our people were
asked to wear Bafana Bafana jerseys on Fridays to promote the team and the
tournament, they responded in an overwhelming manner.

Nothing stood out like the opening match on 11 June 2010. The colourful
South Africans beautified the roads leading to Soccer City. The rainbow
flag flew all over the country — a proud nation in a celebratory fever! We
never thought it possible before the World Cup that South Africans could
demonstrate their love for this country and one another in that manner. It
certainly gave us hope for the future. Indeed, Fifa remarked that South
Africans were the best hosts ever, given the manner in which they actively
participated in the tournament. [Applause.]

We were moved by how parents took small children to soccer matches, even in
the evenings, braving cold weather to support Bafana Bafana and, later,
other teams. This proved that our people had faith in our security systems,
faith in the logistical arrangements, and faith in the ability of their
country to host the event successfully.

It is estimated that half a billion viewers around the world watched the
opening ceremony on 11 June 2010. [Applause.] That was the most powerful
marketing opportunity for this young democracy. It was worth every penny
spent on the tournament.

South Africans truly defied stereotypes during this tournament. We saw
young white South Africans proudly wearing their national colours, walking
around singing and blowing their vuvuzelas outside Soccer City. This is the
Soccer City near Soweto that could in the past have been said to be a no-go
zone due to the compartmentalisation of our residential areas, and even
sports, as a legacy of apartheid. And then the Blue Bulls went to Soweto,
crushing even more stereotypes. [Applause.] The support for the national
team, Bafana Bafana, until it bowed out fighting in Bloemfontein after
teaching France the basics of football, is a powerful lesson in national
solidarity. [Applause.] We are making great progress in achieving social
cohesion. We must celebrate and build on this mood and spirit.

As political representatives, we must not fail our people. We all recall
that special moment when former President Nelson Mandela triumphantly moved
the South African masses and the world at Soccer City at the conclusion of
the tournament on 11 July. He was saluting the masses for a job well done.
Our performance had been outstanding. We made him and all his peers, living
and departed, very proud. [Applause.]

With regard to the economic impact, South Africa has demonstrated that it
has the infrastructure and the capability to warrant serious investment
consideration. It is still too early for a precise indication of the
benefits the 2010 World Cup will have on our economy. However, it is clear
that a healthy return on investment is expected on the R33 billion spent on
transport infrastructure, telecommunications and stadiums. It is estimated
that the tournament will add 0,4% to the country’s real gross domestic
product.

Another important factor is that the successful hosting of the event, in
the midst of a global economic downturn, clearly proves the economic
prowess of the country. We have earned the reputation of being a country
that can deliver on its undertakings. The World Cup has opened the country
to further investment, growth in trade and economic opportunities. It has
also opened up opportunities to improve the way we deliver services. We
reiterate that we view the tournament not as an end in itself, but as a
catalyst for development whose benefits will be felt long after the final
whistle.

The 2010 Fifa World Cup Inter-Ministerial Committee is currently collating
all reports on the tournament. This will enable us to be comprehensive in
utilising the lessons from this tournament in our work as we move forward.

However, while waiting for that report, we already have some very good
examples of excellence to build on. We already know that careful planning
yielded good results in regard to safety and security. The diligent work
that the police did was supported by the application of swift justice by
World Cup-related courts. The Department of Justice is currently
investigating whether the model of the World Cup courts can be incorporated
into the country’s criminal justice system.

Public transport formed the backbone of our transport plans for the 2010
Fifa World Cup, and is one of the greatest successes of the tournament. Our
integrated transport infrastructure and networks will improve the lives of
South Africans for many years to come. The World Cup legacy will ensure
that by 2020 more than 85% of any city’s population will live within a
kilometre of or closer to an integrated rapid public transport network
feeder or corridor.

The impact on the country’s tourism sector cannot be overestimated.
Tourism establishments in areas that were not usually frequented by
tourists were patronised by visitors who may recommend these to their
families and friends back home. Small establishments, which would otherwise
never have had the need to be graded, are now graded and are registered
with the Tourism Council.

We have stated before that we want education to be a lasting legacy of the
World Cup. On 11 July we hosted the Heads of State Education Summit in
support of the United Nations Millennium Development Goals and the 1Goal:
Education for All initiative. This included a renewed commitment to the
Millennium Development Goal of ensuring that by 2015 all boys and girls
complete primary schooling and girls enjoy the same access to education as
boys. This democratic government has made huge strides in the provision of
education to all our children. We currently have nearly universal enrolment
in primary school and around 86% enrolment in high school. This compares
favourably with international standards.

However, according to the General Household Survey conducted by Statistics
South Africa, about 200 000 children in the 7-to-15-years age group are not
attending school. Statistics South Africa found that youth on farms appear
to be significantly more likely to be out of school than children living in
traditional, formal or informal settlements. Anecdotal evidence suggests
that this is a problem particularly affecting coloured farming communities
in the Western Cape. This is one of the vulnerable groups that we have to
target in our universal access campaign.

We are attending to the factors that contribute to the drop-out rate around
the country. These include lack of school fees, general poverty, lack of
transport, teenage pregnancy, and inadequate schools servicing children
with disabilities. We are working to expand access to secondary education
and to increase our enrolment rate to 95% by 2014. We know that the
challenge is not simply one of ensuring that young people have access to
high schools, but also one of ensuring that they complete their National
Senior Certificate. I urge all Members of Parliament to help us identify
the affected children in their constituencies. Together we must ensure that
every child is in school next year as part of the legacy of the 2010 Fifa
Soccer World Cup. [Applause.]

Apart from in education, there is a lot of other work for us to do,
building on the successes and lessons of this tournament. There are houses
to build and communities to strengthen. There are hospitals to improve.
Most of all, we have to make sure that the economy grows strongly to
support job creation.

We are incorporating the World Cup project management lessons into our new
outcomes-based approach to governance. We cannot let these lessons go to
waste; they must help us improve service delivery. These will be outlined
once the Inter-Ministerial Committee presents its report.

Sport remains one of the greatest nation-builders. We wish to reiterate
government’s commitment to the development of football. We wish Safa the
best of luck in its efforts to develop the game and inspire Bafana Bafana
to greater heights. [Applause.] So you will agree with me that very few
teams are going to play around with Bafana Bafana. They are very
consistent, very organised, very hungry for goals, not shy, very clear. And
we all have a responsibility to support Safa in its mammoth task.

While celebrating, let us remember that these achievements were not a
miracle and did not happen by accident. Without the advent of democracy in
1994, after a relentless nonracial struggle, there would have been no World
Cup event on South African soil. [Applause.] Today we celebrate the
remarkable achievements of the South African people. It was not easy, but
as South Africans we decided that the time had come to put the painful past
behind us in 1994.

We must also acknowledge the contribution of the stalwarts who laid the
foundation for the peaceful and nonracial society we live in today. These
are leaders such as our stalwart, Comrade Walter Sisulu, uXhamela. We
recall his profound statement in court during the Defiance Campaign, before
being sentenced for a pass offence on 21 July 1952. He said:

   As long as I enjoy the confidence of my people, and as long as there is a
   spark of life and energy in me, I shall fight with courage and
   determination for the abolition of discriminatory laws and for the
   freedom of all South Africans irrespective of colour or creed.


[Applause.] With Xhamela, we thank all the selfless national heroes and
heroines, from the 1912 generation to that of former President Nelson
Mandela, Oliver Tambo, Lillian Ngoyi, Helen Joseph, Amina Cachalia, Robert
Sobukwe, Helen Suzman, Govan Mbeki and beyond. [Applause.] They sacrificed
their comfort so that we could live in a united, nonracial, democratic and
successful South Africa.
We also celebrate the sterling work of all political parties in building
the South Africa we live in today. It has not been easy over the years to
undo the legacy of the past and build a new society. But we have tried our
best, and are succeeding. Working together we have built a modern, stable
and successful democracy.  This made it easy for Molefi Oliphant, Irvin
Khoza, Danny Jordaan and the whole team to argue strongly and convincingly
their case for the hosting of the 2010 Fifa Soccer World Cup tournament in
our country.

Together we have created a society founded on the values of human dignity,
the achievement of equality and the advancement of human rights and
freedoms. It is a society that upholds nonracialism and nonsexism, as well
as the supremacy of the Constitution and the rule of law. The Constitution
that we crafted together proclaims a multiparty system of democratic
government to ensure accountability, responsiveness and openness. We have
regular elections as required by the Constitution, and citizens have the
opportunity of voting for the party of their choice to govern them.

The institutions created through our democracy are stable and strong, and
we have several checks and balances. We have a Parliament that provides
oversight over the executive. We have an independent judiciary which is the
final arbiter in all disputes. We have institutions such as the Public
Protector, the SA Human Rights Commission, the Auditor-General and the
Commission for Gender Equality, which keep a close watch, protecting the
rights of all our people. It is these political achievements of our nation
that enable us to stand before you today and say that we must collectively
celebrate and claim the victory of successfully hosting the 2010 Fifa
Soccer World Cup. The World Cup tournament has indeed been the pinnacle of
success for this young democracy and that is due to our people.

In conclusion, allow me to thank the many who made a difference. We thank
our Premiers and mayors in all the host cities for their sterling work.
[Applause.] All three spheres of government are here to celebrate these
achievements and that is why this debate is so special. We thank the
children who acted as player escorts, adding a special touch to the
tournament. [Applause.] We thank the selfless volunteers, construction
workers, immigration officials, law enforcement officials, public transport
workers, and, indeed, every South African, as all played a critical role.
[Applause.]

We thank the religious community for their support. A national prayer
service was hosted in the Free State and others took place in other parts
of the country, demonstrating support of this tournament. [Applause.] They
were all saying, “God, help us to have a successful tournament.” And,
indeed, God heard and answered very quickly. [Applause.] That is why even
the criminals went on holiday. [Laughter.]

We congratulate Safa and the 2010 LOC, both the leadership and staff.
[Applause.] They are the pioneers of this first Fifa Soccer World Cup
tournament on South African soil. We are indebted to our Isithwalandwe,
Madiba, who worked so tirelessly to make this dream come true. [Applause.]

We also recognise the contribution of the administration led by former
President Thabo Mbeki who, working with the LOC, laid the basis for all the
planning. [Applause.] We thank Archbishop Desmond Tutu and all in the
1Goal: Education for All initiative, for keeping that important legacy
alive during the tournament. [Applause.]

We also acknowledge the soccer legends who are here today, who laid the
foundation for a football nation, and who actively support the 1Goal:
Education for All initiative. [Applause.] These include Mark Fish, Patson
“Kamuzu” Banda, Doctor Khumalo, Kalusha Bwalya, Trott Moloto, Brian Tlale
and Desiree Ellis. [Applause.] I cannot mention them all, but you know many
of them. I remember one of them saying, “I wish I were a young man in order
to participate.” If indeed he had been there, he would have done wonders,
but by the time he said this, the knees and the legs were no longer that
fast. [Laughter.] We also acknowledge the Bafana Bafana captain, Aaron
Mokoena, who is an outstanding and eloquent ambassador of the 1Goal:
Education for All initiative. [Applause.]

We thank Fifa president Sepp Blatter, who showed character in his
unwavering support for our country. [Applause.] He stood his ground,
supporting South Africa in the midst of negativity and Afro-pessimism.

We thank the media, especially the international media, which provided us
with much international exposure, portraying our country accurately as a
bastion of peace, stability, efficiency, success and achievement.
[Applause.]

We thank the heads of state and governments from the African continent who
made time to join us for the opening and closing ceremonies and various
matches. In fact, Members of Parliament, no World Cup has ever had so many
heads of state visit at one go as we did here. [Applause.] We had said this
would be an African World Cup. They helped us to achieve that goal. It was
indeed an African World Cup.

We are able to celebrate the fact that we have successfully changed
stereotypes about the continent. Nobody can tell us that nothing good can
come from Africa, or that we are the continent of wars, conflict and
poverty. Wherever we go on the continent these days, we hear our African
brothers and sisters thanking South Africa for proving Africa’s capability.
[Applause.] In fact, it is music to one’s ears when one hears them saying
that they feel so proud as Africans to be acknowledged when they go to big
countries and cities and hear people talking well about Africa and South
Africa. It’s wonderful; it’s good music.

We must have made former ANC president Pixley ka Isaka Seme very proud,
because he was a believer in the African continent’s ability to do
something. In 1906, in his landmark article, The Regeneration of Africa, he
said:

   I would ask you not to compare Africa to Europe or to any other
   continent. I make this request not from any fear that such a comparison
   might bring humiliation upon Africa. The reason I have stated: a common
   standard is impossible!

Indeed, there can be no comparison, even if we say so ourselves.

We also thank heads of state and governments from all over the world who
succeeded in participating as many times as possible, and visited our
country to support their teams, or sent high-level representation. You must
have noticed that there were some who were composed and diplomatic, but
when goals were scored, they forgot about status! They jumped up and hugged
people accidentally, or in whatever way. [Laughter.] It was fun; it was
nice.

The South African spirit made even those who came here saying that they
would be composed forget that , especially when they heard the vuvuzelas
and everything. They just became South Africans. In fact, up to now, by the
way, people are still asking, “Why didn’t you bring the vuvuzelas?” At the
SADC summit they were asking, “Where are the vuvuzelas?” [Laughter.] One
head of state even told me that he went back with one that was decorated
with beads, but he couldn’t blow it. However, his children just blew it,
and he says that he can’t sleep lately — his children are blowing it all
the time. In fact, some say we have invented something for the world.

The tournament has ended, but the legacy must live on and inspire us and
the way we work. Let us take that spirit forward and use the lessons to
build a better South Africa and a greater Africa! Nkosi Sikelela i-Africa!
[God bless Africa!] I thank you. [Applause.]

The MINISTER OF SPORT AND RECREATION: Mr Speaker, let me recognise their
Excellencies the President and Deputy President of the Republic of South
Africa, hon members, and compatriots and friends. Allow me to apologise,
first and foremost, to those of our country who felt irked when the world
resorted to Paul the octopus when their bones could have done a better job
for Bafana Bafana during this tournament. MEC Mashamba, please convey our
apologies to that group of people from Limpopo.

Allow me to thank Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu, as well as the other
Nobel Peace Prize winner and former President, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela.
On 15 May 2004, Madiba — despite our pleas with him to stay in his hotel
room and promises that we would go and announce the results to him — defied
the whole leadership of the organising committee and said, “I will be
there.” Indeed, by the time we were invited in, he was there waiting for
the results. Thank you very much, Zondwazintshaba [the one who is hated by
enemies]. [Applause.] When we were in that small room, not knowing what to
do or say, Archbishop Tutu made one proposal, which nobody resisted: “Let
us pray.” [Laughter.] Thank you very much, Tenza.

At the outset, let me also join the President in saying thank you to all
South Africans and our international guests and supporters for a wonderful
task completed since that day when Fifa awarded us the right to prepare for
and organise the World Cup. I do not know how many letters of
congratulations and offers of support we received from Africa and the rest
of the world. We thank one and all.

However, above all, we must thank our fellow South Africans for the
remarkable display of unity and samewerking [co-operation] when the time
called for that. We forgot all our differences and focused on the job at
hand. Not least among those were you, hon members. I followed all the
debates on the matter in this House and I was impressed by the unanimity of
each and every one of us with regard to the importance of hosting this very
big event, which is second to none in the world.

We can declare today that our stated objectives have been achieved. Like
the President quoting Pixley ka Isaka Seme, we were probably inspired by
the same sentiments. In June 2005 we had already declared that we did not
want to host a World Cup that was comparable to the German World Cup. In
our strategic plans in the organising committee we declared that we wanted
to host a memorable World Cup, which everybody would remember for many
years and generations to come. I think we succeeded in doing that.

We even made a contribution to globalisation with the vuvuzela — anywhere
and everywhere! Even those who banned it before 2010 are now running after
it, because they do not want to be left out of the vuvuzela entourage.

The 2010 World Cup also introduced us to some of the countries of the
African continent, something that we do not always take into consideration.
We decided right at the beginning that at least the six qualifying nations
would become part of our family, both in the preparations and in visiting
their countries to motivate their own citizens to be part of this. We
succeeded in bringing Africa together.

Indeed, I think we succeeded — as the President has said — in changing Afro-
pessimism. Africa today is no longer seen as the heart of darkness where
everything we touch simply rots. Our detractors “came, saw and were
conquered”. Some of them refused to leave and others are continuing to come
back, Mr President. Right now we have a delegation from New Zealand. They
have come to learn, from our experience, how to manage the 2011 Rugby World
Cup in a way that is as close to ours as possible. They are also here to
discuss other things that I will come to towards the end of this input.
Thank you very much, Mzantsi.

Thank you, Fifa, for standing your ground no matter how great the barrage
was. President Blatter continued to say: “Plan B, South Africa; Plan C,
South Africa.” [Applause.] Thank you very much indeed.

The tournament exposed us to how good it is to be South Africans. I think
we would all declare that during that one month we discovered who we are as
South Africans. We forgot all else that divides us. Rev Meshoe, Hebrews
12:1 became a reality during that period of our history. Thank you very
much indeed.

It again proved what we have been arguing all the time, that all of us
South Africans agree on the type of South Africa that we are trying to
build — a nonracial, democratic, nonsexist South Africa, where prosperity
and peace prevail. Our differences emerge when we discuss the strategies
and tactics of how to get to our stated goal. The challenge now is: How do
we take the 2010 World Cup experience forward? How do we invest this
experience for the future of our children and of our country?

At this stage, I must thank my colleagues in Cabinet. It is not very easy
to get that team working together in the same direction all the time. The
temptation to go off on a tangent is always with us, but not this time
around. Our colleagues were very helpful, very co-operative, and indeed
even those who were not part of the guarantees insisted on participating as
well. [Applause.] I think this inclusivity is what we should take from the
World Cup. I can assure you that it will take us many miles in a very short
time.

The Premiers of the provinces, their MECs and the host city mayors were no
junior partners in this partnership. Although some of them came after the
guarantees had been signed, they just took the yoke upon themselves and
made it happen. I want to apologise to the Premier of Gauteng and the
Executive Mayor of Tshwane for harassing them so much about the German base
camp issue, but it came right in the end, and it came right at the right
time. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Like the rest of the walk to freedom and democracy, how we use those
experiences is not going to be an event of one day. It is not going to be
something that happens before the end of this year. It is going to be an
arduous trip, just like the road to 2010 was very long and very difficult.
It is going to need the goodwill and support of all sectors of society,
especially the public and private sectors.

Government needs to provide leadership and to be a catalyst. The private
sector needs to come on board with the required resources, both human and
material. This will ensure that the various role-players that shape the
economy collaborate in a symbiotic manner to make it happen for the whole
country. This is one lesson bequeathed to us by organising the 2010 World
Cup.

I’m glad that the leaderships of Safa and the Premier Soccer League, PSL,
are here today because I saw them squabbling yesterday in the portfolio
committee meeting about who was going to play where and who was going to
pay what. To the different federations of our country I want to say that
this is neither the time nor the place to discuss those things. The Host
City Forum will sit together with our departments, and we will advise the
municipalities on how best to manage these things without falling prey to
the management companies that make the federations complain that access to
these facilities is very expensive. Indeed, it will be expensive if you
unleash the market forces to determine how we run our public facilities.

When we built these facilities, we said that we were placing in the hands
of our people the sort of facilities they have been clamouring for, and for
which they have never taken responsibility in the past. We can’t now just
desert that responsibility and place those facilities in the hands of
private managers who in managing them want to make maximum profits
overnight.

The public and private sectors will, especially, have to give very serious
leadership here, to make sure that South African business people, who met
very promising potential partners from across the world, do not turn their
backs on us. The space created by the mood during the World Cup, as well as
the reverberating rebranding and refocusing of our country in the eyes of
the world, must be converted into investment opportunities. We must not
wait too long, lest London 2012 and New Zealand 2011 take the wind out of
our sails.

The passionate support for Bafana Bafana was soon translated to “BaGhana
BaGhana” when our boys were pipped very early in the competition. The
tournament presented us with a unique opportunity ... [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The PREMIER OF THE WESTERN CAPE (Ms O H Zille): Speaker, Mr President, all
hon members and guests, this is an important debate. Firstly, it gives us
an opportunity to express deep gratitude to everyone involved in this
triumph for South Africa. I associate myself fully with the President’s
warm thanks and acknowledgement to so many people, whom I do not have the
time to mention, but I would like to fully support that. From the LOC to
Bafana Bafana, our team, from every worker and every manager on the
construction sites to every volunteer and everyone in between, thank you
all for an unparalleled team effort. We made history, and we built our
nation.

This is also an opportunity to think about what we learned from hosting the
World Cup. We all agree that the tournament was an unparalleled success.
The question is: How did we do it? How did we deliver a global event on
this scale in record time, when many people still do not have access to
basic services after 16 years of democracy? The answer is this: We had an
immutable deadline. The world expected the tournament to kick off in
Johannesburg at l6:00 on 11 June, and we could not fail. So we did what it
took to make it happen.

World Cup deliverables were exempted from normal bureaucratic processes and
often dealt with as special cases. All spheres of government aligned their
efforts. The best project managers were brought on board, and deviations
from time-consuming procedures were often granted. We did this because
every other risk paled into insignificance compared to the catastrophe of
missing the world’s deadline.

The World Cup was a rare case in which all role-players were incentivised
to deliver quickly. This incentive is often absent. In fact, government is
most often incentivised to deliver slowly because there is a greater risk
in not adhering to complex bureaucratic procedures than there is in missing
delivery or deadlines. Lawyers always point out the legal pitfalls of not
complying with every step of myriad laws and regulations. Politicians and
officials comply because taking a short cut is often a greater risk than
delivery failure.

This is why, 11 months ago, I met with the President to brief him on the
many laws and regulations that make it so difficult to deliver at local
level. The President has undertaken to review these laws and bring about
changes where necessary. This is greatly encouraging, and we look forward
to seeing the outcome.

Of course, we must strike a balance between regulation and delivery. Too
much discretion, especially in a context of endemic corruption, is open to
abuse. Corruption hampers delivery even more than overregulation does. And
it makes a country poorer and poorer.

We must now go beyond talking. We must set immutable deadlines to meet
targets in addressing social challenges. If we can learn this lesson from
the World Cup and apply it in a way that does not erode our constitutional
democracy, it will have been more than worth it.

Understanding how we did what we did is the first lesson. The second is to
understand what the World Cup’s significance is and how we can replicate it
beyond the tournament.

I think that most people would agree with the President when he said that
the single greatest achievement of the World Cup was the way it changed
stereotyped perceptions of our country and continent. We showed the
Afro—pessimists what we can do. We all started to believe in ourselves and
that we can be a successful democracy with a growing economy.

How do we keep this momentum going? How can we erase the negative
perceptions forever? The good news is that it is all about the choices we
make. Let me be quite frank here. In a new book, Why is Africa poor?, Dr
Greg Mills concludes that many of our continent’s people are poor because
their leaders have made policy choices that lead to impoverishment. He
says:

   ... bad choices have been made because better choices in the broad public
   interest were in very many cases not in the leaders’ personal and often
   financial self-interest.

Tragically, it is not correct to say that we are advancing equity or
equality. I agree with Zwelinzima Vavi when he says that South Africa is
becoming a predatory state. And the current assault on media freedom —
which is being publicised worldwide — is undoing much of what we achieved
in the World Cup. We are starting to conform to the negative stereotype
once again.

The only way to turn the tide is for our citizens to take responsibility
for exercising the power they have in a democracy to effect change. Mills
concludes in his book:
    ... that African leaders were permitted to get away with ruinous, self-
   interested decisions must be attributed ... to a relative lack of ...
   bottom-up pressure on leadership to make better choices.

In the final analysis it is our people who decide whether we banish
negative perceptions of our country once and for all. They have the power
to do it.

It is a very good thing for politicians to fear voters. If we feared
Fifa and the risk of missing the world’s deadlines, think how much more we
could achieve if government and politicians really feared the voters.
[Applause.] This is how it should be in a democracy. If we have learnt this
lesson from the World Cup, it will be a legacy beyond anything we ever
anticipated. Halala, Mzantsi, halala! [Praise to South Africa]. I thank
you. [Applause.]

Mr G P D MAC KENZIE: Mr Speaker, hon President, Deputy President,
Ministers, Premiers, people in the gallery, Fifa and sporting codes, this
is one of the most important debates after the World Cup. South Africa won
all-round accolades for staging one of the greatest Soccer World Cups of
all time. The stupendous goal scored by Siphiwe Tshabalala will remain
etched in our collective memory. [Applause.] As a country, we bask in the
glory of our successes and, had it not been for unwarranted negative media,
the number of overseas visitors would have been even larger.

As the sweet memories of the sound of the triumphant Spanish Armada –
singing, “Ole! Ole!” — begin to fade into distant memory, we need to jolt
ourselves back into everyday reality. As a nation, we must not slip back to
business as usual regarding issues such as crime, political agendas, and
other actions that can unravel the hard-fought gains of the World Cup.

We have changed international perceptions of South Africa. We at Cope urge
the government to tread cautiously when pursuing policies that will have a
negative impact on our freedom and fledgling democracy. To the government I
say: “Well done! It was a great World Cup. Keep it up and you will be
amazed at how the country responds.” [Applause.]

I witnessed again and again the manifest love for our national flag of all
our people, the passion with which the national anthem was sung by
everybody, and the manner in which all our people, black and white, came
together to support the games. This provided an enormous spurt in nation-
building, as well as the definition of our national identity. These
powerful gains must be consolidated. The patriotism that was aroused must
be kept alive, and the vibrant democracy we put on display must remain
intact for all times.

When Bafana Bafana was eliminated in the first round, our people kept alive
their total enthusiasm for the remaining games. What a great nation we
have! Cope also salutes Bafana Bafana on their gutsy performance on the
field. Well done, guys.

Our roads, airports and city infrastructure were improved to such an extent
that we could scarcely believe our eyes. We showed clearly what we are
capable of doing when we work together as a united people for the common
good. Our policing was the best it has ever been, and the wheels of justice
turned more smoothly and faster than ever before. If we could do it then,
why can’t we do it now? Are the problems of the poor beyond our capacity to
solve? I don’t believe so.

We really and truly impressed the world. Now the time has come for the
government to equally impress the people of South Africa. We demand this
with one voice.

Regarding stadiums, unlike Korea and China, where newly built stadiums were
demolished after their Olympics and World Cup, we must ensure that our
legacy remains intact. As Fifa’s Jérôme Valcke said, the legacy and use of
infrastructure and all that will be built for the World Cup must not, and
will not, become white elephants.

In awarding conditional grants to the cities, the government specified
their preparing the stadiums and making them multipurpose venues to include
a variety of sports. However, yesterday we learnt that cricket and rugby,
among other sports, were not consulted by some city authorities, resulting
in some stadiums not being suitable to host different sporting codes. We
urge government to come down hard on these cities.

Government was a prime participant in pushing for the sporting
infrastructure we have; government must now push to have multipurpose use
for them. Taxpayers and, of course, our citizens need this legacy. Our
stadiums are iconic. They reflect our personality, our resolve and our
spirit. If they die, something very precious in us will also die.

Cope suggests that all PSL matches should also have a curtain-raiser that
will involve women soccer players in order to improve their standards and
help to attract women spectators. The World Cup has also highlighted the
role of the arts in sports. We should henceforth use the experience to make
all PSL matches into feasts of the arts, as well as of sports.

I now come to an important political issue. At the matches I attended I
witnessed both black and white communities coming out in great numbers to
watch the football. This legacy has an important contribution to make to
resolving the question of national identity and achieving social cohesion.

All South Africans love football and this support must continue. The fact
that there was a very high level of security at all World Cup matches
encouraged people to indulge their passion for soccer, as was evident at
the fan parks, beachfronts, public viewing areas and stadiums. As a citizen
of Durban, I must say how proud I was to see this transformation. They were
clean and welcoming to our tourists. Other cities, without doubt, would
also have done the same. Our challenge is to ensure that this benchmark
remains. As Cope we are confident that when government and the sporting
bodies get together everything is possible.

Cope offers its heartfelt thanks and gratitude to the South African
government, particularly the Minister, who has been a huge support and
driving force for the World Cup, Danny Jordaan and his organising team, the
thousands of volunteers, Safa, Fifa and all the people of South Africa who
contributed to the success of the World Cup.

If we dream, we can create. Our season of dreams, Minister, has only just
begun, because as a country we now need to start dreaming again. This time
we must dream about the Olympics in Durban in 2020. Come on, Durban. Come
on, South Africa. We can make it happen. We are as tall as our dreams.
Amandla, Mzansi Africa! Amandla! [Power to South Africa! Power!] I thank
you. [Applause.]

Prince M G BUTHELEZI: Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, His Excellency the
President, His Excellency the Deputy President, hon Premiers, hon members
of the Assembly, like every South African, I am proud of what my country
has achieved in hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup. The significance of this
international event held on South African soil transcends the beautiful
game. It was about more than just soccer, vuvuzelas and the team spirit
that it brought out. It spoke of South Africa’s firm footing in the
international arena as a noteworthy player. We did our country proud and
promoted our continent. Our nation is still cheering.

It was here on South African soil that Bafana Bafana delivered a 2-1
victory over the ninth-ranked team in the world. It was here that Bongani
Khumalo, Siphiwe Tshabalala and Katlego Mphela brought a nation to its
feet. It was here that Ghana’s Black Stars qualified in the group stage for
the quarterfinals and carried with them the pride of our continent. It was
here that the world came, watched, cheered and wept.

It was here that a new platform for national unity was forged. [Applause.]
Never before in South Africa’s history have our people been so unified. In
my almost 82 years I have never seen South Africans from all walks of life,
doing the same thing, at the same time, for the same reason, until I
witnessed the Soccer World Cup. Standing in Soccer City, which has been
called “the melting pot of African cultures”, I was struck by the diversity
of the spectators. Aside from our international guests, here we had blacks,
whites, Indians, and coloureds; English speakers and Afrikaners; South
Africans speaking isiNdebele, isiXhosa, isiZulu, Sesotho, Sepedi and
siSwati; men and women; young and old; all gathered in one place,
voluntarily.

We do not see that kind of diversity in the crowds that gather to celebrate
our national days. I have remarked before in this House that our national
events still fail to attract a representative group. We still see Freedom
Day celebrations attended mostly by blacks; so too with Human Rights Day,
Workers Day and Youth Day. After witnessing the diverse group that turned
out for the World Cup, it was sad to see Women’s Day celebrations again
supported primarily by blacks. [Applause.] It was even more hurtful to see
Cope’s spokesperson being shouted down and booed by members of the ruling
party, to the extent that our President threatened to walk out. [Applause.]

I had hoped to see the national unity we built during June and July spill
over into a new dynamic when it comes to celebrating together as a nation.
If soccer could unite us, why should Heritage Day still see us divided? I
still hope to see South Africans coming together on 24 September as we did
on 11 June. It is time we delved a little deeper to find what binds us as
South Africans and as a nation. May the World Cup be the catalyst of that
process.

Many of us in this House have expressed the hope that we might harness the
goodwill that the World Cup created and somehow extend its benefits. There
is a tangible fear that the World Cup fever will collapse and turn sour. We
may very well hear today how much money was spent and how it could have
been spent elsewhere. Well, of course, it is true that the millions we
raised for building state-of-the-art stadia were necessarily channelled
away from building hospitals, schools and houses. However, if we choose to
step under that shadow of regret, we must be ready to relinquish the
goodwill and sense of unity we have managed to create. [Applause.] Can we
afford to do so? I think that would be a pity.

Already our successful hosting of the World Cup leaves us with a tremendous
challenge. We have proven to our people what we are capable of and have
raised their expectations for the future. We managed to pull together
enormous resources in a short space of time. We managed to upgrade the
infrastructure that has long been in need of attention. We relocated Durban
International Airport; got the Gautrain running; raised a R3,3 billion
stadium in Soweto; and hosted a million visitors with grace and aplomb. If
we are able to do all of these things, our people are certainly going to
ask why we are not able to address the daily challenges they face. I thank
you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mrs M M THUSI: Hon Chairperson of the NCOP, His Excellency the President of
the Republic, the Deputy President of the Republic, hon members and
distinguished guests, as I rise to address the House, I wish to express an
apology on behalf of the Premier, Dr Zweli Mkhize, who could not join us
today.
Mr President and hon members, today we have come to celebrate, not to
mourn. Let us find another day to mourn and discuss other issues.
[Applause.] This is indeed an important debate.

First and foremost, I want to salute all public servants who worked
tirelessly to ensure that this country hosted a most successful World Cup
showpiece.

We must also acknowledge the contribution of our communities in the
political, economic and social arenas because it is a result of their
dedication and support that we were able to host an incident-free soccer
tournament. Bafana Bafana did not proceed to the next round, but the warmth
and hospitality shown by locals has had a lasting impact on the minds of
all visitors.

We pay tribute to the LOC for their dedication and commitment. Similarly,
we must acknowledge the contribution of former President Thabo Mbeki and
his Cabinet Ministers for working tirelessly to bring to the country the
2010 Fifa World Cup. [Applause.]

We remain indebted and shall forever be grateful to Nelson Mandela for his
unique and exemplary leadership as the father of our rainbow nation. As we
reflect on the successes that we scored during the World Cup, I urge all of
us to keep a little of the Madiba spirit in our hearts and do good for
others as a tribute to the hero of our times.
We are overwhelmed by the enthusiastic response and interest that has been
shown by our guests to this country. We are receiving positive feedback
from ambassadors, consuls general and other dignitaries that we hosted. The
most recent positive feedback came from the Australian Minister for Sports,
Kate Ellis.

Indeed the World Cup enabled us to draw new interest in business and
capital to this country. We presented to the visitors our ambitious plans
to ensure that this country takes centre stage on the international trade
front. The South African government took a decision to use the Fifa World
Cup showpiece to showcase unity, our warmth and, most importantly, our
commitment to the concept of the rainbow nation.

Members of this Parliament will recall that different leaders of our
government, at the national as well as provincial levels, led delegations
of officials from government, tourism organisations and investment agencies
on visits to different countries. These visits form part of a comprehensive
programme aimed at promoting South Africa to international markets as a
sporting and investment destination. Our message to the international
countries was very clear: South Africa was ready to host the World Cup.

It is not often that countries find themselves in this kind of convergence
of positive measures of public mood, especially in a disparate society such
as ours, with all kinds of fissures defined by race and the urban and rural
divide. We’ll use this convergence to move to a higher trajectory of
growth, development and nation-building. South Africa is not only a
beautiful and hospitable place on the continent, but a classic example of a
community of people who have realised that their collective dreams can be
achieved through mutual respect.

We were able to meet all challenges because this country was blessed with
leaders coming from diverse communities. These leaders created a new
society that thrives on unity, consensus and diversity. In the run-up to
the World Cup, the KwaZulu-Natal government launched a community
mobilisation campaign aimed at encouraging civic pride and proactive
community participation in the World Cup.

The Department of Sport and Recreation launched a highly successful,
countrywide mass mobilisation campaign, which saw interactions with
communities throughout the length and breadth of our country. Concurrent
with this campaign was another one driven by the Department of Arts and
Culture, during which we encouraged people to fly our flag. The campaign
was a resounding success, as people dug deep into their pockets and
displayed our country’s flags on their cars, homes, business premises, and
so on.

There were also a variety of arts and culture programmes which kept our
visitors entertained between the games. Teams from government also held
community road shows and visited schools, churches, youth entertainment
spots, shopping centres and other key attraction spots, conveying messages
of encouragement to the public to play perfect hosts to our visitors during
the World Cup.

Government’s decision to invest in the hosting of public viewing areas
during the World Cup tournament paid off tremendously. This ensured that
thousands of our people who had no resources to watch matches in the host
cities were part of the excitement and of making history, thanks to the
visionary leadership of our President. [Applause.]

Public viewing areas were not only a means of entertainment for our people,
but they also played a major role in empowering local small businesses.
Artists, both emerging and well established, were also given platforms to
perform in the public viewing areas. The challenge before us is to defend
and protect the gains that we have made as a country during the 2010 Fifa
World Cup.

The World Cup presented government with an opportunity to showcase the
country’s unparalleled natural resources, a tapestry of cultures, a rich
history and heritage, and a magnificent topography that features evergreen
valleys, eternally laughing waterfalls and attractive beaches, all ready to
welcome both business and ordinary tourists.

To give visitors a true warm experience in KwaZulu-Natal, we developed a
hosting programme involving a broad cross section of leadership of our
people across all sectors, irrespective of their religion and political
affiliation. We deployed our leaders to strategic areas where they acted as
KwaZulu-Natal ambassadors, effectively becoming the face of the province.
They interacted with key stakeholders that we hosted, who we believed would
add immense value to the growth and development of our province and the
country.

Most critically, our plan entailed a visit to Pretoria to share our vision
with the diplomatic community over dinner with ambassadors. We invited them
to identify influential stakeholders from their respective countries, who
would be visiting South Africa during the World Cup. I am proud to report
that the hosting plan was appreciated by the majority of the 56 ambassadors
and high commissioners who attended prematch events. Other guests we hosted
included businesspeople, chief executive officers, chairpersons of boards,
political leaders, and others from abroad.

As I conclude my remarks, I want to draw your attention to comments from
some VIPs that we hosted during the World Cup. Dieter W Haller, the
ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany, said:

   Nowhere in the world could we have received a warmer welcome. I am
   absolutely overawed by your hospitality and the efforts you have gone to.
The honorary consul for Portugal in Durban, Mr Tony de Souza, was another
excited delegate. He congratulated KwaZulu-Natal for showcasing the
province to the world. Ambassador Rudolf Baerfuss from the embassy of
Switzerland was overwhelmed by the hospitality. He said:

   I was here in March at the 100 days to go festivities and could not
   believe the transformation Durban has undergone. The city is a beautiful
   place to be and the Office of the Premier could not have gone to more
   trouble to make today a most memorable occasion for my wife and me.
   Switzerland is a landlocked country, so to be here next to the sea on
   your glorious beaches is indeed a privilege.

Clearly, our co-ordination capabilities ensured that our guests left our
shores with a renewed respect for our country. I hope that they will be
bringing their families and friends back to our country and our province.
Viva Mzantsi! Viva! [Applause.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Deputy Speaker, hon President and Deputy President, hon
Premiers and hon members ...

... sesithetha nje mhlekazi kuba kufuneka sithethile, ngamany’ amazwi
uyigqibile le nto. [Kwaqhwatywa.] Likhona ixesha lokuba sibethane kwaye
namhlanje ibingelilo, kodwa ke asinakukuyeka sesikubona noko. [Kwahlekwa.]
(Translation of isiXhosa paragraph follows.)
[... sir, we are going to speak only because we have been mandated to do
so; otherwise you have covered everything. [Applause.] There is a time for
us to be at loggerheads, and this is not the time, but now that we have
been afforded this opportunity, we are not going to let it go to waste.
[Laughter.]]

The UDM salutes the people of South Africa for making this World Cup a
resounding success. In the run-up to this event we spoke of the key role-
players who made this possible, namely the then leadership of Safa, who had
the vision and were supported by former President Nelson Mandela and his
administration; the LOC and former President Mbeki’s administration, who
oversaw the implementation of that vision; and finally, the administration
of President Zuma who oversaw the finishing touches to this great sporting
event.

We are right to celebrate our own successes, but that must not prevent us
from looking towards the future. We have hosted a successful Soccer World
Cup; what now? The UDM would like to make the following two appeals, once
more, to government and Safa.

Firstly, the stadia and infrastructure that were created need to be
maintained and used as a springboard for further infrastructure
development. You should bring proper roads and playing fields to the
townships and rural areas.

Secondly, you should use the Soccer World Cup as the first stepping stone
in a major soccer development programme. There are considerable amounts of
money that flow into South African soccer, but not enough of it is being
invested in developing tomorrow’s talented players.

In conclusion, allow me to say a few words on the possibility of South
Africa’s hosting other major events of this nature. In the past month there
has been widespread speculation about bringing the Olympics to our shores.
There is no doubt about our ability to host such an event. However, we must
proceed with a certain caution because the Olympics are hosted by a single
city, not the whole country. We need to ensure that whichever city bids for
the opportunity will have the finances and capacity to deal with the
massive infrastructure development that is required, whilst simultaneously
honouring all of its service delivery commitments.

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mhlekazi, ixesha lakho liphelile. [Hon member, your
time has expired.]

Mr B H HOLOMISA: Ndikuvile, mama. Musa ukungxola. [Intswahla.] [I have
heard you, mama. Please do not interrupt me. [Laughter.]]

Mr T D LEE: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr President, Mr Deputy President,
colleagues and friends, at the unveiling of the 2010 Fifa World Cup emblem
in Berlin, the former Secretary-General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan,
said the following:

  As the pinnacle of the only truly global game, played in every country by
  every race and religion, it is one of the few phenomena as universal as
  the UN.


  ... [T]he World Cup is an event in which everybody knows where their team
  stands, and what it did to get there.


  Everybody loves talking about what their team did right, and what it
  could have done differently. Annan further said:

   I wish we had more of that sort of competition in the family of nations.
   Countries vying for the best standing in the table of respect for human
   rights, and trying to outdo one another ... States parading their
   performance for all the world to see. Governments being held accountable
   for what actions led them to that result. ... citizens consumed by the
   topic of how their country could do better ...

With that kind of public scrutiny, good governance would not be an option;
it would be a necessity. And with that sense of public ownership, countries
would better ensure that their own resources are used in a way that
benefits their own daughters and sons. That was what Kofi Annan said. So
let us take what we have learnt from hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup and
unveil a future of hope for our nation — a future where our actions will
echo what is right and what is good; a future South Africa where we deliver
in accordance with deadlines, and where we deliver services to benefit all
of our sons and daughters.

Let us stand united to ensure that we can speak out about what our
government did right, and what it could have done differently, without fear
of intimidation and harassment. Let us stand together and hold government
accountable for its actions.

South African citizens, engage with how South Africa could do better. We
must begin to demand that good governance becomes a necessity, not an
option. We must take control of the future of our beautiful country — of
your future as South Africans — and demand that our resources be used for
the betterment of all people, and not for the benefit of an elite minority
with the right political connections.

Speaker, ŉ ander les wat ons geleer het, is die feit dat as ons eerbaar
optree, ons die respek en agting van die wêreld afdwing. So, byvoorbeeld,
het ons, as deel van die ooreenkoms, wetgewing deurgevoer wat as nadelig
vir ons eie sakegemeenskap geag mag word. By nabetragting weet ons almal
altyd beter, en daarom is ek doodseker dat ons ongemaklik gevoel het met
die totale houvas wat Fifa het oor die gasheerland wat die
Sokkerwêreldbekertoernooi aanbied. Ons moet onsself afvra waarom dit vir
Korea goedkoper was om, nadat hulle die Sokkerwêreldbekertoernooi aangebied
het, hul stadiums te sloop eerder as om dit te onderhou. Dit verbaas my dus
glad nie dat Nederland en België nou in opstand kom teen hierdie
versmorende neiging van Fifa nie. Op ŉ manier sal die afkeer wat ons vir
dié soort optrede het onder die aandag van Fifa gebring moet word.
(Translation of Afrikaans paragraph follows.)

[Speaker, another lesson that we have learnt is the fact that when we act
honestly, we command the respect of the world and are held in high esteem.
For example, as part of the agreement we implemented legislation that may
be regarded as detrimental to our own business community. We always know
better in retrospect, and therefore I am quite sure that we felt
uncomfortable with the total hold that Fifa has had on the country hosting
the Soccer World Cup. We have to ask ourselves the question of why it was
cheaper for Korea to demolish their stadiums, after they had hosted the
World Cup, instead of maintaining them. Therefore, it does not surprise me
at all that the Netherlands and Belgium are now protesting against this
stifling tendency of Fifa. In some way our dissatisfaction with this kind
of action should be brought to Fifa’s attention.]

During the event, we showed pride as a nation united in diversity, and this
yielded a successful World Cup. South Africa, we have to begin respecting
our diversity and, in doing so, so much more will be achieved.

We have learnt numerous lessons during the 2010 Fifa World Cup. But, above
all, we have learnt that development, peace and human rights, and promoting
and building a true democracy and an open society are the core aspect of
building a great and prosperous nation.

I have penned a poem titled South Africa, our Land. This time around I
didn’t get the assistance of Mr James Selfe, so I don’t owe him any
royalties! The poem goes like this:

   Oh, South Africa and Africa,
   our beautiful lands,
   your fragile future
   we hold in our fallible hands.
   The football World Cup for us a table has laid
   to show to the world of what stuff we are made.
   The challenge we accept — we dare not fail;
   otherwise everything will have been to no avail.

   The World Cup showed us what could be done,
   if we act in harmony and as one.
   As leaders we have to show the way
   if on course to prosperity we want to stay.
   If we do the right things and act with sense,
   this country is destined for excellence.

Thank you. [Applause.]

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Madam Deputy
Speaker, today we say thank you to those people in South Africa who dreamt
that South Africa could host the Soccer World Cup. Robert Goddard, father
of the American space programme, said, “Every vision is a joke until the
first man accomplishes it.”

Yesterday, with a view to today’s debate, I went through newspaper
clippings of the past couple of months. It is notable that, prior to the
start of the tournament, the majority of writers abroad and in South Africa
were pessimistic and negative about South Africa’s capability of hosting
the tournament successfully. After the tournament, the majority of writers
were positive about the success of the tournament. The pessimists were
proven wrong.

Sir, how do you recognise a pessimist? They say if a pessimist smells
flowers, he does not look, where the closest garden is; he looks, where the
closest funeral is!

Up to 500 million television viewers watched the final game. There weren’t
any power outages, as some had predicted there would be. The large
terrorist attack that had been predicted thankfully did not take place, and
the majority of the security and other arrangements ran smoothly. The
Gautrain operated perfectly, and road traffic in the majority of our cities
was faster and better after the road infrastructure had been upgraded. If
you have flown recently, you will have been impressed with how attractive
and modern our airports now appear to be.

As to the precise costs and the advantages and disadvantages for South
Africa, there will be raging debates for a long time to come. According to
government, R33 billion was spent on transport infrastructure,
telecommunications and stadiums.

The question today is: What have we learnt from this success? Why can we
not repeat the success of the soccer tournament with the solving of all the
other problems — the building of houses, the repair of potholes, and the
combating of crime? Crime declined during the hosting of the tournament,
and now murder, robberies and farm attacks are suddenly back. What was the
recipe for this success?

Firstly, everybody worked together enthusiastically. There were no negative
spoilers. The closest we came to that was the ANC Youth League’s criticism
of the Bafana Bafana captain, their comments on farmers, and the events
surrounding Eugene Terre’Blanche’s murder – which definitely frightened
foreign spectators away. But, sir, all South Africans approached their
tasks in a positive manner.

Secondly, we utilised the best expertise that South Africa possesses to
complete the stadiums on time and to improve the infrastructure. Thirdly,
politics was made subservient to the accomplishment of specific objectives
and, fourthly, there were specific deadlines. The result was a successful
tournament and a feel-good atmosphere among all South Africans, with hope
for the future.

With the rapid increase in crime after the tournament, as well as the
rising ANC populism at the moment — according to their September conference
— we are busy losing it again. For the sake of our children and the future,
we cannot lose it! Former American president L B Johnson said: “Yesterday
is not ours to recover, but tomorrow is ours to win or to lose.” I thank
you.

The MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION: Hon Deputy
Speaker, hon President and Deputy President, hon Premiers, hon Ministers,
hon members of the Joint Sitting, distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen, our forebear, father and former president of the ANC, Oliver
Tambo, prophetically said in 1976:

   [When we finally get free] ... we will have a South Africa which will
   live in peace with its neighbours and with the rest of the world. It will
   base its foreign relations on the principles of non-interference and
   mutually advantageous assistance among the peoples [of the world] as well
   as the continuation of the struggle against the system of imperialist and
   neocolonialist domination.

Ge ke eme mo pele ga lena Ntlo ye e Kgethegilego, ke gopola gore mo
kgweding ye ya basadi, Mma Lilian Masediba Ngoyi — ngwana wa ga Matabane —
le Mma Charlotte Makgomo Maxeke — ngwana wa ga Manye — ba swanetše go ba ba
myemyela ba re mala a basadi a rwala dikgolo. (Translation of Sepedi
paragraph follows.)

[As I stand before this august House during this Women’s Month, I think
that Madam Lillian Masediba Ngoyi — Matabane’s daughter — and Madam
Charlotte Makgomo Maxeke — Manye’s daughter — must be proud of the work
that women have done.]

Malibongwe! [Praise!]

Social scientists Joe Luft and Harry Ingham designed the famous Johari
Window to unravel the mystery in each one of us. The mystery is due to the
fact that there are things that we know about ourselves, things which other
people don’t know; and there are those things that we don’t know about
ourselves, things which other people do know.

Our hosting of the Soccer World Cup taught us something about ourselves,
namely: Those who believed in us always knew about us. It has also helped
the world to know something about us, and that is: We always believed in
ourselves. We also helped the world to know something about itself —
something that we always knew about ourselves — and that is ubuntu botho.
We taught the world about ubuntu in the manner in which we received our
visitors and projected our humanity. This experience even touched the US
soccer team during their Confederations Cup, to the extent that the team
internalised ubuntu as its guiding philosophy.

The Boston Celtics, one of the giants of American basketball, have also
found solace and spiritual guidance in our ubuntu belief. One American
journalist, William Rhodes, who writes for The New York Times, wrote:

   Ubuntu seems especially wellsuited to team sports in that it describes an
   approach to life that is characterised by selflessness, sharing, unity
   and respect.

The task for South Africa in asserting our place in the world can never be
an event but remains a process. It is going to be a long journey. Like all
journeys, there will be high moments and trying times. The hosting of the
soccer World Cup was one such high moment. It followed others like the
Rugby World Cup, the World Conference on Sustainable Development, and our
first tenure in the United Nations Security Council during the years 2007
and 2008. Each of these moments laid the basis for the other, building on
lessons learnt.

Never before in the history of the hosting of the World Cup has a country
volunteered to share this rare privilege, with all its opportunities of
incomparable magnitude, with its neighbours, let alone an entire continent.
We took that decision as a country because we are sincere in our belief
that this is Africa’s time; ke nako! [It’s time!]

Our continent can rise and walk tall in this African century. It can take
its place among the nations of the world as an equal and indeed feed,
clothe, educate and shelter its people only when we take bold decisions of
this nature.

The correctness of our decision has been vindicated. The chapter has now
been closed on the pessimism, the cynicism with which some sceptics viewed
the ability and the capacity of our continent. I can now declare to you
that, indeed, the world believes that we are a permanent Plan B.

We took measures to give concrete expression to our decision to make this
Soccer World Cup an African event. We worked with countries on our
continent — including the five whose teams qualified for the finals — to
take the Soccer World Cup to every household in Africa and create
conditions for its benefits to be shared by all our people for a better
life.

We played our part as a country when the 8th Assembly of the African Union,
the AU, reaffirmed our continent’s commitment to owning the Soccer World
Cup event and declared 2007 the International Year of African Football. We
worked with other African nations in the context of the AU declaration —
through meetings and programmes on sectoral issues like sports, tourism and
the environment — for concrete action with concrete results.

It therefore made sense for our President to invite his colleagues and
other eminent African personalities to the opening and closing matches of
the event in recognition of the support received from our African brothers
and sisters. In total, more than 30 African heads of state and governments
honoured our President’s invitation.

The SA Development Community, SADC, also took full advantage of the event
through concrete action with concrete results. An example here is the
launch of the SADC 2010 Investment Promotion Programme under the theme “1
Team, 15 Nations for Sustainable Investment”. The programme, which will run
up to December 2011, is aimed at mobilising investment resources for our
regional infrastructure, trade and industry, and tourism, in order to
support our efforts to combat poverty and accelerate the integration of our
region.

We worked with the UN in leveraging the event for the accelerated
implementation of its various agencies’ programmes – from the United
Nations Development Programme, UNDP, and the Human Rights Council, to UN
Sport for Development and Peace.

At the closing event of the Fifa 2010 World Cup, UN Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon said that the 2010 Fifa World Cup gave the UN a momentum in its
work that will have to be carried through in the coming years and amplified
in even further UN engagements with national governments.

I need to reiterate what our hon President said about our hosting of the
1Goal: Education for All campaign which he launched during the tournament.
He said that for the very first time ever a political summit was hosted on
the sidelines of a sporting event of this nature. We want to take this
opportunity to thank you ever so much, Mr President, for that. [Applause.]

International artists and film stars, who were among the many visitors that
were received during the one-month spectacle, left this country singing our
country’s praises, making my job even easier because they have become our
future ambassadors.

During the event, the City of Cape Town opened its arms and for the very
first time hosted — together with the DTI, Fortune 500, CNN and Time 100 —
a three-day conference on African soil, which brought together
international business luminaries and other world leaders. This served to
confirm our continent as a new global opportunity.
Though the Soccer World Cup may not have silenced the guns in some parts of
our continent, or made poverty history for many of our people, it has
strengthened our resolve, our conviction and our belief that a better
Africa is possible.

We have received congratulatory tributes from all corners of the world,
including the General Assembly of the UN, on the occasion of the inaugural
celebration of International Nelson Mandela Day, as well as during the
summit of the AU held in Kampala recently. May I also hasten to say that it
was the first time that the UN General Assembly had declared a day to
celebrate just one individual, Nelson Mandela. It has never happened
before. [Applause.]

In his address to the AU summit that I alluded to earlier, German Foreign
Minister Guido Westerwelle, who does not necessarily share political
ideology with me, said:

   People in Germany, in Europe, all over the world experienced the modern
   Africa with perfect organisation and an overwhelming hospitality during
   the World Cup. Africa presented the world with the gift of an
   unforgettable festival.

These humbling accolades were summed up by none other than President Joseph
Kabila at the 30th Jubilee celebration in Namibia the day before yesterday
when he said:

   To say the least, South Africa administered a blow to Afro-pessimism and
   rekindled self-respect, self-esteem and confidence among the daughters
   and sons of our continent.

We should accept these accolades with the humility which our country is
known for. At the same time, we should be proud as a nation of the modest
contribution we made to the cause of our African continent and humanity in
general.

We have shown that as a country South Africa can play its role on this
continent and globally as a committed and responsible member of the
international community. We shall use this positive space to respond to the
challenge of growing our economy and ensuring that its benefits are shared
by all.

The event has indeed taught us something about ourselves, something which
Madiba in particular always believed about us, and that is: Our ubuntu can
pull us together as a team, in our diversity, to rally behind a uniting
vision. We now know that when we are united, with our differences set
aside, our ubuntu can prevail to inspire others.

In the next two years, we will be joining the UN Security Council again,
led and inspired by ubuntu. I thank you. [Time expired.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members, before hon Meshoe starts speaking, if I
can hear you talking at this level, it means you are making a noise and
breaking the rules.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, hon President, hon Deputy President and
hon members, South Africans have never displayed so much joy, harmony and
unity of purpose as we saw during the World Cup. The sight of different
racial groups and colours, all standing side by side, shouting, singing and
blowing their vuvuzelas was beautiful to behold.

Indeed, the success of this tournament was, by far, beyond all
expectations. Even the optimists were taken by surprise by the overwhelming
success that we achieved. Foreigners who spoke little English said, “This
is wonderful.” Foreign journalists, who had been negative in their
reporting about our preparedness for the World Cup, could not find a
negative thing to report on. Yes, Africa did it, and South Africa did it in
style. Who can doubt the fact that the world’s perception of Africa has
improved?

However, the ACDP is concerned that the positive image of this country
which was created by the successful World Cup is being undermined by the
latest events, such as the strike, the controversial Media Appeals Tribunal
and the Protection of State Information Bill.

The Vienna-based International Press Institute said that it had sent an
open letter to President Zuma expressing its concerns over what the ANC is
planning to do with the Media Appeals Tribunal and the Protection of State
Information Bill. [Interjections.] In the letter, the watchdog expressed
concern that the planned regulations would endanger the independence and
vitality of the South African media.

A Zimbabwean media analyst who is in our country is reported to have said
that parallels between the Bill and the Zimbabwean government’s actions
were clear. He said:

   Just as Zanu (PF) did, this is a very clear attempt to control the media
   ... This Bill has been initiated by those in power who cannot take
   criticism from the media.

As the rain outside has dampened the warm and sunny weather we’ve all
enjoyed over the last few days, so has the latest news about what SA Rugby
Union President Oregon Hoskins called “major problems” concerning the use
of the new stadiums for future matches been a damper. It sounds like they
will turn into white elephants and we really appeal to government to ensure
that this will not be the case.

In conclusion, the ACDP wants to join the President in thanking the long
list of people who contributed much in order to make South Africa the talk
of the nations because we have improved the image of Africa by hosting a
very successful World Cup. I thank you. [Applause.]

Mrs M N MATLADI: Hon Deputy Speaker, tempting as it always is to look for
areas where criticism can be made, today is a day when all such is
forsaken. Today is one of the rare occasions where we can all afford to pat
each other on the back and say, “Well done, Africa!” [Applause.]

Congratulations to all Africans for the successful hosting of the most
popular global sporting event. Indeed, we silenced the critics who thought
that Africa was not good enough to host an event of this magnitude. It is
with a great sense of relief and delight that we report that the sporting
event was without the incidents that the doomsayers had prophesied.

Congratulations to the Police Ministry are also in order. Indeed, you have
done us proud. You did not only protect our visitors and ensure the
enforcement of the law, but you planted a seed of hope that the country has
the capacity to deal effectively with the scourge of crime that has
tormented our teenage democracy.

If we as a nation can work together, as we did with the organising of this
event in developing magnificent stadia and fascinating infrastructure
topped by Africa’s greatest virtue of ubuntu, we can and should be able to
address effectively the issues of poverty, unemployment, crime and
HIV/Aids. What we have to do is say that the same zeal that we displayed
with the World Cup has to be displayed in addressing the above-mentioned.
We need to forge ahead with the very same spirit and let the people who are
the slave masters know that Africa can come triumphantly out of all the
challenges that have been mentioned. I thank you. [Applause.]

Ms F I CHOHAN: Madam Deputy Speaker, Mr President and Mr Deputy President,
I think it’s important for me to warn members that I’m the thirteenth
speaker and it’s very bad luck not to listen to me!

As the World Cup tournament ended, President Jacob Zuma diverted our
attention, as well as that of the world, away from soccer towards
education. At the Education Summit on 11 July 2010 he said:

   We want education to be the lasting legacy of the 2010 World Cup. We urge
   all nations of the world to mobilise in every corner to ensure that every
   child is in school, especially at the primary school level.

There are two objectives that have been adopted by the international
community in the field of education. The first is Millennium Development
Goal 2, which aims to achieve universal primary education by the year 2015.
The second is the 1Goal: Education for All initiative, which is an
international initiative to bring the benefits of education to every
citizen in every society.
The 1Goal: Education for All campaign is a popular campaign to enrol all
children worldwide in schools by 2014. Key patrons of this campaign are the
Nobel Peace laureate, His Grace Archbishop Desmond Tutu, Her Majesty Queen
Rania of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, and Fifa president, Sepp Blatter.

What is the situation now regarding universal primary education? Globally
there has been some progress. An additional 42 million children have
entered primary school since 2000, notably because of increased political
leadership and national resources for education. However, progress has been
slow and some formidable challenges remain.

About 47 of 163 countries have achieved universal primary education, and an
additional 20 countries are estimated to be on track to achieving this goal
by 2015. But very big challenges remain in 44 countries, 23 of which are on
this continent. These countries are unlikely to achieve universal primary
education by 2015, unless domestic and international efforts are
accelerated substantially.

Colleagues, approximately 72 million children are still denied their basic
right to education in our world, and 759 million adults lack basic literacy
skills in this age of cellphones, the Internet, and our ability to view
planets and distant galaxies.

When we speak about this issue, we should consider that the 72 million
children who are not in school will be trapped in a cycle of poverty, which
will deny us the achievement of the Millennium Development Goal of
eradicating poverty from the face of this planet.

I say again, 72 million children have never seen a classroom. That is more
children, by the way, than all of the children going to primary school in
the US, Canada, the whole of Europe and Australia, all combined. We should
consider, as an African state, that 32 million of this number are on this
continent. Thirty-two million African children don’t go to school.

By July 2010, 12 million people, ordinary soccer fans, had joined the
1Goal: Education for All campaign and signed the yellow card calling on
leaders of the world to make illiteracy history. Twelve million people
called on world leaders to ensure that every child who is born on this
planet receives education and the chance to beat poverty. This makes it the
biggest campaign for education in the history of mankind, and it is soccer
that has made it possible. Because of the World Cup, many prominent and
influential people have joined the campaign and lent their tacit and active
support.

When asked about his role in the 1Goal: Education for All campaign, His
Grace Archbishop Tutu stated the following:

  Without free and compulsory schooling, the lives of these children are a
  nightmare of forced labour in factories, sweatshops and fields.


  For this reason, I have become a co-chair of 1Goal: Education for All.

The fact that we have 72 million children out of school shames us; it
should shame the world. There are heart-wrenching cases all over the
developing world, and stories like Mahder’s, a 12-year-old from Ethiopia,
are all too common. Like any child who should play sports and love reality
TV, when her father died her family could no longer afford school fees. It
is stories like Mahder’s that have led 1Goal to call for the abolition of
school fees in all developing countries, so that a level of educational
inclusion, which is yet to be attained, can be delivered.

His Grace Archbishop Desmond Tutu further said:

   The solutions put forward by 1Goal are so simple that it is immensely
   frustrating that they need to be enumerated at all.


   The essence is this: rich governments must play their part by supporting
   poorer countries in getting all children into school.


   For their part, developing countries must bear the responsibility of
   making sure that money is spent properly by ensuring that 20% of their
   budgets are given over to education.


   Further, developing countries must make education a constitutional right.




   Yes, times are tight, financially.


   But bear in mind that the $16 billion needed to deliver the dream of
   universal education amounts to just 0,2% of the money used to bail out
   the global banking system.


   The economic case is absolutely clear: developing countries could be
   losing out to the tune of $70 billion a year by not having well-educated
   populations ...


   Excitingly, the world of football has lined up behind the campaign.


   I am proud to say that ... very prominent members of Bafana Bafana,
   including Aaron Mokoena, the captain, have lent their support to this
   campaign.

His Grace concludes that it is the first time ever that a tournament of
this nature will leave a genuine legacy.
While $16 billion is needed to achieve this goal of universal access to
education in 2015, the Education for All Global Monitoring Report of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, Unesco,
indicates that aid to basic education in sub-Saharan Africa dropped from
$1,7 billion to $1,6 billion in 2008. So let us recap: We need to send
72 million kids to school; we need 0,2% of the money used to bail out
global banks to be spent on education.

Premier Zille spoke about choices. Let us also remember that in this
country, as the President said, 200 000 children don’t go to school. Let us
address this reality. Let us address the reality that more coloured boys
and girls are out of school than any other group in this country. Let us
get those kids into schools and eradicate the legacy of gangsterism and
drugs on the Cape Flats. Thank you. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Mr R B BHOOLA: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon President and Deputy President, if
ever South Africa got the respect of the world and proved the prophets of
doom wrong, it was when the great sports commentators and Fifa president,
Sepp Blatter, declared that it was the best World Cup ever.

For the first time all sections of the community understood what the
meaning of social cohesion was, and Madiba’s call for unity through sport
was a profound symbol of friendship, solidarity and humility. Everybody
united under the South African flag. They flocked to the grounds, the fan
parks, and the gift centres. They mingled with the people and made South
Africa proud. Indeed, our organisational ability in sports, which is
demonstrated by how we hosted the Rugby World Cup, the World Swimming Cup,
the Indian Premier League and the Champions’ League, goes to show that we
are a nation of which we can be proud.

South Africa must stride on from this and move away from race. We must look
at every sector of the community and say: “If you can make a contribution,
you will be allowed to do so, irrespective of race, colour and creed.”

We have great faith and hope in the future of our country. We have proved
ourselves and I think that besides the miracle of 27 April 1994, the
success of the World Cup was a great achievement, and Africa was proud of
it. [Laughter.]

I also think that the World Cup has proved that there is a need to change
the rules. The MF has believed that the definition of a goal was when the
ball completely crossed the line and made an eclipse. However, the MF now
proposes that we change that definition and say that a goal is a goal only
when the referee sees it!

True accolades must be awarded to all South Africans for their spirit of
brotherhood and togetherness. Undoubtedly, we are vastly patriotic and
proud of Bafana Bafana.

As the slogan so accurately says: “You take no risk; you have no success.”
Indeed, success goes to those who are prepared to work hard with courage,
conviction and determination to deliver everybody from the shackles of
poverty.

South Africa was not just any country hosting the World Cup, but was simply
the best. Mr President, this country makes us proud and the World Cup has
given meaning to the words, “Proudly South African”. I am proud that I am a
South African. I can walk the streets in the international arena because I
am a South African, and the World Cup has made me proud. [Applause.]

I have no doubt, hon President, that your call for the World Cup to leave a
legacy for 1Goal: Education for All is alive with reality. We just have to
feel it; it is right here.

Indeed, South Africa is a country with unlimited possibilities. The World
Cup has laid a strong foundation based on mutual trust, understanding,
unity and nation-building. It’s time for Africa. Halala, Africa! halala!
[Applause.]

The PREMIER OF GAUTENG (Ms N P Mokonyane: Deputy Speaker, the President of
the Republic of South Africa, His Excellency President Jacob Zuma, the
Deputy President, hon Speaker, hon Chairperson of the NCOP, hon members and
fellow South Africans, South Africa is indeed a country that is alive with
possibilities. The 2010 Fifa World Cup has just demonstrated this fact to
millions of people all over the world.

The successful hosting of the World Cup has proven that South Africa has
both the capacity and capability to host big global events. We have also
used the opportunity created by the World Cup to display our world-class
capability, skills and ability to deliver.

This placed a huge responsibility on the government to ensure that
everything went well, especially with regard to traffic management, public
transport, health and emergency services. With close co-operation between
the three spheres of government and the organising committee, we all
fulfilled our responsibilities and delivered a great World Cup.

The volunteers who worked hard every day of the World Cup also made a
significant contribution to this success, learning from the volunteers of
yesteryear, Chief Albert Luthuli, Nelson Mandela and others.

For four weeks the world was enthralled by some of the most exhilarating
football. Throughout the tournament the stadia, fan parks, public viewing
areas and every part of our country were characterised by a festive mood.
Never before has our country received such positive publicity.

Hundreds of thousands of visitors who came to our country for the World Cup
were exposed to the positive attributes of the country which had always
been overshadowed by some of our problems and shortcomings – something that
even here today was demonstrated by our own. This is something that we
really need to try to refrain from. Let us take away the negative energy
and focus together on the good that we can do for the country collectively.
[Applause.] Even the millions of people who followed the World Cup through
the mass media were able to see the better side of our country because of
the positive media reports.

Some thought we lived in trees and in mountains and bought clothes only
when we travelled to Europe, but they found beautiful ladies and handsome
men — beautiful and peace-loving people - here on the shores of South
Africa. I am told, hon members, that when others arrived at O R Tambo
International Airport they actually asked when were they going to connect
to South Africa, not realising that they had indeed arrived in South
Africa. A big thumbs up to South Africa! [Applause.]

Many of the visitors who had an opportunity to spend time in our townships
and cities publicly expressed great appreciation of the warmth and
hospitality of our people. Most of those who were at the stadiums also
found an opportunity to spend time on Vilakazi Street – the only street in
the world that has had two residents who are recipients of the Nobel Peace
Prize, Dr Nelson Mandela and Archbishop Desmond Tutu. They were able to go
and spend time in Umlazi, in Gugulethu, in some of the villages, and even
in our own conservation areas. They found it quite opportune to know more
about South Africa and felt that South Africa is indeed a country full of
surprises.

New tourism markets have been opened, with first-time visitors from Latin
American countries such as Mexico indicating that they would like to visit
our country again in the future. And I must hasten to say that already
relationships are being built between countries such as Spain and the
provinces by way of sisterhoods to promote arts and creative industries.

With most of the World Cup activities having being staged in Gauteng, the
province received the biggest share of the tourists who visited the country
during the World Cup period. Approximately 75% of the estimated 463 000
visitors stayed in Gauteng.

While the full economic impact of the World Cup will be known once the
necessary studies have been concluded, preliminary reports indicate that
there was a substantial increase in spending during the period of the
tournament. The success of hosting the World Cup will be measured not only
by the impact we made during the four weeks of the tournament, but also by
the legacy left behind and how that benefits the people.

The greatest legacy of the World Cup is the much-needed public
infrastructure. We now have modern stadia which compare with some of the
best in the world. We have upgraded our transport infrastructure to meet
the needs, as the most urbanised provinces and cities required that. We
have increased the capacity of our health care facilities, including
emergency medical services.

The money spent in the development and refurbishment of infrastructure was
a worthy investment whose returns will be fully realised in the long term
by the very voters that we are told in this House that we fear. We do not
fear the voters; hence our priorities are education and health.
[Interjections.] We have been consistently cognisant of their situations
and we know them better. And precisely because they understand that we are
here to serve, they responded to our clarion call and became the best
hosts. They have never been negative, and they have continued to raise the
flag. [Applause.]

The new ambulances and other resources that we have acquired to cater for
the World Cup are available to serve our people. The increased capacity has
enabled us to respond faster to emergency calls. The improved road network
has resulted in the easing of the flow of traffic on some of our busiest
roads.

The World Cup has taught us an important lesson, that better co-operation
by different spheres of government can lead to greater efficiency and
effectiveness in service delivery. It has nothing to do with interference
with the Constitution. Good examples of this are joint management of
traffic flow and public transport, and how we co-operated in implementing
an effective security plan under the single command of the SA Police
Service, SAPS. If this close co-operation continues beyond the World Cup,
we can achieve greater results.

Hosting the World Cup also gave us an opportunity to put our public
transport system to the test, and it proved to be very efficient and
reliable. The first phase of the Gautrain project started operating on
8 June 2010, before the start of the World Cup. The train service and its
feeder system added much-needed capacity to the public transport system.
When the next phases are completed in 2011, the Gautrain will become the
backbone of our integrated public transport system.

Government will continue to work together with the transport sector and
ensure that we make public transport the most reliable means of transport,
as one of the best lessons coming out of the World Cup. Smarter usage of
the existing modes of public transport in the form of trains, buses and
minibuses will be encouraged.

The resounding success of the World Cup has boosted our country’s
confidence in bidding for more world sporting events, with the 2020 Olympic
Games being seen as a possibility. We in Gauteng will support any South
African cities that may decide to bid for the Olympic Games, and will
consider major infrastructure development. If it is eThekwini, we already
have plans for connecting eThekwini and the city of Johannesburg with a
high-speed train. This is a lesson we have learnt from the Gautrain.
They’ll do it and we will all contribute to its success. [Applause.] We
will offer our expertise on big infrastructure planning and development to
any South African city that gets awarded the right to host the Games. Re
kaofela. [We are together.]

The challenge now is how to sustain the positive mood and encourage the
people to continue promoting patriotism. For example, we must redefine how
we celebrate our national days and, most importantly, our heritage as a
nation, without leaving this to political parties and contestation as to
the meaning of our important national days: Workers’ Day, Human Rights Day,
Women’s Day and Youth Day. As a country learning from the World Cup we need
to work together, celebrate as a nation and re be kaofela [and be
together.]

I wish to pay special tribute to all the people who contributed to the
success of the World Cup. I also wish to pay special tribute to our
football legends who were there with us throughout the tournament.

It would also be remiss on my part if I did not pay special tribute to the
women of our country, especially during this month, which is dedicated to
women for the role they played and continue to play in the development of
our country. A few names of women who made a significant contribution to
the World Cup include the Airports Company South Africa CEO, Ms Monhla
Hlahla – a big thumbs up to her! The other one is the head of the
Johannesburg 2010 Unit, Sibongile Mazibuko. You see Soccer City, you see
the designs, you see Ellis Park — it is because of the efforts and the
leadership of Sibongile Mazibuko. [Applause.] The third is one of the first
Gautrain drivers, Nomzamo Zitha. The ignition key that was put in the
Gautrain on 8 June was inserted by a woman, Nomzamo Zitha, a 19-year-old
who was brought up by a single mother – a big thumbs up to her! [Applause.]

Moving forward, I think we need to cease being negative communicators about
our country. The world has seen us, and the world believes in us. We cannot
be the ones who speak negatively about ourselves. However, we know that
some of us will want to play politics, even on issues of nation-building
and social cohesion. The world would be shocked to hear you talking badly
about our country, your country, because they have seen it; they have seen
its people; and they have seen the leadership. You will be an outcast.
Thank you.

Mr G R KRUMBOCK: Deputy Speaker, the point of hosting any mega event such
as the Fifa World Cup or the Olympics is to use this rare opportunity to
rebrand your country in a way that stimulates investor confidence and
significantly increases tourism appeal.

The World Cup offered our country the chance to decisively rebrand
ourselves as a safe, friendly and value-for-money destination that can
present an unparalleled range of experiences that are unrivalled anywhere
else in the world. It is against this long-term objective that our hosting
of the 2010 Fifa World Cup should be viewed.

During the World Cup the DA interacted with and interviewed face to face a
large number of fans and fellow tourists in the airports, striding out on
the fan walks, trying out the Rea Vaya, together at the park-and-rides, and
riding on the Gautrain and on the intercity and airport shuttles. Based on
these interviews, we can unequivocally state that from a tourism
perspective our hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup was a resounding
success.

In the first instance, the World Cup tourists who visited our shores found
South Africans to be amongst the friendliest people in the world. Eleven
percent of them found South Africans to be friendly and hospitable, while a
whopping 89% found us extremely friendly and hospitable. Typical of this
experience was that of André and Nor Coquillard of Seoul, South Korea, who
spoke about a family in Sandton who found them stranded in our country and
offered them hospitality in their home.

The deployment of an additional 40 000 SAPS officers on our streets during
the World Cup succeeded beyond anyone’s expectations. Seventy percent of
fans said they felt safe, 26% felt very safe, and only 4% said they felt —
on occasion — somewhat unsafe, mostly in Johannesburg. Many tourists said
that the constant visible presence of the SAPS officers was a reassuring
factor which made them feel completely at ease. They also said that their
actual experience during the World Cup in regard to safety was completely
different to the perception they had gained back home.

The lesson that we must draw from this aspect of the World Cup experience
is obvious. Visible policing works, and there is no reason for any tourist
to feel unsafe in our country, provided that reasonable safety precautions
are practised.

Fears that World Cup tourists might be overcharged proved unfounded.
Competition in the hospitality industry ensured that 48% of our tourists
found prices reasonable and similar to those back home, while a further 45%
found our prices cheaper than in their home country. Only 7% found prices
more expensive, with most respondents citing taxi fares as the culprit.

Not surprisingly, 23% of World Cup visitors found the individual games and
general World Cup experience the highlight of their trip. Excluding the
football, 37% of our tourists found the Kruger Park, safaris and game
drives their most memorable experience during the tournament, while 26%
found Cape Town and its tourist attractions outstanding.

A less expected result was that one in four tourists found South Africa’s
people themselves to be their most rewarding experience. Fans found the
ongoing development of our rainbow nation and nonracial crowds singing
Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika together at fan zones and at beach fronts to be
personally unforgettable.

Of course, challenges do remain. The chaos that ensued on 7 July 2010 at
King Shaka International Airport, before the World Cup semifinal between
Germany and Spain, when Acsa spinelessly failed to exercise proper control,
must be stringently interrogated by the Portfolio Committee on Transport.
Not only did this incident undermine the very positive reports on our
country that had hitherto dominated the world press, but it should have
been avoided based on numerous earlier warnings which were, unfortunately,
ignored.

While my personal experience and that of most South Africans was that the
park-and-rides — with the exception of Rustenburg — airport shuttles,
intercity shuttles, Rea Vaya, taxis and fan walks operated seamlessly every
time, it is interesting that 74,5% of our tourists found transport to be
either their worst experience during the World Cup, or the area where the
greatest improvement is needed. Respondents cited potholes, untarred roads,
lack of public transport, clogged traffic in Johannesburg and expensive
taxis time and time again. As much as public transport showed an
improvement during the World Cup, our tourists are telling us that we are
nowhere near international standards yet.

Transport issues notwithstanding, the DA believes that our overall hosting
of the 2010 Fifa World Cup was a remarkable success. We have successfully
rebranded our country as a safe, friendly and value-for-money destination,
all the more reason now to rethink the very short-sighted decision to cut
R160 million from SA Tourism’s budget during the Medium-Term Expenditure
Framework period.

No successful business spends R43 billion — which is what the World Cup
cost us — developing a product and then dramatically cuts back on the
budget advertising that product. Provided SA Tourism is allowed to do its
job, we can increase our tourist numbers by 10% and generate additional
receipts to the SA Revenue Service of around R6 billion per year.

Given that ratepayers have largely financed the stadiums, and ongoing
maintenance costs appear to be less than 5% of additional Sars receipts, it
seems very unfair that the national fiscus should bank the ongoing World
Cup receipts while local ratepayers bear the maintenance costs. The DA
therefore asks that a conditional grant be made available to applicable
local government structures to ensure a fairer distribution of the World
Cup dividend.

The World Cup was a great accelerator that delivered to our country much-
needed infrastructural improvements which will underpin our economic growth
for decades to come. Airports, stadiums and roads were built in record
time. Residents who had seen widening potholes and broken street lights for
years suddenly saw them filled and repaired almost overnight, along with
the greening and beautification of their cities and suburbs.

Crime plummeted during the World Cup. We also accelerated the building of
one nation with one future. The president of Fifa has shown us what we can
do under pressure. Now let us carry on doing it for ourselves. I thank you,
Deputy Speaker.

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF POLICE: Hon Deputy Speaker, hon President, Deputy
President, hon members, Premiers, distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen, today there is a deafening silence from the naysayers, when the
views they spewed out about the inability of Africans to host a successful
World Cup have come back to bite them. The silence speaks volumes on how
the venomous words of pessimism have led them to crawl back into their
holes of misdirected, miscalculated and misguided perception on the ability
of the African continent to deliver.

We stand here before you this afternoon, proud of the fact that we are able
to meet here to celebrate the successes of our country in hosting a world-
class 2010 Fifa World Cup, a legacy that will live forever. This legacy
will indeed spread to many generations to come — a legacy epitomised by the
patriotism and unity of purpose of many South Africans of different
colours, creeds, classes and genders. This is the legacy of a shared dream
of changing humanity for a better tomorrow.

Hon Premier of the Western Cape Helen Zille, your assertion that we have
left our people behind is a distortion. For us the 2010 World Cup was not
only a great soccer championship; it was a catalytic imperative to
transform the faces and facets of this country, a vision to promote real
social cohesion, sustained growth, skills formation, job creation,
macrosocial inclusion and continental renaissance.

Government made available a budget of R665 million for the procurement of
equipment, as well as R640 million for the deployment of members of the
SAPS. In sum, around R1,5 billion was invested in SAPS Fifa World Cup 2010
activities. Within the greater total, this was real value for money.

In ensuring that we provided a safe and secure World Cup, we had to utilise
some of the allocated resources for procuring assets like water cannons,
bomb detection equipment, helicopters, downlinks for helicopters, fixed-
wing aircraft, highway patrol vehicles, mobile command centres, and body
armour for public order policing, as well as for the rebuilding of Nyala
armoured vehicles.

We provided security for the heads of state who came for the World Cup
opening and finals, as well as those who came during the game stages to
offer support to their teams. We also provided high-risk forces for each
host city, comprising the Special Task Force personnel, the National
Intelligence unit detectives, Crime Intelligence Division personnel, bomb
disposal unit personnel and other role-players. We also deployed a total of
850 to 1 000 members on special trains on a daily basis.

More than three million fans attended the 64 games at the stadia, and more
than one million attended Fan Fests, with remarkable peace and stability.
It was said that tourists to the country during the World Cup would be
stabbed, and therefore a company in a certain stabbing capital in Europe
designed a stab vest. What lame disinvestment.

Our people, like the warriors, rose to the occasion ...

... bana ba thari e ntsho maila ngwathela ... [... South Africans of
African descent ...]

... inspired by the spirit of great African warriors — Moshoeshoe, Shaka,
Sekhukhune, Cetshwayo and King Sabata Dalindyebo. They, in unison, sang ...
“Bulalani abathakathi! Bulalani abathakathi!” [Kill the witches! Kill the
witches!] ... in defence of the motherland, in defence of Mother Africa.
They defeated the peddlers of pessimism, the faceless bearers of “Plan B”
and “Plan C”. South Africa was Plan A, B and C.

Our people proved that the optimism of will and intellect far surpasses the
purveyors of despair and disdain; that willpower naturally rebuffs toxic
tendencies and antics; and that they will not be captives of apocalyptic
clerics.

Martin Luther King Jr fittingly captures a denunciation of these kinds of
eccentric frolics when he says:

   If you succumb to the temptation of [negativity, gloom and despair,]
   unborn generations will be the recipients of a long and desolate night of
   bitterness, and your chief legacy to the future will be an endless reign
   of meaningless chaos.


We could not have allowed our people to fall victim to these walkers in
gloom. Our people in their millions rejected this stage-managed despair and
dreariness. The spirit of “forward ever, backward never” imbued the rainbow
nation. The ill-bred and the boorish may say we lost on the field of play,
but we say we won the bigger World Cup — unity of our people across the
continent and the pride of Africans in the diaspora.

The challenge that we all have to confront now is to build on the momentum
and the window of opportunity created by this unparalleled exposure. The
zeal and the love displayed by the country during the World Cup was
unbelievable, and we worked tirelessly to ensure that we didn’t betray the
trust placed in us by the South African population.

Africa has a reason to smile! South Africa has a right to walk with its
head held high! However, the success of this World Cup was not only the
success of South Africa; it was also the success of the entire continent
and a blow against peddlers of pessimism who sought to make it their
permanent vocation to say that nothing good would come out of Africa.

Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf averred that the successful
hosting of the World Cup had instilled a sense of pride in all Africans and
had to be celebrated. Then, seeing that the vuvuzela-frenzied spectacle was
scored 9 out of 10 by Fifa president, Sepp Blatter, people started
spreading rumours that after the World Cup there would be xenophobic
attacks against African migrants by the South African public!

The legacy of this World Cup will live with us forever. South Africa will
never be the same again. Our people are united as never before. Criminals
have learnt that when we say, “Wafa, tsotsi” [Die, thug] we mean business.
These factors are contributing favourably to macrosocial stability,
investment attraction, economic development and poverty busting.

We pay homage to and salute many in our government, civil society and the
international community, and President Zuma for his apt stewardship and
guidance. We remain forever indebted to former President Nelson Mandela for
his selfless belief and, above all, the ANC for its vision.

We take our hats off to all our security agencies. As we say in our
township lingo, le dinganga ... [you are heroes ...]

... ovuk’abayibambe ngempela ... [... the real fighters ...]

... and you did us proud.

As we conclude we take wisdom and humility from the inscriptions by Stephen
Covey, when he says:
   There are certain things that are fundamental to human fulfilment. The
   essence of these needs is captured in the phrase ‘to live, to love, to
   learn, to leave a legacy’. ... the need to leave a legacy is our
   spiritual need to have a sense of meaning, purpose, personal congruence,
   and contribution.

We live this legacy today; we’ll live this legacy tomorrow. This journey
has just begun.

Morena boloka setjhaba sa heso! [God bless our nation.]

Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Prince M M M ZULU: Phini likaSomlomo, Mongameli waseRiphabhulikhi
yaseNingizimu Afrika Mnu Zuma, iPhini lakho ubaba uMotlanthe, abaholi
bezombusazwe namaqembu akhona ezombusazwe ... [Deputy Speaker, President of
the Republic of South Africa Mr Zuma, your Deputy hon Motlanthe, leaders of
political parties and political parties that are present ...]

... I am very sorry, I do not intend to offend anybody by using my mother
tongue – Queen Msweli’s language.

Ngimi phambi kwenu njengesakhamuzi esiziqhenyayo ngobuzwe baso base
Ningizimu Afrika. Izwe lase Ningizimu Afrika lizuze okukhulu ukuhlonishwa
emazweni omhlaba ngokubamba i-Fifa World Cup ebeliyibambile ngenyanga
edlule.

Lokho Msholozi kusenze saba nokuziqhenya njengezakhamizi zaleli izwe, ukuba
sikwazi ukuphumelela. Ngibonge izinhlaka zokuphepha kuleli lizwe ngoba
zisebenze ngokukhulu ukuzimisela ukuba zinqande izigebengu. Ngibonga
namaqembu ezombusazwe ukuthi leli lima enanilenza la nihalalisela ukubanjwa
kwe-Fifa World Cup. Ngakho-ke ngifisa-ke ukuthi abantu bakaCetshwayo nabo
bazuze ukusimamisa izinhlelo zentuthuko kubantu, nenze njengoba nenza
nihlanganiswe i-Fifa World Cup.

Akukho okunye esingakunqoba kuleli lizwe ngaphandle kokuthi sihlangane
njengezakhamuzi zalapha, sime ndawonye senze konke okungenzeka.
Ngiyalihalalisela iqembu lethu leBafana Bafana ngoba akekho owayecabanga
ukuthi lingase lidlale kahle neMexico, liphinde libhaxabule nezwe
laseFrance ngaloluya hlobo okwenzeka ngayo. Ngibuye futhi ngihalalisele
iqembu leBafana Bafana ukuthi kuleli sonto esiphuma kulo ligile izimanga,
lashaya iqembu laseGhana.

Kusho ukuthi ngempela leli lizwe lethu limile njengezwe okufanele ukuthi
thina sizimisele ngalo. Mina njengendodana yasebukhosini bakwaZulu,
ngiyanicela ningosombusazwe ukuthi sebenzani noma asisebenzeni
ngokubambisana ukuze izwe lakithi liphumelele. Ngiyabonga. [Ihlombe.]
(Translation of isiZulu paragraphs follows.)

[I stand before you as a citizen who is proud of his South African
nationality. South Africa as a country has received a great deal of respect
internationally from hosting the Fifa World Cup, which was held last month.


Msholozi made us proud citizens of this country, because we have succeeded
in hosting this event. I would like to thank the security structures in
this country, as they have worked with great enthusiasm in capturing
criminals. I also thank the political parties for co-operating with one
another when the hosting of the Fifa World Cup was celebrated. I wish King
Cetshwayo’s subjects could also benefit from the development programmes in
the communities. Therefore, I urge you to work together like you did when
you were united by the Fifa World Cup.

We can conquer nothing in this country unless we are united as citizens,
and stand together and do whatever we can to take us through. I
congratulate our national team, Bafana Bafana, because no one thought that
they could play so well against Mexico, as well as crush a team like the
French national team the way they did. Again, I want to congratulate the
same Bafana Bafana team, as they performed miracles last week when they
defeated the Ghana national team.

This means that this country of ours indeed stands out as a country and
that we as citizens should be committed to it. I, as the son of the Zulu
royal house, request you as politicians to work; we need to work together
so that our country can succeed. Thank you. [Applause.]]

Mr S H PLAATJIE: Deputy Speaker and hon President, the awarding of the
Soccer World Cup to South Africa was a cause for much celebration across
the boundaries of this beloved country and the continent. It was a dream.
The successful hosting of the World Cup tournament proved that South Africa
could rise to the challenge of hosting world-class events. We could
scarcely believe how well we could deliver on all of our undertakings,
without default.

The Minister of Finance, hon Gordhan, put it well when he said:

   The tournament undoubtedly boosted our country’s standing
   internationally, showcasing its capabilities in delivering world-class
   infrastructure on time and without imposing a financial burden on the
   national fiscus.

More importantly, the hosting of the Soccer World Cup acted as a catalyst
for expanding our infrastructure base and economic growth. I confidently
know that the government is putting together a sustainable infrastructure
delivery plan that seeks to benefit the people of South Africa and the
continent. Let that dream not become a nightmare.

Our people responded to all the calls to wear national colours with pride.
Let’s continue and be committed to setting aside Friday as a soccer day.
All of us have the energy to carry forward the kind of fusion magic that
Shakira created with her Waka Waka song.

After Bafana Bafana was eliminated from the contest, we heeded the call to
fill the stadiums and throw our weight behind “BaGhana BaGhana”. We showed
the world that we could become good losers, with a positive view on things.


We must now be united in using all the lessons and positive outcomes of the
World Cup for the betterment of our society. If what is being done by the
hon Minister of Human Settlements to fight corruption with courage and
determination is applied across all levels of government, our nation will
have benefited from the World Cup experience.

There is a continuing debate on how to use our stadiums optimally. Cope
supports the idea of the stadiums being used for a variety of sporting
codes with an infusion of music, movement and dance, so that the nature of
the spectacles attracts people.

Cope further supports the initiative by the Foundation for a Safe South
Africa, the 2010 LOC, the Embassy of the Netherlands and the Institute for
Democracy in Africa — taking a giant step by creating the Youth Zone
Initiative, which combines football, computer literacy and life skills
training to create an enabling environment for young people in the
disadvantaged communities. Let this dream not become a nightmare.

Finally, I wish to pay tribute to rugby, cricket and other sport stars for
showing their support for Bafana Bafana and the World Cup. There was a very
great generosity of spirit that accorded perfectly with ubuntu, and it made
us proud. May that spirit live forever. May all South Africans continue to
profess the patriotism they openly displayed, so that after the World Cup
we can finally succeed in finding ourselves outside the racial enclave and
inside the embrace of a common South African nationhood. I thank you.
[Applause.]

Mr B M KOMPHELA: Deputy Speaker, hon President and hon Deputy President,
hon Premiers, hon members, comrades and friends, and representatives of all
host cities who are here today, I greet you.

Motlatsamotsamaisi wa dipuisano ya hlomphehang, batho ba rona ba nkopile
hore ke fane ka molaetsa ona, letsatsing lena la ho tla keteka mosebetsi
ona o matla o entsweng ka hara naha. Motsamaisi wa mosebetsi, batho ba rona
ba re ke re ho Moporesidente: Le sebeditse jwaloka bana ba thari e ntsho,
bana ba ho peptjwa ka letlalo la tshepe hore ba tle ba tshepahale.
Moporesidente, ba re ha Ntate Mandela a ne a nehelana ka lesokwane lena, a
le fa Ntate Mbeki, Ntate Mbeki ha a ka a hana ka lona kapa ho le diha. O
ile a le nehela Ntate Motlanthe. Ha Ntate Motlanthe a le tlohela, o ile a
le fetisetsa ho wena Moporesidente, Ntate Zuma.

Ena ke ketso e makatsang ka lebaka la hobane hangata ditabeng tse jwalo,
monna e mong o diha lesokwana ka boomo e le hobane a le mona, kapa bao a
mathang lebelo le bona ba a mo diha e le ho mo sitisa hore ba tle ba kgone
ho hlola lebelo leo. Mosebetsi o kang oo, ke mosebetsi o ka etswang ke rona
ANC hore re tle re kgone hore re neheletsane ka mosebetsi ona o kgabane
hakana. Re se ke ra ba le pelo tse telele hore o batle ho qeta lebelo o le
mong. Neheletsa ba bang re tle re tsebe ho qeta lebelo mmoho. (Translation
of Sesotho paragraphs follows.)

[Hon Deputy Speaker, our people have requested me to convey this message on
this day when we celebrate the great job that has been done in the country.
Hon Deputy Speaker, our people asked me to say to the President: You have
done a wonderful job, just like South Africans of African descent, whose
mothers used to carry them on their backs with the skin of a springbok. Hon
President, they say that when hon Mandela passed on his baton of presidency
to hon Mbeki, the hon Mbeki did not hold onto it for too long. He passed it
on to hon Motlanthe. When hon Motlanthe left the presidency, he passed it
onto you, hon President Zuma.

This is an amazing act, because in most cases a person would hold onto the
position for a long time as a result of jealousy, or those who were
competing with him would try to bring him down, so that they could assume
the position. This is why we as the ANC do things in such a way that we are
able to pass the baton on to others. Let us not be greedy or wish to be the
only ones who finish the race. Pass the baton on to others so that we can
finish the race together.]

I want to say to hon Lee that for the first time in the history of Fifa and
of South Africa, Fifa had to accept that there would be Acts to regulate
how Fifa was going to conduct business with our people. There are two such
pieces of legislation, which are the 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa
Special Measures Act and the Second 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa
Special Measures Act, which we passed, together with Donald Lee. We were
not afraid of Fifa; Fifa has never dictated to us. What we had was a mutual
agreement and we wanted our people on the ground to be able to say that we
had had a grand occasion where all of us benefited. I think it is pleasing
for our country to have taken that bold step and taken care of our people.

On the issue that Cope has raised around Dr Sutcliffe and the president of
rugby, Mr Oregan Hoskins, what I can say is that the two gentlemen have big
egos, because theirs is not a national matter. It is a provincial matter to
do with KwaZulu-Natal where the two have to meet and discuss how they are
going to use the facility that our government said should be a facility for
every federation in the country. That is how it is supposed to be. They
should not come here and make that a national issue, as if there is a
crisis around the stadium. There is harmony and agreement.

There are people who came to us and said that they had asked them how they
intended to use the stadium so that it could be sustainable after the World
Cup and 60 years from now. They presented a plan and told us that the
Development Bank of Southern Africa was going to come up with a detailed
plan which Parliament was going to oversee in making sure these stadiums
became a lasting legacy for our people. There is no earthquake; I don’t
know where this comes from.

Members must go to the committee and engage on these issues vigorously. The
ANC is open to engaging about these assets. The ANC says that in our
resolutions we must make sure that the assets and the investment beyond the
2010 Fifa World Cup are something that the ANC guards and that our people
will benefit from for ever and ever, amen. [Applause.]

Hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup has helped elevate all Africans to their
rightful place. Given a fair chance, these are the fruits of building a
democratic government. This is what we requested all the time, saying,
“Give us a fair chance.” After we were given a fair chance, this is what we
delivered to the world and today we tower in the world. After the delivery
of a successful 2010 Fifa World Cup, no one will ever again have the
courage to argue that Africa is hopeless, because Africa has lived up to
its undertaking of hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup.

This has been an incredible, exciting and painful journey of 16 years.
Hosting the 2010 Fifa World Cup required revolutionary technological
advances. It required high-speed communication, a new organisational model,
leadership, and a participatory environment due to the nature and
complexity of the project that the country had to deal with.

The journey started in 1994, when we set ourselves targets. We said that we
had to build the nation through the 2010 Fifa World Cup. The President and
everybody — nobody has had a different view — have said that we have built
the nation through this. We have built a nonracial society, and the country
that all our forbears aspired to see — a South Africa that has no colour.
That is one of the objectives that we set ourselves.

Increase tourism in this country is what we have done. The 3,18 million
fans who arrived in this country were not simply lost — they came to this
country deliberately in order to be a part of the celebration of the big
moment that South Africa was given by the nations of the world.

The gentleman from the DA said that branding South Africa means a South
Africa that is safe and a South Africa that attracts investments, and we
have lived up to that expectation. South Africa has been free and is free
after the World Cup, and everybody is ready to come and invest in South
Africa today. That was one of the targets that we set ourselves.

With regard to building infrastructure, when we were debating here we said
— hon Donald Lee knows this and, in fact, he himself said it — that after
the 2010 Fifa World Cup South Africa would never be the same again. South
Africa is not the same today, because of the dividends that have been
yielded by the hosting of the 2010 Fifa World Cup for the people of this
country. Infrastructure and roads — everything is up to standard.
[Applause.]

We said the delivery of major events in our country would help to build the
kind of South Africa that we wanted to see — nonracial, nonsexist and
democratic, Africans united in their diversity. We created unity by
bringing the people together and engaging them in a project that all would
feel part of, and that is what has happened.

Even though Kimberley was not a host city, through the SABC programme
Morning Live it became part of this grand occasion and celebrated.
Everybody in the world saw that the World Cup also touched the cities that
were not host cities. That is what we have done.

We wanted to draw tourists into this country and thus far we have drawn in
10 million tourists, which was our target for 2010. Our target for 2015 is
15 million tourists. We are going to reach that target against the odds. We
wanted to show that South Africa was well placed for investments, trade and
business, as well as a growing economy with great job opportunities.

We wanted to build infrastructure to generate investment. We had strict
deadlines that we had to meet, and our people who were in construction
understood that we had a project to complete. It was not because Fifa
dictated, but because we had a time frame and had promised the world that
we would be able to meet the targets.

One of the things that happened in this country, which has never happened
before in the history of the Fifa World Cup, is what happened at the Nelson
Mandela Bay Stadium. Twelve months before the World Cup that stadium was
complete, despite the fact that people from Iraq said that the roof was
going to fall into the sea, and that it was likely that it was not going to
be completed in time. They completed the stadium a year before the 2010
Fifa World Cup! It was a record, and when the inspection was done for the
last time, they said that the Nelson Mandela Bay Stadium was ready.
Unfortunately, it could not get the Africa Cup of Nations.

Hon Deputy Speaker and hon President, the world has been shown that being
an African and being world-class are synonymous. You can’t be an African
and not be world-class, because the two go together, and that is what we
are to the world today. [Applause.]

During the 2010 Fifa World Cup, we received 12 million Internet visitors
per minute. We had more than 16 000 broadcasters, journalists and
photographers.

One hundred days before the 2010 Fifa World Cup, we toured the length and
breadth of this country with 300 international journalists. South Africa
would come to a stadium and say: “Go into the stadium and see what you
wanted to know.”

The climax was in Durban when we met with the Deputy President. On the day
of that historic conference one of the African journalists asked the Deputy
President whether what had been happening to South Africa — its being under
such heavy media scrutiny — was going to happen to other countries that
were going to host World Cups subsequent to 2010.

Jérôme Valcke and Sepp Blatter responded by saying that South Africa had
set a precedent. They further said that it would not be fair to subject
South Africa to such heavy scrutiny and pressure to open its doors —
something which South Africa complied with — and not apply the same to
other countries. What could have been wrong with South Africa and right
with other countries? So, that is going to be the pattern throughout the
world. One hundred days before any Fifa World Cup journalists will be
called in to see how ready the host country is. We were ready, and nobody
had a doubt. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

The Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly adjourned the Joint Sitting at
16:59.


