---
title: 'National Assembly - 09 November 2010'
layout: debate
year: 2010
month: NOVEMBER
month_slug: Nov
section: parliamentary
category: National Assembly
permalink: /parliamentary/2010/national-assembly/parliamentary-debates-NA-2010-11-09
---

                          TUESDAY, 09 NOVEMBER 2010
                                    ____

                    PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
                                    ____

The House met at 14:03.

The Speaker took the Chair and requested members to observe a moment of
silence for prayers or meditation.

ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS – see col 000.


                                 NEW MEMBERS


                               (Announcement)

The Speaker announced that the vacancies which occurred in the National
Assembly owing to the passing away of Dr M Sefularo, the resignations of Ms
B A Hogan and Mr I Vadi had been filled by the nominations of Ms S G
Pampiri, with effect from 2 November 2010, Mr A H Gaum, with effect from 4
November 2010, and Ms S T Williams-De Bruyn, with effect from 9 November
2010, respectively.

                                    OATH

Ms Pampiri, Mr Gaum and Ms Williams-De Bruyn, accompanied by Mrs M M Maunye
and Ms N D Ngcengwane, made and subscribed the oath, and took their seats.

                              NOTICES OF MOTION

Mr M E GEORGE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House, I shall move on behalf of Cope:


   That the House debates the impropriety of Kimberley prison officials in
   allowing MEC John Block to be treated as a celebrity deserving of special
   treatment.

[Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon members, order!

Dr W G JAMES: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House, I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates the continued existence of mud schools in several
   provinces in South Africa, and solutions to rapidly replace those
   structures with buildings that ensure an environment conducive to
   learning.

[Applause.]
The SPEAKER: Does any other member wish to give notice of a motion?
Mrs P C NGWENYA-MABILA: Yes, Speaker.

The SPEAKER: Hon member, where are you saying “yes” from? Please go ahead.
[Laughter.]

Mrs P C NGWENYA-MABILA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next
sitting day of the House, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates how to change perceptions that the criminal
   justice system is ineffective in dealing with crime and corruption.


[Applause.]

Mr P D DEXTER: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House, I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the failure of government to help resolve the
   crisis at the Aurora Mines, where an environmental disaster is unfolding.




[Applause.]

Mr N J J KOORNHOF: Speaker, I give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House, I shall move on behalf of Cope:
   That the House discusses whether the remuneration of chief executive
   officers in South Africa is out of control.

Rev K R J MESHOE: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House, I shall move on behalf of the ACDP:

   That the House debates the increase in the number of rapes committed by
  schoolchildren on school grounds, and what should be done to make the
  schools safe centres of learning once again.

Mr C L GOLOLO: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates reviving the role of state-owned enterprises in
   skills development, training and building partnerships between the state,
   parastatals, the union movement and the private sector to improve skills.



Mr M S F DE FREITAS: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House, I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates how the Road Accident Fund can speed up its
   processes so that road accident victims are compensated faster than at
   present.

Mrs F F MUSHWANA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting
day of the House, I shall move on behalf of the ANC:

   That the House debates ways to increase graduate output in areas of
   skills shortages.

Mr L S NGONYAMA: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House, I shall move on behalf of Cope:

   That the House debates the prevailing insecurity along Africa’s eastern
   coast as a result of Somali piracy and the implications thereof.

Mrs A STEYN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day of
the House, I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates measures by which the land restitution backlog in
  South Africa can finally be cleared.


[Applause.]

Mr G R MORGAN: Speaker, I hereby give notice that on the next sitting day
of the House, I shall move on behalf of the DA:

   That the House debates threats to the quality of water in South Africa,
   and solutions to ensure that water is of an acceptable quality.

               SUDDEN DEATH OF JAZZ LEGEND HOTEP IDRIS GALETA

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —

     1) notes with deep sadness the sudden death of jazz legend Hotep Idris
        Galeta after an asthma attack on 3 November 2010, at the age of 69;

     2) remembers that Mr Galeta started music at the age of seven and  was
        mentored by a great musician, Abdullah Ibrahim, whom he met at high
        school, and that throughout his astonishing career, he  had  worked
        with the most acclaimed artists from South Africa  and  the  United
        States and recorded 18 albums;

     3) recognises that Mr Galeta was also an  academic  who  obtained  his
        Masters degree in Jazz Education and Performance  with  distinction
        while studying and lecturing in the United States, that he returned
        to South Africa in 1991 and lectured in the Music Department at the
        University of Fort Hare;

     4) believes that he has played his role to the fullest,  has  made  an
        impact in the music fraternity and has touched  many  music  lovers
        here in South Africa and abroad; and

     5) conveys its heartfelt condolences to his family,  friends  and  the
        music fraternity.

Agreed to.

               TWENTY-FIRST ANNIVERSARY OF FALL OF BERLIN WALL

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Mr Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —


     1) notes that today marks 21 years since the fall of the Berlin Wall
        in November 1989;

     2) further notes that the Wall was constructed in August 1961 as a
        barrier to separate West and East Berlin in order to prevent the
        emigration and defection of citizens that characterised Germany and
        the communist Eastern Bloc during the post-World War II period;

     3) recognises that the fall of the Wall marked the end of the Cold War
        and the beginning of a new wave of democratisation across Eastern
        Europe;

     4) further recognises the symbolic importance of this day, not only to
        the citizens of Berlin and Germany, but also to all those people
        who have ever had their freedoms curtailed by a government; and


     5) acknowledges the significance of the collapse of the Wall as it
        embodies the principles of unity, freedom and democracy.

Agreed to.

   PROTEAS CRICKET TEAM WINS ONE-DAY INTERNATIONAL SERIES AGAINST PAKISTAN

                             (Draft Resolution)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move without notice:

   That the House —
     1) celebrates the 57-run win of the Proteas cricket team over Pakistan
        and a 3-2 victory in the one-day  series  in  Dubai  on  Monday,  8
        November 2010;


     2)  believes  that  the  Proteas  played  well,  put  up  their   best
        performance and deserved to win;


     3) congratulates the Proteas on winning the ODI against  Pakistan  and
        for flying the South African flag high;


     4) wishes Graeme Smith and the rest of  the  team  the  best  for  the
        upcoming season and urges them to make the nation proud.

Agreed to.

      JACQUES KALLIS LAUDED FOR PERFORMANCE AND ACHIEVEMENTS IN CRICKET

Mrs J D KILIAN:  Speaker, I move without notice:


   That the House —

   (1)      notes that Jacques Kallis surpassed  11  000  runs  in  one  day
        internationals on Monday evening, 8 November 2010,  while  steering
        South Africa to a 3-2 series win against Pakistan;

   (2)      further notes that Kallis was named Man of the Match in the epic
        final game of the one-day series in Dubai and that he is the  first
        South African and the sixth player in the  history  of  this  great
        game to achieve this unique milestone;

   (3)      recognises that Kallis is widely considered to be the best  all-
        rounder of all time, having captured more than 250 wickets  and  11
        000 runs in both the five-day and one-day version of the game, thus
        becoming the only player in history to do so; and


   (4)      congratulates Kallis on achieving this milestone, wishes him all
        the best and hopes that he will continue to serve the country  with
        distinction.

Agreed to.

                            MOTION OF CONDOLENCE

                      (The late Mama Mittah Seperepere)

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move:


   That the House —

     1) notes the sad passing of a gallant freedom fighter, a pathfinder of
        note and community builder, Mama Mittah Seperepere or Goeieman,  as
        she was affectionately known, on 30 October 2010;


     2) further notes that Mama Mittah was born  on  28  December  1929  in
        Riverton and lived most of her adult life in exile;


     3) remembers her participation in sowing the seeds of the struggle for
        women’s emancipation inspired by the Programme of Action of 1949 of
        the African National Congress Youth League and that her involvement
        earned her the wrath of the  Special  Branch,  culminating  in  her
        imprisonment in 1965;


     4) further remembers that in 1989 Mama Mittah was appointed ANC  Chief
        Representative to Madagascar, La Réunion, Seychelles, Mauritius and
        the Comores;


     5) recalls that in 1990, she returned to South Africa and served as  a
        Member of the National Assembly from 1994 to 1999; and


     6) conveys its heartfelt condolences to the Seperepere family, friends
        and comrades in the ANC and its alliance partners.

Agreed to.

The SPEAKER: The condolences of the House will be conveyed accordingly.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I’m sorry to raise this point, sir. We have
certainly acknowledged the resolution and I realise that we probably should
have made an issue of this beforehand if we had any problems with it, but
I’m not at all sure, sir, why a notice of this particular type appears on
the Order Paper and why it wasn’t simply a motion without notice read by
the ANC.

There might be some other details that I’m not aware of, but at the same
time, I believe that this might lead to a kind of precedent being followed
in Parliament in the future that could have unfortunate consequences.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, with due respect, we think
that that objection should have come much earlier. Thank you very much.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I wish to emphasise, sir, that I’m not objecting
to the motion, but I’m just saying to the ANC Whippery that I would
sincerely hope that we are more cautious in the future about the kind of
motions that we put on the Order Paper.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: We ...

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I really don’t want to open a debate on this
matter.

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: With your permission, Speaker, we
take the point. Thank you.

               QUESTION NOT TO TAKE PRECEDENCE ON 10 NOVEMBER

The CHIEF WHIP OF THE MAJORITY PARTY: Speaker, I move:

   That, notwithstanding the provisions of Rules 29(8) and 113(1), Questions
   shall not take precedence tomorrow, 10 November 2010.

Agreed to.

               PROBLEMS RELATING TO CENTRAL FIREARMS REGISTRY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mrs L S CHIKUNGA (ANC): Speaker, the Firearms Control Act, No 60 of 2000,
came into effect in 2004. Section 124(17) of the Act establishes the
Central Firearms Registry that must contain all information related to
firearms, such as a firearms database, dealer database, manufacturers’
database, licences, authorisations and permits, renewals and cancellations.

There have been complaints and allegations related to the malfunctioning of
the SAPS Central Firearms Registry. The Minister’s task team, led by the
Civilian Secretary of Police which probed these allegations, confirmed the
malfunctioning, which is evidenced by a backlog in the processing of
firearms licences, corruption and irregular issuing of these licences and
other things.

We welcome the Minister’s appropriate intervention, which includes the
establishment of an intervention team to address the current backlog. We
agree with the Minister that the current management of the Central Firearms
Registry needs to be changed as a matter of urgency. We further call upon
the Minister to ensure that where corruption has occurred, sanctions should
be applied.

In the interests of all citizens, we further ask the public and interested
parties to co-operate and exercise patience as these challenges are being
addressed. We believe that an incorruptible Central Firearms Registry is an
important component in South Africa’s fight against crime. I thank you.
[Applause.]

                STATE OF SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr D J MAYNIER (DA): Speaker, the hon Minister of Defence and Military
Veterans, Lindiwe Sisulu, seemed to blow a political gasket last week.
[Interjections.] This followed revelations about the state of the Defence
Force read out in this Parliament.

The Minister switched to rapid fire and released two press statements
trying to persuade us that all is well in the Defence Force. However, the
interim report of the National Defence Force Service Commission paints a
different picture.

On combat readiness, the interim report found that it is possible that the
level of combat readiness in the SANDF is not quite as good as it should
be. On service conditions, the interim report found that salaries of junior
members are totally inadequate and force them to live in informal
settlements far from their place of work; and that the effects of transport
costs significantly dilute their income, leading to social, psychological
and family crises.

The salary situation is so poor that some members state that they would
rather have their right to vote revoked in lieu of nonpayment of personal
income tax. The housing allowance at R500 per month is regarded as
ridiculous because it cannot cover bond repayments and members are not able
to get bonds through the commercial banks, given their poor salary levels.

There have been improvements in the SANDF and some of these improvements
are a credit to the Minister, but we have a long way to go. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]
             RETRENCHMENTS AT STANDARD BANK AND NEDBANK IMMINENT

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr L S NGONYAMA (Cope): Speaker, our country is bleeding. Millions of
people have not been able to find jobs for some time. On top of that,
nearly a million people lost their jobs last year.

As this year is coming to an end, thousands more face the terrible prospect
of losing their jobs if Standard Bank and Nedbank proceed with their
intention of retrenching staff.

It is common cause that corruption within government is severely distorting
the economy. The economy is therefore in a crisis. Our country, more than
ever, needs leadership that is moral, ethical and visionary. We say this
because government has dedicated funds in reserve to help companies in
distress to both retain and retrain their staff; yet, the silence of the
government with regard to the imminent retrenchment of staff at Standard
Bank and Nedbank is deafening. All of South Africa must be wondering why
the government has not begun negotiations with these banks in the interests
of saving jobs, protecting the livelihoods of many families and keeping our
economy afloat.

Of course, in a democracy such as ours, government fosters patronage in an
unapologetic and self-serving manner, rather than focusing on the needs and
aspirations of the people. We demand that government enters into immediate
negotiations with the above-mentioned banks. I thank you, Speaker.
[Applause.]

  ANC WELCOMES ESTABLISHMENT OF SOUTH AFRICAN RISK AND VULNERABILITY ATLAS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms B T NGCOBO (ANC): Speaker, the ANC welcomes the launch of the South
African Risk and Vulnerability Atlas by the Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research, CSIR, and the Department of Science and Technology.

The primary objective of the atlas initiative is to provide decision-makers
in South Africa with information to timeously inform planning decisions
that will minimise sensitivity to global changes and improve adaptive
capacity.

The application will be endowed with features similar to Google Earth. It
will further enable users to zoom in on specific locations in South Africa
and get information about the projected effects of climate change.

South Africa is a relatively water-scarce country that experiences
periodical droughts and floods. It is therefore vulnerable to climate
change. The ANC welcomes the fact that Risk and Vulnerability Atlas Centres
will be established at the historically disadvantaged rural universities,
namely the Fort Hare, Limpopo, Zululand, Walter Sisulu and Venda campuses,
which will provide advice to rural municipalities.

The initiative will strengthen the research capacity of these universities
and at the same time enhance the planning capacity of rural municipalities
that will be the most affected by climate change. I thank you. [Applause.]

    ILLEGAL OCCUPATION OF STATE-OWNED HOUSES BY FRIENDS AND RELATIVES OF
                            GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr B W DHLAMINI (IFP): Speaker, it was sad to read that it was reported in
The Star newspaper that more than 708 state-owned houses in Gauteng are
occupied by friends and relatives of government officials.

This information was released in terms of the report submitted by the
department of infrastructure and development to the legislature’s oversight
committee in Gauteng last night. According to the report, some of the
occupants claim to have bribed senior government officials in order to gain
access to houses.
Out of 826 state-owned and occupied houses, there were only 46 signed lease
agreements, with most of the tenants who were friends or relatives
currently defaulting on the payment of taxes, rent and rates.

The report described the houses as being in a mess and in a state of
disrepair. It will cost the state an estimated R5 billion to restore them,
for which the department has only budgeted R520 million for this year.

In conclusion, the IFP calls for an urgent investigation into the above
irregularities concerning illegal tenants of the state, where these tenants
are friends and relatives of government officials. I thank you. [Applause.]


   SHOCKING REPORT OF SCHOOLGIRL GANG-RAPED BY THREE BOYS AT JOHANNESBURG
                                   SCHOOL

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr N M KGANYAGO (UDM): Speaker, the UDM is horrified by the reports that a
15-year-old girl was drugged and gang-raped by three schoolboys at a
Johannesburg school during school hours, whilst the ordeal was witnessed
and filmed by other schoolchildren.

We are further outraged that this injustice was exacerbated by the reported
negligence and further careless initial response of school authorities and
the police.

We cannot pretend that this is a terrible, isolated case because the truth
is that it is simply one of the countless cases of sexual abuse that happen
every day in the country.

For instance, in the Gauteng education department alone there are
reportedly 36 outstanding cases of sexual assault and of the 15 cases
processed this year, 13 resulted in a teacher being found guilty. There is
a deep, underlying rot in our society when rape and sexual assault are so
common and pervasive. Today South Africa is making international headlines
due to the injustice experienced by the girl from Johannesburg. Sadly, she
is just one of thousands who are victimised every month.

As a society we should hang our heads in shame. We call on government to
investigate and punish those school authorities and members of the police
who initially neglected this case. We trust that the three perpetrators
will have their day in court as soon as possible. I thank you. [Applause.]

              VICTIM SUPPORT STRATEGY IMPLEMENTED IN NORTH WEST

                            (Member’s Statement)
Mr G LEKGETHO (ANC): Speaker, the ANC reaffirms that the focus should be
placed on mobilising society to make life difficult for criminals in our
midst. This includes improving gender and family relations and intolerance
of abuse within communities, as well as the transformation of institutions
dealing with crime.

Hence the ANC welcomes the North West province’s steps to make its criminal
justice system more victim-friendly. This is after the MEC for health and
social development, Rebecca Kasienyane, unveiled the Victim Empowerment
Integrated Plan on Tuesday, 2 November 2010.

The aim of the plan is to provide support, protection and empowerment to
victims of crime and violence through a strategic partnership between
government and civil society, with a special focus on vulnerable groups.

Finally, this initiative is in line with the ANC’s serious commitment to
combat violence and crime against women and children by increasing the
capacity of the criminal justice system to deal with such violence. Thank
you.

                   MARITIME PIRACY AFFECTING GLOBAL TRADE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr K S MUBU (DA): Speaker, inflicting a financial loss of over
US$16 billion on the international shipping industry, the occurrence of
maritime piracy in and around the east coast of Africa has significantly
affected the long-term stability of global maritime trade.

Since the collapse of the Somali state in the early 1990s, international
watch groups have expressed their concern about the rise of piracy off the
coast of Somalia and the waterways of the Gulf of Aden.

As more than 85% of world trade relies on maritime transport, the lack of a
feasible solution to this problem is troublesome, to say the least. The
problem of piracy has never truly been a concern for the South African
government, as attacks have never taken place within our territory’s
waters.

However, recent attacks indicate that this phenomenon is not only limited
to the corner of Africa, as attacks have even been documented as far south
as Mauritius and the Seychelles.

The latest attacks by pirates appear to have affected South African
citizens. It is of the utmost importance that the government breaks its
silence on this issue and addresses the matter with the seriousness that it
deserves.

Considering our country’s commitment to ensuring peace and security on the
African continent and the need to ensure our own national security and the
maintenance of international trade, the DA calls on the Departments of
International Relations and Co-operation, and Defence and Military Veterans
to address the issue of piracy on the coast of Africa, especially
considering that piracy could become a more direct threat to South Africa
if left unchecked elsewhere. Thank you.

           SHOVA KALULA BICYCLES DONATED TO CHILDREN IN MPUMALANGA

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms P BHENGU (ANC): Speaker, Shova Kalula [Pedal Easy] is the ANC government-
sponsored initiative that provides bicycles to communities to ensure
improved levels of mobility and accessibility. This is done by integrating
rural, peri-urban and urban areas into an effective transport system. As a
result, up to 2 000 children in townships around Siyabuswa and
Kwaggafontein in Mpumalanga will no longer have to walk long distances to
school.

This is after the MEC for public works, roads and transport, Clifford
Mkasi, handed over 1 643 bicycles that will be distributed to schools in
the Dr J S Moroka and Thembisile Hani Local Municipalities, north of
Emalahleni/Witbank in the first week of November. This is part of the
national Shova Kalula campaign, to cater for learners who have to walk up
to 6 km to get to school.

The ANC welcomes this initiative to promote cycling as a low-cost mobility
solution for low-income households, targeting many scholars, rural women
and farmworkers. The ANC hopes that other provinces can revive cycling and
emulate this initiative in order to curb children having to walk long
distances to school, especially in rural communities. Thank you.

                    NONDELIVERY OF LAPTOPS FOR EDUCATORS

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr A M MPONTSHANE (IFP): Speaker, last week the IFP raised the question of
laptops that were promised to educators. The Deputy Minister’s reply was
that the task of supplying these computers was given to the SA Council for
Educators, SACE.

The IFP has since done some research on this matter by, inter alia,
contacting the people concerned. Nothing has been done. In other words, no
computers are being delivered.

The IFP, therefore, calls on the Ministry to make a comprehensive report on
this matter and not to shift its responsibility as it is not the SACE that
promised laptops, but the Ministry. It is the Ministry that is directly and
immediately accountable to this House. I thank you. [Applause.]

                     NEED TO ADDRESS CRISES IN EDUCATION

                            (Member’s Statement)

Ms N Y VUKUZA-LINDA (Cope): Speaker, education seems to be lurching from
one crisis to the other. As if the crises of curricular and professional
issues were not enough, we also have to contend with the disgraceful
conduct of many of our educators. There are those who abuse young females,
are routinely absent, are late for duty and who come to school intoxicated
or under the influence of drugs. They are terribly unworthy role models for
our children.

Through the bad example of many of these educators, the rot spreads to the
children in our schools. Schoolchildren gang-raping a fellow student is
unacceptable in any decent society. Schoolchildren abusing drugs and
narcotics undermines the future progress of this country. Educators using
pornography subverts the values we hold dear as a people.

Cope demands that parents receive a categorical assurance from this
government that the crises in education will be resolved to the
satisfaction of all those concerned. This government cannot afford to let
the country down. Further damage to our children must be stopped. Thank
you. [Applause.]

            CIVIL SOCIETY PROGRAMME TO IMPROVE ACCESS TO JUSTICE

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr Z C NTULI (ANC): Speaker, the ANC-led government has always strived to
improve access to justice institutions for vulnerable and marginalised
groups and to enhance participatory democracy. Therefore, we welcome the
launch of the strengthening of civil society programme. This programme is
designed to assist South Africa’s vulnerable citizens, with the financial
support of the European Union.

Government has already increased social spending to uplift the poor, and
the newly launched programme will assist with reaching many more South
Africans. The targeted communities and beneficiaries include women and
children, rural and urban poor communities, farmworkers, child-headed
households and refugees and asylumseekers.

The ANC commends the Department of Justice and Constitutional Development
for its commitment to improving access to justice for all our people.

Ngiyabonga Somlomo. [Thank you, Speaker.] [Applause.]
        RACIST COMMENTS MADE BY SOUTH AFRICAN SINGER SUNETTE BRIDGES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Dr A LOTRIET (DA): Speaker, the DA is shocked by the appalling comments
attributed to South African singer, Sunette Bridges. Ms Bridges has been
quoted in Beeld as making horrible, disparaging comments about black South
Africans.

This is more reminiscent of a bygone era of racial domination under
apartheid than the kind of conversation one expects to hear in a
multiracial democracy in 2010. Sunette Bridges needs to attend a
sensitivity workshop and to apologise to all South Africans. It is
appalling that she is now attempting to defend her comments.

The statement shows that there are still South Africans out there who are
detached from the values of modern South African society and who are
careless and uncaring in their treatment of their fellow citizens.

The sorts of comments made by Ms Bridges are completely out of line and
should be rejected by every South African who is committed to building a
compassionate, caring society. [Applause.]

       ZEVENFONTEIN INFORMAL SETTLEMENT RESIDENTS MOVED TO COSMO CITY

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mr G D SCHNEEMANN (ANC): Speaker, the Zevenfontein informal settlement has
been in existence since the late 1980s. Zevenfontein was not formalised, as
the land was privately owned. Land had been earmarked for that community,
and they were to be relocated to an area now known as Cosmo City.

There were numerous delays in the establishment of Cosmo City due to court
action from surrounding landowners who wanted to prevent the development of
that area. Finally, in 2004, the go-ahead was given for the establishment
of Cosmo City.

The first residents from Zevenfontein moved into their new homes in late
2005. Since then, the entire community who qualified for housing assistance
from government has been relocated into formal housing in Cosmo City.

The informal settlement of Zevenfontein, which was the only home many young
people had known, is no longer in existence. The last family was recently
moved to Cosmo City.

In Zevenfontein, the community had access to limited basic services, and in
Cosmo City they now live in a well-established suburb. This clearly
demonstrates that it is possible to eradicate informal settlements. The ANC-
led government must be congratulated on this achievement.

We would also call on those involved in the eradication of informal
settlements to learn from the experiences of both Zevenfontein and Cosmo
City. The ANC lives and the ANC leads. I thank you. [Applause.]

The SPEAKER: The APC did not make use of its opportunity to make a
statement. This will now go over to the ANC. Does the ANC wish to make a
statement?

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker ... [Interjections.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, I have asked the question. Does the ANC wish to
make a statement? If not, then it moves on to the DA.

Mr M J ELLIS: Mr Speaker, I wanted to say that the hon Trevor Manuel ...
Oh, it doesn’t matter, sir! [Laughter.]

The SPEAKER: Hon member, please don’t waste our time. Apart from Mr Ellis,
does the DA wish to make a serious statement? [Laughter.]

   RISING PRODUCTION COSTS OF WHEAT AND INADEQUATE IMPORT TARIFF INCREASES

                            (Member’s Statement)

Mnr N D DU TOIT (DA): Speaker, omtrent ’n jaar gelede is die Minister van
Handel en Nywerheid deur die tersaaklike organisasies in landbou genader om
’n besluit te neem oor die invoertariewe op koring. Die Minister van
Landbou, Bosbou en Visserye het nie juis die saak aangeblaas nie, en dit
het ses maande geduur voordat ’n besluit geneem is.

Die besluit was geneem ten tyde van die departementele begroting, nadat die
DA die agb Minister van Landbou, Bosbou en Visserye daaraan herinner het
dat planttyd reeds begin het, en oor ’n maand sou klaar wees. Die
uiteindelike tariefverhoging was te min en te laat, en die kommersiële
produsente het nog steeds ’n prys gekry wat laer as produksiekoste was.

Dit is nou weer daardie tyd van die jaar, en almal is angstig om te sien of
die agb Minister gaan onthou dat daar produsente is wat die nasie moet
voed. Kom ons kyk hierdie keer hoe lank dit gaan neem om ’n tarief vas te
stel en of dit genoeg gaan wees om die koringproduksie winsgewend te maak.

Vir diegene wat dink dat koring altyd ingevoer kan word om tekorte aan te
vul, let op die volgende: ingevoerde koring van ’n swak gehalte veroorsaak
baie probleme in die meulenaars- en bakkerybedryf, want dit moet met Suid-
Afrikaanse koring van ’n beter graad vermeng word en die meel wil nie
behoorlik rys nie. Hoe meer boere ophou koring plant, hoe erger gaan die
probleem word.

Daar is toenemende vrees onder ontwikkelende lande dat daar aan die einde
van die volgende dekade wêreldwyd ’n tekort aan voedsel gaan wees. Daar is
reeds ’n miljard honger mense op die aarde, en oor 10 jaar moet daar nog ’n
miljard gevoed word. Dit moet geskied teen toenemende produksiekostes
wêreldwyd. Baie mense gaan dus nie kos kan bekostig nie. As die lede van
hierdie Huis dink lande kan orals ... Dankie, Speaker. [Tyd verstreke.]
(Translation of Afrikaans member’s statement follows.)

[Mr N D DU TOIT (DA): Speaker, approximately one year ago the Minister of
Trade and Industry was approached by the relevant agricultural
organisations to make a decision regarding wheat import tariffs. The
Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries did not show much
enthusiasm, and it took six months for a decision to be made.

The decision was made during the departmental budget, after the DA reminded
the hon Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries that the planting
season had already begun, and would finish within a month. The eventual
tariff increase was too little and too late, and the commercial producers
still had to sell at a price lower than their production costs.

It is that time of year once again, and everyone is anxiously waiting to
see whether the hon Minister will remember that there are producers who
have to feed the nation. Let us see how long it will take to determine a
tariff this time and whether it will be enough to make wheat production
profitable.

Those who think that wheat can always be imported to make up for shortages,
should note the following: Imported wheat of a poor quality causes many
problems in the milling and baking industries, because it has to be mixed
with the higher-grade South African wheat and the flour does not rise
properly. The more farmers stop planting wheat, the worse the problem will
become.

There is an increasing fear amongst developing countries that at the end of
the next decade there will be a shortage of food globally. There are a
billion hungry people on earth already, and within 10 years another billion
will have to be fed. This has to take place at increasing production costs
worldwide. Many people will therefore not be able to afford food. If the
members of this House think that countries can ... Thank you, Speaker.
[Time expired.]]

   RISING PRODUCTION COSTS OF WHEAT AND INADEQUATE IMPORT TARIFF INCREASES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY: Speaker, I want to respond to the last
statement that was made by the DA. I am interested, in the first instance,
in the fact that the DA wants high tariffs. That is news to me.

In this particular case, I think that the hon member needs to know that
this process was fast-tracked. We have a process of setting tariffs in this
country, and it is not a question of coming to talk to the Minister and
lobbying the Minister; there is a process of investigation that takes
place.

There was no inordinate delay, and that tariff was in place. Unfortunately,
I think the problems in the sector are bigger and deeper than simply that.
If one looks at the Industrial Policy Action Plan, one will see that we are
actually working on some of those matters.

Let me also say that I think that the entire value chain has some very
significant problems, because it is very, very important that we make sure
that the benefits go on to the ordinary consumer. The statement that was
made by the Minister of Economic Development the other day, about the price-
fixing that had been going on among bread producers, shows that there are a
lot of very significant problems that need to be solved.

I think that the work has been done on our side and that it is mostly to
the satisfaction, broadly speaking, of the grain producers. Thank you.

           SHOVA KALULA BICYCLES DONATED TO CHILDREN IN MPUMALANGA
        RACIST COMMENTS MADE BY SOUTH AFRICAN SINGER SUNETTE BRIDGES

                            (Minister’s Response)

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: Hon Speaker, I would like to thank the
hon Bhengu for informing this House about the 1 643 bicycles that have been
distributed to poor schoolchildren in Mpumalanga province, particularly
those who have to walk more than 6 km in order to get to school. I think
this is a very important initiative; it’s not just in Mpumalanga province,
but is part of a countrywide initiative.

What is helping this initiative is also the fact that we are now able to
locate it more effectively within the rural development programme led by
Minister Gugile Nkwinti. The need to see mobility in rural areas is not
just a stand-alone thing, but part and parcel of developing our region.

The DA has reminded us today that it is 20 years since the Berlin Wall came
down. But I think before we celebrate too quickly about that matter we need
to remind ourselves that there are many walls that still remain in the
world and in our country; and many types of spatial discrimination. The
most fortified frontier in the world is between two countries supposedly at
peace — Mexico and the United States. More people have died on that border
than tragically died on the Berlin Wall. I think that that is a sobering
thing that we should remember.

My point is that there are all kinds of spatial discriminations alive and
well, including within our own country. Gated communities are but one
example of this spatial discrimination, and they are found in many
communities represented by the DA, no doubt.

There are spatial discriminations of all kinds, and the Shova Kalula
programme is one small contribution to beginning to democratise mobility,
space and access in our country.

Another DA member correctly, I think, stood up, and it was good that the DA
sided with us and made the point that the statements by the singer Sunette
Bridges are outrageous. The DA came up with the useful suggestion that she
should be sent to sensitivity classes. I think that would be a good
contribution to our country.

While she goes, perhaps so that we can get two for the price of one, there
are a couple of members in their caucus, the DA caucus, who might also like
to go to sensitivity training when it comes to understanding a nonracial
South Africa. [Applause.]
                   MARITIME PIRACY AFFECTING GLOBAL TRADE

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF STATE SECURITY: Deputy Speaker, I would just like to
respond to the challenge posed by piracy on the east coast of Africa.
Firstly, this is a global challenge, although it affects our region. It
happens in other regions too, particularly in Asia and the Far East. It
therefore does need a collective response from all nations.

Secondly, while it is true that the challenge on the east coast of Africa
arises particularly out of the weak state of government in Somalia, it is
ironic that the DA, which always advocates for weak states, is now the
first to complain here. It is important that we find a solution because it
is the root cause. [Interjections.]

We have a failed state in Somalia because others have been advocating that
we should create these weak governments, that we create stability inside
Somalia first so that there is political stability in order to deal ...
[Interjections.] You can never deal with this challenge on the high seas
until you deal ... [Interjections.] ... because these are soldiers and navy
people who were in the army and we now have the effect of that weak state.

It can never be true that the South African government has not been paying
attention to this problem. Since the beginning of last year we have been
working within the Southern African Development Community, SADC, because
many SADC states have been affected by this phenomenon. We have been
working within the ambit of the African Union, AU, to try and have a
collective response to this cancer which is happening on the east coast of
Africa. [Interjections.]

The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order please, members!

The MINISTER OF STATE SECURITY: As the South African government, we will
continue to find the solutions in Somalia, to find a stable government.
[Interjections.] We will continue to find collective solutions to fight
piracy on our east coast. Thank you. [Applause.]

                STATE OF SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE
             RETRENCHMENTS AT STANDARD BANK AND NEDBANK IMMINENT
  ANC WELCOMES ESTABLISHMENT OF SOUTH AFRICAN RISK AND VULNERABILITY ATLAS

                            (Minister’s Response)

The MINISTER OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: Madam Deputy Speaker, I just want
to confirm, in response to the hon Maynier, that the hon Minister of
Defence and Military Veterans has taken extensive steps to address the
challenges that she encountered when she became Minister in this
department.

We have to acknowledge the steps she has taken to improve the conditions of
service, the status of the Defence Force and the provisions that the
Defence Force requires in order to carry out its work.

Secondly, I understand that, in terms of sensitivity training, apparently
the hon Ellis has excellent skills in this regard and, perhaps, should
offer Ms Bridges some assistance! [Interjections.]

With respect to the concern about job losses expressed by the hon Ngonyama,
clearly this is a concern that all of us share and government, through its
new growth strategy, is working with the relevant sectors to establish what
steps can be taken to improve the employment situation in our country.

However, we don’t see ourselves assuming the role of running any of the
banks in our country; and therefore I was asked by the hon Nzimande to
invite the hon Ngonyama — not in November, but in October next year — to
join the Red October Campaign to assist and support the Communist Party in
its campaign on banks. [Laughter.]

I also would like to welcome the statement by the hon Ngcobo recognising
and referring to the SA Risk and Vulnerability Atlas, which has been
developed by the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, CSIR, with
support from our department, to improve geographic earth observation in the
world.

We are very pleased that the atlas has been welcomed by many colleagues and
researchers. Recently colleagues at the geographic Earth Observation Summit
indicated an interest in using the model of the SA Risk and Vulnerability
Atlas to develop their own observation technology along the lines of the
technology that has been developed in our country. So we are very pleased
that we have developed a mechanism that assists us to monitor climate
change and its impact, as well as to alert communities well in time in
order to address the management of disasters that often confront
communities before they have a full warning to take appropriate action.
Thank you very much. [Applause.]

       ACCESS TO TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS FOR POOR, DESERVING UNDER- AND
                                POSTGRADUATES

                          (Subject for Discussion)

Mrs M T KUBAYI: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon Members of Parliament, members of
the public in the gallery, I would like to acknowledge the students’
representative council, SRC, members from the University of the Western
Cape, UWC; University of Cape Town, UCT; Cape Peninsula University of
Technology, CPUT; and Stellenbosch institutions who earlier on interacted
with the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, to share their
experiences and what they think this debate should inform. As part of my
debate, I would also reflect on what they have highlighted for us.

Access to tertiary institutions for the majority of the youth and the
community at large is a critical matter, which all off us need to be
worried about in terms of sustaining our economic growth.

The debate, Madam Deputy Speaker, takes place at a time when the year is
coming to an end – a period when many institutions are at the point of
preparing for enrolment for the year 2011.

However, most of the time, when you look at this time now and the following
year, you will find that many students, instead of focusing on their
studies, are worrying about the fee increments that are imposed on them.
The fee increments are normally at a level which the majority of our
people, learners and students at institutions can’t afford. Instead of
these students focusing on their studies, they become worried about what
the future holds and whether it will be sustained because the fee
increments are not at the levels that they can afford.

Madam Deputy Speaker, in Stellenbosch we have a situation, which the
students have shared with us, where the proposed fee increase was 15%.
Students had to fight to get it to 11%, which is still very high. When you
look at the interest rates currently sitting at 6%, you could understand it
if they are to put on an additional 2%. However, you can’t justify having
11% as an increase. This is one of the means by which discrimination
continues against our students.

Furthermore, we looked at the issues of institutional differentiation and
mergers. One of the key goals of transforming the institutional landscape
includes the creation of a more diverse and differentiated higher education
landscape.

The aim was the diversification of institutional profiles and their
capacity to address diverse needs and societal demands, which usually are
associated with the expansion and massification of higher education, and
the increasingly diverse profiles, competences and qualifications of
students. With the expectation that they should fulfil a wide range of
demands linked to the emergence of knowledge societies, new roles and tasks
that go well beyond the traditional functions of teaching and research have
developed.

It is important to note that in addition to widening access in order to
produce a greater pool of qualified workers for the knowledge economy,
business innovation, knowledge transfer and continuing professional
development have become increasingly important dimensions of higher
education activities.

Through the mergers, three institutional types were developed and were
created to bring about differentiation amongst institutions of higher
learning. It is important that we note that this included democracy, equity
with redress, public accountability, academic freedom and quality. This was
reflected in the White Paper.

Different institutional types provide choices to students; graduates from
different programmes for a complex labour market; efficiency through
specialisation; and different staffing arrangements.

According to the Higher Education South Africa, HESA, report entitled
Pathways to a Diverse and Effective South African Higher Education System,
Strategic Framework 2010-20, major achievements have been seen. African
students now make up 63% of the public higher education student numbers,
which rose from 58% in 2008. We also look at African female students, who
now make up 56% of the total student number, which increased from 52% in
2000.

We further note the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation, Unesco, report that defines the challenges we are faced with.
Currently we have an enrolment that has increased by 1% from 15% in 2001;
in 2010 we are sitting at 16%. This shows that we still have a lot of
challenges.

The quite worrying factor is the high dropout rate of students in higher
education institutions, particularly during the first year of their
studies. This is a well-known factor and we have been interacting with this
through the presentations that we have received even at the committee
level. However, the other challenge that the institutions are faced with is
the low graduation rates, and this together with the high dropout rates
clearly shows that something is seriously amiss in our higher education
system.

The poor students coming from different disadvantaged communities continue
to suffer because the institutions by nature have been defined and designed
to look at minority people and also to look at those who are coming from
urban areas. Often you would find students from rural areas who are poor
and can’t adjust to the institution and therefore end up dropping out.

There are many issues, Madam Speaker, which we would also like to cover in
terms of the institutions of higher learning having a responsibility to
ensure that they are accessible to all South Africans. The key issue is
that there is a need to really look in detail at the functions of these
institutions and to be able to respond to the demand and the need. Student
enrolment needs to respond to the country’s demographics and the immediate
needs of communities.

At times, you will find that institutions that exist within the rural
communities do not respond to the challenges and needs of that particular
community. You would find that the institutions that exist in the rural
communities do not even have, for example, agricultural studies, which
would contribute to the development of the economy of that environment.

Continually, an institution creates means tests as a form of entry to
courses, which often become a method of continuing to exclude more
students. You would find many young black students piling up in social
studies and there are fewer of them in the scarce skills area. An example,
Madam Deputy Speaker, is reflected in the Cape Peninsula University of
Technology, CPUT, and has been shared with us by the students. They inform
us that currently there has been a capping method in place in the
commercial subjects.

Therefore, we request the assistance of the Minister to look at these
matters. We call on the department to look at the best ways that can be
used to continue to assist in reducing the discrimination against poor,
deserving students. If this is not monitored, it can be quite a problem.

Madam Deputy Speaker, the need for comprehensive student support is
critical at tertiary institutions. Firstly, these institutions by their
nature have been designed to respond to smaller populations. It is further
important for institutions to provide courses that are relevant to the
communities and the environment they exist in.

Finally, it is important to look at the managerial programmes that are
offered by business schools existing within these tertiary institutions.
Many courses that are offered by these business schools are not affordable;
their fees are so high that many of our people can’t afford them.

In conclusion, I just want to reflect on some of the issues that were
raised by the students. They raised the issue of academic freedom,
transformation and the mergers. Regarding the mergers, we have received
complaints that they are not effective, therefore students continue to
suffer. However, on the issue of academic freedom, students raised the
point that they continue to support academic freedom as long as they are
not excluded through the process.

Again, students raised the issue of key private-public partnerships that
need to be introduced as a form of comprehensive funding for students,
because at times you would find that their postgraduate level is not
funded. When they are interested in continuing to the postgraduate level
they do not get the support they need to be able to meet the challenges.

Among these issues are the high, upfront payments requested by
institutions. This is a major challenge that, most of the time, causes the
high dropout rate of students in higher education institutions. As a
result, they have requested us to say when we talk about access, let’s not
talk about them getting into the schools or the tertiary institution, but
we must look at them being sustained in those institutions. We must look at
them being able to graduate and move on to a higher postgraduate level.
Thank you. [Applause.]

Dr W G JAMES: Hon Deputy Speaker, in July of every year, young South
African matriculants start to prepare their applications to attend
university. It is an absolutely vital first step in realising their hope
for a future as independent young adults.

Parental pride, of course, is accompanied by anxiety about whether they can
afford a university-level education, especially one that is worthwhile.

The statistics for 2009 indicate that 164 528 students entered university
for the first time. We estimate that some 65% of those entering class for
the first time are drawn directly from matric. Three times as many students
apply for admission as those who enter for the first time. Admission
requirements are modified in many cases by giving preferential access to
students from historically disadvantaged backgrounds.

Many students do not attend the university of their choice. We do not know,
on a national level, how many students get to attend their first, second or
third choice of university. Anecdotally, the estimate is a one-in-twenty
chance for the average student with average academic performance to enter
the university of their first choice.

Attending a university, especially for those who are located far away from
home, can be a frightening prospect. If you are the first person from your
family to attend university, which is the case for many if not most poor
students, the unfamiliarity of that experience on a wide variety of fronts
can be terrifying. What then are the barriers to entering a South African
university?

To start with, university officials would, of course, say that the greatest
barrier is academic. Reviewing the figures since 1994, we reached a high
point of a 73% matric pass rate in 2003, followed by a prolonged downswing
to reach 61% in 2009. Of those who passed, 20% of students had university
exemption. Of those who wrote the first key subject of mathematics needed
for any science or economics degree, 18% passed with 50% or more and 29%
passed with 40% or more.

If one takes 50% to be a real pass in mathematics, then 82% of our students
who wrote mathematics actually failed and 18% passed. This is a decline in
performance of catastrophic proportions.

The second barrier to entry is cultural. If you are academically capable
and your first language is English, the world is your oyster in South
Africa. There is far less of a choice, but you still have a choice between
some credible institutions of higher learning if your first language is
Afrikaans. You do not have many good choices to make if your first language
is isiZulu or isiXhosa.

Language and the cultural apparatus that comes with it are vital resources
on which to build academic success. They give emotional security to those
entering universities for the first time. Families who have sent their
children to university for generations do not know how lucky they are.

The third barrier to entry is class. All universities charge fees as the
government subsidy is not enough to cover the costs of a quality education.
The facility that enables poor students to afford university education is
the National Student Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS. Aid is provided to 17% of
students.

In 2008 a mere 19% of NSFAS-supported students graduated, whereas a
phenomenal 48% dropped out of the system. Poor students, who are mostly
black, are therefore granted access, but they fail or drop out and then
sink back into poverty.

There are other barriers that matter, such as geography, gender and
disability. While universities should do what they can to ameliorate
barriers to entry, the most fundamental one is really out of their hands,
which is the quality of our matric results and the expansion of the college
system.
At present there are about 125 000 full-time equivalent students studying
at the further education and training, FET, colleges. This number is
subject to confirmation. The enrolment should grow to over a million by
2018. The pass rate for FET colleges is estimated to be a dismal 30%.

At university it takes, on average, five years to complete a three-year
degree. The dropout rate is alarming. There are too many underprepared
students in the system. It distracts universities and diverts resources
from their core functions. In summary, we need to solve some major problems
and unless we do, our human resources development strategy will implode.

The question is: What has the Minister of Higher Education and Training,
Blade Nzimande, done to solve the problems? Not much, it seems. He has held
many summits and made lots of speeches. The only hard decision he has taken
is to place some sector education and training authorities, Setas, under
administration. He has also announced what is called the new Seta
landscape; an act undertaken with the courage of a mouse in the face of the
fury of an elephant.

The creation of a new Ministry, his brainchild, will cost the taxpayer R150
million. He has lost a director-general, Prof Mary Metcalfe — because, I
believe, he wanted to fly half of the SACP to Cuba — and his media
spokesperson because he is a public relations nightmare. He was recently
spotted at the Vineyard Hotel and, if he was staying there, it seems as if
the embarrassment of staying at the uberbourgeois hotel, the Mount Nelson,
is not enough to deter him.

The question is: What has to be done? Many more opportunities for the main
Nguni first-language speakers should be created using a multicultural
approach to development at universities at a regional level. Universities
should be financed to replace the three-year-long degree with a four-year-
long one.

In consultation with the provinces, dysfunctional FET college councils and
principals should be performance-managed out of the system and a quality
rebuilding process should begin.

The National Skills Fund should be used as a financial vehicle for the FET
curriculum expansion involving the private sector and, when it comes to
schools, the provincial education superintendent-generals should assert
their duties and obligations to govern and administer, keep the teachers’
unions at bay and be held to account for mismanagement. Government must
abandon the national democratic revolution as the guiding principle in
appointments.

In conclusion, last week, the Eastern Cape provincial government rehired Mr
Mannya as superintendent-general of education. He was rehired even though
he left the same post in 2001 after being threatened with criminal charges
by the MEC for education, who claimed he had failed to perform his duties.

Last year he was suspended and dismissed as head of the KwaZulu-Natal
department of agriculture after a disciplinary hearing found him guilty on
16 charges of misconduct. So here he is to rescue a department that
received a disclaimer from the Auditor-General - no accountability!
Government recycles crooks to look after our children’s education. Thank
you. [Applause.]

Ms N Y VUKUZA-LINDA: Madam Deputy Speaker, hon members, learners in the
gallery, we are today tackling the issue of access to tertiary education
for poor and deserving students. I much prefer referring to such learners
as learners without means rather than poor students, as this labelling
perspective is drawn from a deficit model where poor is equated to
inability, rural, underpreparedness and sometimes mental underdevelopment.

History should tell us that this couldn’t be further from the truth as
South Africa on her own boasts leaders who come from such poor backgrounds.
The issue of “poor” when addressed developmentally means opening and giving
opportunities to those learners without means, who have the potential and
to which such opportunities did not or do not come naturally.

For Cope, access to a tertiary institution is more than students bringing
warm bodies to the institution. It starts with an enabling environment, be
this physical, as in residences; psychological, as in mental preparedness;
economic, as in means; or geographic, as in proximity or lack thereof. It
is a total package of an environment ready and willing to receive, teach,
engage and nurture the learner. A passive, hostile environment is not
psychologically enabling. Therefore, it will not be helpful to a learner
even if such a learner had the material means to study; bearing in mind
that there are many poor and deserving learners, who, because of their
socioeconomic conditions, are not able to make it to such institutions.

The enabling environment goes as far as giving material assistance to
deserving learners, which brings me to the issue of the National Student
Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS. I am aware that this issue, Minister, is
currently receiving attention. I hope that the Cabinet will be generous in
its approach to this question.

Everybody uses the World Cup and its successes as a benchmark of how South
Africa can rise to a challenge when called upon to do so. Well, there can
never be a bigger and better World Cup than an investment in the human
resources of this country!

Still on the question of the national students fund, one cannot
overemphasise the principles of fairness and justice in administering this
scheme. There is so much mischief at institutional level with regard to the
disbursement of this fund and so much politics involved in its
administration.

Suddenly, to be poor and deserving means being properly networked and
connected. This must stop. Being without means must be what it is and
“deserving” must be what it means. That is why we have professional
students who stand in the way of learners wanting to come in. Those
powerful parents whose children are not in a hurry to finish studying, must
stop intimidating institutions by using their influence and power to
persuade them not to exclude their children. They are blocking the way.

In conclusion, access to the institutions of higher learning starts at the
basic education level. That is why we need a sustained and focused
engagement with basic education. I repeat the assertion that education must
be seen as a chain from production to consumers, linking primary schooling
to secondary schooling, to higher education and ultimately to the
marketplace.

Any supply chain manager will tell you that the chain is as strong as its
weakest link. The failures of primary schooling cannot be fixed at tertiary
institutions. The failures at tertiary institutions cannot be fixed in the
marketplace and that is why we need to support the efforts of basic
education. Thank you. [Applause]
Mr A M MPONTSHANE: Hon Deputy Speaker, the Department of Education, then,
developed a plan for higher education in 2004 with targets to tackle issues
such as the one we dealing with today.

The question is: What happened to that plan? Why was it never implemented?
Here we are, six years later, dealing with the same challenges that we were
going to address in 2004.

Nevertheless, the IFP believes that the key to successfully overcoming our
challenges lies first in being able to identify them correctly, and with
sufficient insight and clarity. Let me cite four challenges that we are
facing. Firstly, with regard to quality of education, our learners suffer
because our approach to quality education has always been, “Fatten the pig
before the day of sale”. This focus has made us neglect some very essential
elements in basic education.

For instance, in 2008 we had a 62% matric pass rate with 19,5% of the
students obtaining matriculation exemptions. In 2009, the matric pass rate
was 60,7% with 19,8% of the students obtaining matriculation exemption.
This equates to approximately only 100 000 learners per year being eligible
for tertiary education. Our basic education is not equipping our learners
to adequately deal with and adapt to the high standards of education at our
tertiary institutions.

Secondly, in terms of university autonomy, universities drive their own
entrance requirements. We feel they should at least liaise with the
department regarding these exams so that our learners can be better
prepared when they sit these examinations.

Thirdly, regarding NSFAS, here we can urge the Minister to implement the
recommendations that are contained in the recent review of the scheme. We
feel that many students are turned away just because they cannot pay the
registration fees. We know that the Minister thinks it was hon Minister
Pandor who had entered into an agreement with universities to waive the
registration fees. However, this has not been enforceable.

Lastly, on the issue of personal circumstances, we must come to the
personal circumstances surrounding many of our poor learners and these may
vary from unwanted pregnancies, HIV and Aids and in some instances,
cultural constraints. Thank you. [Time expired.]

Mr S Z NTAPANE: Hon chairperson and hon members, the UDM fully supports
access to tertiary education for deserving under- and postgraduate students
who are denied an opportunity because of poverty. It would be difficult to
imagine that anyone in this House would disagree with that proposition.

The question is, therefore, not whether it is desirable, but what steps are
required to make this happen. This is where the dilemma lies: South Africa
is already spending more on education in general than any other line
function, except for social assistance and grants. In other words, we would
be taking funding from other vital functions if we intend to find funding
for these students outside the education budget.

We can honestly ask ourselves whether the money should not come from within
the large budget allocated to the two departments of education. Are
taxpayers genuinely getting value for their money from the current
education budget? The answer is an undeniable no.

Basic literacy and numeracy among South African schoolchildren are far
below international standards. Countries that are far poorer and spend
significantly less on education still outperform us.

As the UDM has said in its manifesto, we need to return to the basics with
our education. Years of fiddling with the curriculum and policies have left
the education system in a perilous state. We should be getting far more
value from the overall education budget. Clearly, money that could fund
deserving under- and postgraduates from disadvantaged circumstances is
going to waste.

A word of caution should also be raised with regard to the popular practice
in certain circles of blaming the universities and tertiary institutions.
These institutions are pressured by government to produce more degrees with
less funding to answer the skills shortage in the economy, but at the same
time government demands higher enrolment and lower fees. These are two
competing demands, which, if not checked can lead to only ... [Time
expired.]

Ms N GINA: Hon Chairperson, the Constitution of the Republic of South
Africa declares that everyone has the right to basic and further education.
Despite the declaration and concerns that education should be accorded to
all, access for the disabled or for people living with disabilities is
still a challenge in our country. That is why today I will speak on access
to education for people living with disabilities.

We normally understand access to education to be the accessibility of
education to any student, including access to appropriate educational
institutions, materials and personnel. For disabled people, however, access
is more than that. Access for them has more to do with the characteristics
of available facilities, programmes and services that allow these to be
entered or used by individuals despite visual, hearing, mobility and other
impairments.

This is because disability is a condition of being unable to perform as a
consequence of physical or mental unfitness. Therefore, this is more about
removing obstacles and barriers so that people with disabilities are able
to perform.

The Soudien report noted the following:
   As far as disability is concerned, there seems to be a general
   recognition that there has been limited progress made in addressing the
   needs of the disabled, both in terms of the physical infrastructure, as
   well as educational support structures.


The lack of access to higher education for disabled people is indicated by
the fact that in 2007 there were only 4 325 disabled students in higher
education that were recorded. This figure represents only 0,6% of the total
head-count of the enrolment of students for higher education.

When one looks at the statistics for 2009, there was a very minimal growth
in that number: only 347, which meant that it moved up to 4 672 students
with disabilities who had access to the higher education of our country
from 4 325. This is an area of concern. However, we are very proud to say
that with the current Minister and with Higher Education and Training as a
Ministry on its own, we hope and believe that these are some of the issues
that are going to be addressed and looked at so that we can see more people
with disabilities having access to higher education, as we expect them to.


On top of this, Minister, as has been mentioned by the previous speakers
here, I think it is important to note that no matter what we do, we will
never succeed as the Department of Higher Education and Training if we
don’t involve or work together with the Department of Basic Education. This
is because we can’t really wait for learners to have access to higher
education institutions.

What is happening at the basic education level? We think that is what we
need to look at. I will just give an example. There is a community for the
disabled here in Cape Town that has just come to the portfolio committee to
air their views and complaints about where they are at the schooling level.


They said they were running short of educators who are well trained to
teach disabled learners. There was also an example of deaf schools. So,
really, Minister, if we don’t look at what is happening at the school
level, we will always be faced with the problem of people with disabilities
experiencing difficulties in having access to higher education, as is the
case now.

As a country, I think we have to note that we have undergone a significant
process of transformation, especially in higher education. At the centre of
this transformation process that we are talking about is the goal of
increasing access for the most disadvantaged groups in our society,
including students with disabilities. It is disheartening, though, to note
that there is still a lack of commitment by some of the higher education
institutions to ensure that the right environment for learning for students
with disabilities is being provided.
Another breakthrough that our government has achieved was to make sure that
people with disabilities do get access to higher education institutions.
When we look at the National Student Financial Aid Scheme, NSFAS, everybody
can apply for it. It is a great achievement that there is a portion that is
specifically allocated to people with disabilities within NSFAS.

When one looks at the annual report for 2009-10 at NSFAS, it is reported
that there has been a low uptake of special funding by disabled students.
This is caused by the lack of advocacy. One would find that most of the
students were not aware that they could specifically apply for such funding
for them to have access to higher education institutions. However, I think
we need to commend the government for doing this to show that they are
taking care of people living with disabilities.

Again, when we look at the Soudien report, we note that there is still
discrimination taking place when one goes to institutions of higher
learning. The infrastructure is not yet up to standard to accommodate some
of these learners. Here is one example: There is a university where
students had to sit for more than three weeks without going to classes just
because there were no ramps for wheelchairs for them to go and attend those
classes. I think this is one of the things you need to look at, Minister,
to make sure that our students who are disabled have access in this form.

Another thing that is lacking in some of the universities is that even
residences are not built in a manner that can accommodate such students. We
find that due to that, a small number of students have access to
universities.

We also need our universities to have sensitivity towards learning
disabilities such as dyslexia. Braille needs to be used. We need to see
these things happening in our institutions. So this is a challenge to all
universities to provide all these adequate systems to support the teaching
and learning of students with disabilities and to make sure that teaching
methods do take this into consideration.

This would require a budget, and we need to commit to this budget for the
purpose of ensuring access for these students. By so doing, we will be
ensuring that people with disabilities feel they are part of the community
in our country and that they will even have access to the labour market and
be able to contribute to the economy of the country.

Minister, we know the passion that you have. I think it would be proper for
me to highlight this. The Minister that we have is very passionate,
especially about the skilling of people. When we talk of the skilling of
people, we are not leaving ... [Interjections.] Thank you. [Time expired.]
[Applause.]

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Hon members, you are
conversing too loudly, and we can’t hear the speakers. Please!

The DEPUTY MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND FISHERIES: Chairperson,
following the Anglo Boer War in 1902, the majority of Afrikaans families
were very poor.

My father was the youngest child of such a family. There were 10 children
who qualified for the definition of today’s subject. If I may define it,
they were poor and deserving children who wanted to become students.
Because there wasn’t any money, the eldest seven children could not study
further after school level and had to go and work.

The youngest three could go and study further only because the older
brothers and sisters, who were working, sent money home for them to study.
So, this is not a new problem at the moment. The FF Plus says it is a
serious injustice perpetrated against any child who has the ability to
learn and who performs well academically at school, if he or she cannot
study further for economic reasons.

That is why the government’s bursary scheme is so important. However, the
government’s bursary scheme seriously discriminates, at the moment, against
certain students, specifically brown students and white students. According
to statistics, only 4% of brown students recently received bursaries and
only 2% of white students received bursaries. This is not representative of
the general population at all.

It also appears as if Afrikaans students are being discriminated against
specifically. Now you must remember that the majority of Afrikaans-speaking
people in South Africa, for a long time already, have not been white
people. Afrikaans is a language through which these students, especially
the brown students, are empowered.

The majority of these students live in the Western Cape. The population in
the Western Cape is approximately 60% brown, 20% white and 20% black.
According to the national bursary scheme, 16 000 bursaries were made
available in the Western Cape. Altogether 69% of these were awarded to
black students; 22% were awarded to brown students; and 6% were awarded to
white students. How do I explain this to the young people who phone me and
talk to me about this?

We are creating a new generation of aggrieved young people – brown and
white – because they feel that they are being discriminated against because
they are poor, on the one hand, but also because it seems they are not
black enough, on the other hand. After 16 years, surely this is a very
serious matter that cannot continue. I thank you.

Mr Z S MAKHUBELE: Hon Chairperson, let me first and foremost acknowledge
the guests, particularly the students’ representative council, SRC,
leadership, my mother, my wife and the young ones in the gallery.

The challenge facing our country in the new dispensation, amongst other
things, is the transformation of the education and training system to
redress past discrimination and ensure representation and equal access. The
educational disparities are manifested along racial, class and gender lines
due to the political, economic and social policies of the pre-1994 era.

Most learners from rural, disadvantaged schools are seldom advised on
alternative paths to education and career opportunities and funding
availability. They often learn about the national financial aid schemes
only upon arrival at the universities.

These institutions should reach out to all areas of the country, more
especially the most rural areas where the youth or learners have very
little access to any form of media, by conducting road shows and other
strategies that would enhance fair access to information.

The provision of quality education for the broader section of learners
coming from rural and poorer areas leaves much to be desired, thereby
hindering access opportunities for the majority of learners. Many of them
have to undergo bridging courses before the primary course they intend to
study.
These bridging courses are not funded by the National Student Financial Aid
Scheme, NSFAS. Therefore, those students from poor socioeconomic
backgrounds, though deserving, may not be able to afford the cost for the
bridging courses.

The threshold for the beneficiaries of the NSFAS funds should be reviewed
in order to accommodate those students whose parents currently qualify for
neither the scheme, as middle-income earners, nor loans from the financial
houses. The NSFAS institution allocation formula needs to be revisited to
ensure access to adequate resources for all deserving students.

The government should consider funding postgraduate programmes to assist
students who often rely on part-time employment to finance their studies.

There is also an urgent need to improve, strengthen and expand the further
education and training, FET, sector so that many students, who cannot gain
entry to universities, are absorbed by the colleges. The majority of
learners from rural and poor areas are inadequately prepared for higher
education studies due to a lack of proper facilities. The college sector
should accommodate them.

There is a need for improvement of the curriculum at FET colleges to enable
smooth articulation from FET colleges to institutions of higher learning.
The FET colleges are mostly accessible to most learners and should
deliberately be made institutions of choice. We need a clear focus on this
sector if we are to succeed in the provision of critical skills needed by
the economy of our country.

Some of the FET colleges are not relevant and/or responsive to the local
economic development strategies where they are found. This matter needs
urgent attention to ensure that their programmes are responsive to the
market demands as far as possible.

It should be acknowledged that the educational policies of the past
prevented millions of our people from accessing formal education and
training, hence the ANC government introduced recognition of prior learning
to recognise the expertise and the experience of these people and to award
credits towards the achievement of qualifications or part qualifications.
Others have never completed their formal education. Recognition of prior
learning, RPL, gives them a second chance to access education and training
and become the qualified citizens they ought to be. Yet others have
undergone in-house and workplace training, but do not have full
qualifications. Therefore RPL will acknowledge the parts of qualifications
that people already have and identify what is outstanding so that they can
complete their qualifications should they wish to do so.

It has been noted that most institutions of higher learning use RPL for
admission purposes and not to award credits or qualifications. Since there
is no financial recoveries being made from implementing RPL, institutions
place it on the low-priority list. Therefore, it is not surprising that
very little has been done since 2002. Most institutions are still grappling
with a proper conceptualisation and implementation of this programme.

The government, through the Setas, should use funds earmarked for skills
development to include RPL and probably give financial incentives in order
to encourage institutions to implement it.

Recognition of prior learning should be positioned as a central pillar of
redress, having the capacity to widen access to education and training and
to enhance the qualification status of historically disadvantaged adults.
It is required of us to remove legal impediments such as the 50% residency
clause and the Umalusi accreditation requirements that disallow assessment-
only providers and the matriculation with endorsement as entry requirements
to higher education.

The new higher education and training system, which is a single, national,
co-ordinated system, should enhance the broadening of the social base of
learners in terms of race, class, gender and age. The higher education
system must be transformed to redress past inequalities, to serve a new
social order, to meet pressing national needs and to respond to new
realities and opportunities.

Tiko leri vekisaka eka dyondzo ya rixaka kumbe eka vaakatiko hi ku
angarhela i tiko leri hluvukaka hi ku hatlisa loko ri tekele enhlokweni
dyondzo ya rixaka. Inkomu Mutshamaxitulu. [Va phokotela.] [A country that
invests in the nation’s education or society in general is a country that
develops rapidly if it has prioritised the nation’s education. Thank you,
Chairperson. [Applause.]]

Rev K R J MESHOE: House Chairperson, the ACDP believes that to merely
consider access to tertiary institutions for poor, deserving under- and
postgraduates without addressing the reasons for the high undergraduate
dropout rate would in all probability be a waste, ultimately, of our time
and resources.

It is reported that at some institutions the dropout rate is as high as 80%
and the National Student Financial Aid Scheme of South Africa has managed
to recover only 20% of the total R12 billion in funds it has loaned.

Access to tertiary education also means access to relevant books and
equipment. Calls for government to consider dropping VAT on textbooks to
free up 14% more funds for books and resource materials seem like a
reasonable idea. Has the government considered this, hon Minister?

First-generation students from low-income families with cramped living
conditions are, however, the most likely to drop out, and it will take
nothing short of total funding on education, accommodation, food and books
to ensure that students have an opportunity to actually complete their
degrees.

From the ACDP would like to see the National Student Financial Aid Scheme
of South Africa linked to public-private partnerships where students are
placed in companies that provide financial support, mentoring, vacation
employment and an incentive to reach degree goals.

As far back as 1994, the ACDP has been calling for the introduction of a
voucher system in our schools. The ACDP has also called for broader
criteria for loan qualification, and we therefore support the
recommendation to change the income level. This will allow additional
students to qualify for partial funding, a step that would be in the right
direction. Thank you.

Mr K J DIKOBO: Chairperson, hon members, guests, and representatives of
SRCs, one of the issues that limits access to higher education is funding.
There are many students in our country who are euphemistically referred to
as previously or historically disadvantaged.

For many of them, there is nothing previous about them being disadvantaged.
They are still as disadvantaged now as their parents have been. They attend
poorly resourced and poorly run schools, referred to as dysfunctional
schools. They get poor Grade 12 passes, not because they are intellectually
less gifted, but because the system failed them.

Azapo believes that besides funding, the best way of improving access to
higher education for the majority of our people is to improve the quality
of teaching and learning in village and township schools. Thank you.

Mrs M T KUBAYI: House Chairperson, I would just like to note and
acknowledge the inputs and the contributions to the discussion. I think
there is a need for all of us continually to engage to ensure that there is
a better future for all young people in South Africa, so that they can
contribute positively to the economy of the country.

There are various areas that I just want to respond to that members have
reflected on. Firstly, I would like to respond to the issue of the summits.
I want to say here that those of us who were part of the summits
acknowledge their importance. The summits that were referred to by the hon
James were stakeholder summits where people were operating within
particular sectors. It was a skills development summit, a higher education
summit, and a further education and training summit.

The stakeholders appreciated what the Minister was doing. The stakeholders
appreciated the engagement, saying that they appreciate being engaged with
in a process where they can make inputs to policy development and
development of the Green Paper.

I think, Minister, from where we are standing as the ANC, we applaud you
for the work that you have done and appreciate that this is a government of
the people by the people. It is not that we are doing something separate
that people are not part of.

I think we need to acknowledge that and note that perhaps that is the view
that the DA is holding, because they did not participate in the summits,
although they were invited. All of us, as members of the portfolio
committee, went to those summits. Again, it does not profit us to go to the
point of character assassination, hitting on the Minister without us
dealing with the issues we are faced with.

All of us are stakeholders; all of us have a responsibility; and all of us
have a part to play. This means that all of us, including the DA, need to
assist in shaping the way forward, in informing the policies that are being
developed, as Members of Parliament and members of the portfolio committee.

There is a second point that I want to reflect on. I am not so sure that
the issues that the hon Ntapane from the UDM has raised are relevant in a
higher education debate. The issue that we are dealing with here is access
to tertiary institutions by students at a tertiary level. It has nothing to
do with numeracy and literacy. Those are issues that we must debate at a
basic education level. Therefore, I think that he should perhaps introduce
a motion for us to have a debate on that issue. [Applause.]

Finally, the last issue that I think we need to look at in terms of
relevance, hon Deputy Minister, is the issue of the equity definition. I
don’t know whether there is anything called “brown”. We have black, white,
and coloured. I am not sure about this. I am trying to understand what you
are talking about, which racial group you are talking about. I wanted to
understand the “brown”.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we should appreciate ...
[Interjections.]

Dr C P MULDER: Can I help the member?

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Order! Why are you rising, hon
member?

Dr C P MULDER: Those categories are not my categories. They are your
categories that you filled in on all those different forms at university
when they must give census figures. You can go and check on them.

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): You can continue, hon member.

Mrs M T KUBAYI: I don’t think he’s responding to that. I thought perhaps he
would assist and clarify, but we will take it outside. The issue that I
think we should look at is the importance of making sure that as we talk
about access, there are a number of issues that members have raised.

There are a number of issues that are fundamental to making sure that
access to tertiary institutions is open so that all people, old and young,
can benefit. We do not sit here and only speak for a particular group. We
do not sit here as Members of Parliament and not make sure the ...

The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Mr M B Skosana): Hon member, your time has expired.

Mrs M T KUBAYI: I just wanted to say that the debate has contributed
positively in ensuring that articulation is properly done in the
department. Thank you very much. [Applause.]

Debate concluded.

  CONSIDERATION OF REQUEST FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL ACTS OF THE INTERNATIONAL
     TELECOMMUNICATIONS UNION PLENIPOTENTIARY CONFERENCE, ANTALYA, 2006

Mr S E KHOLWANE: Chairperson, the Portfolio Committee on Communications
received and considered the report on the Final Acts of the International
Telecommunications Union, known as the ITU. This is a leading agency of the
United Nations providing a platform for the governance of information and
communication technology for the technology sector.

It comprises 191 member states and more than 700 sector members and
associates. It has three co-sectors, which are radio communication,
telecommunication standardisation and telecommunication development.

It was at this conference held in Antalya in 2006 where South Africa was
elected to the executive council of the ITU. South Africa has been re-
elected to the same position in 2010.

The portfolio committee, having considered the Final Acts of the
International Telecommunications Union Plenipotentiary Conference, Antalya,
2006, recommends that the House approves the final acts of this conference.
I thank you, Chair.

There was no debate.
Final Acts of the International Telecommunications Union Plenipotentiary
Conference, Antalya, 2006, approved.

The House adjourned at 15:33.
                                 __________

                ANNOUNCEMENTS, TABLINGS AND COMMITTEE REPORTS

                           FRIDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2010

ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Membership of Committees


    (1)     The following members have been nominated by their party to
        serve on the Ad Hoc Committee on Commission for Gender Equality
        Forensic Investigation:

        African National Congress


        Ramodibe, Ms DM
        Van Wyk, Ms A
TABLINGS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

1.    The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Development

    (a)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr F R
        Rambau, a regional magistrate at Polokwane in terms of section
        13(3)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


    (b)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr L
        Skrenya, a magistrate at Cala in terms of section 13(3)(b) of the
        Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


    (c)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr M K
        Chauke, an additional magistrate at Pretoria in terms of section
        13(3)(c) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


    (d)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr W J M
        Prinsloo, a magistrate at Ermelo in terms of section 13(3)(c) of
        the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


    (e)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr I W O
        M Morake, a magistrate at Lichtenburg in terms of section 13(3)(b)
        of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


    (f)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Ms A
        Maharaj, an additional magistrate at George in terms of section
        13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


    (g)     Report on the provisional suspension of a magistrate: Mr N M
        Jassiem, an additional magistrate at Mitchells Plain in terms of
        section 13(4)(b) of the Magistrates Act, 1993 (Act No 90 of 1993).


2.    The Minister of Finance


    (a)     Government Notice No R999 published in Government Gazette No
        33717 dated 1 November 2010: Amendment:  Exchange Control
        Regulations, in terms of the Currency and Exchanges Act, 1933 (Act
        No 9 of 1933).

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT - T101105e-insert1 – PAGES 3693 – 3706

                           MONDAY, 8 NOVEMBER 2010

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly
1. Report of the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises on the Funding
   Solution for the Transnet Second Defined Benefit Fund and the Transport
   Pension Fund, dated 2 November 2010

   1. Introduction


   The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises received a petition from
   the Pensioners of Transnet Second Defined Benefit Fund (TSDBF) and the
   Transport Pension Fund (TPF). The plea of the pensioners was informed by
   the deteriorating economic conditions and challenges that they faced as a
   result of the low pensions they continued to receive. They received an
   annual increase of 2% on their pensions for 2 decades as per rule Rule 24
   (Rule as a Schedule) of the Transnet Pension Fund Act (Act 62 of 1990) as
   amended in 1991 (52 of 1991); amended in 2000 (41 of 2000) and amended in
   2007 (6 of 2007).

   2. Background

   Prior to 1990 Transnet had the Railways and harbours pension Fund for
   Black employees and the Railways and Harbours Superannuation Fund for
   white employees. In 1990 these two funds were merged into the Transnet
   Pension Fund which was established under the Transnet Pension Fund Act of
   1990 (Act 62 of 1990). Prior to the merger the two pension funds were
   controlled by the state and had an actuarial deficit of R17.1 billion.
   The fund has 79 467 members and the average pension received by the
   members is R2 833 per month, and 40% of the pensioners received less that
   the State’s social pension of R940,00 per month (as in 2008).

   3. Investigation by the Committee

   Having considered the petition of the Pensioners, the Committee invited
   the affected stakeholders to brief the Committee and subsequently took a
   resolution to investigate a funding solution for the Transnet Second
   Defined Benefit Fund and the Transport Pension Fund.  The Committee
   established a task team that comprised of Hon G Borman (ANC) (Convener),
   Hon L Gololo (ANC), Hon G Koornhof (ANC), Hon S Van Dyk (DA),
   representatives of Transnet, Department of Public Enterprises and
   National Treasury.

   The task team met several times with Transnet, National Treasury and the
   Department of Public Enterprises and consulted with parties, study groups
   and clusters.  Bearing in mind the injustices of the past a funding
   solution needed to be affordable, fair and one that did not jeopardise
   the future of the pension funds. The funding solution was aimed at
   addressing the following objectives:


   a) Ex gratia payment to compensate pensioners for the low amounts paid
           out in the past;
   b) Increasing the base pension of the pensioners; and
   c) An increase policy to be applied going forward.

   4. Recommendations

   The task team of the Committee tabled a report with recommendations to
   the Portfolio Committee on 2 November 2010. The Committee deliberated on
   the report and adopted the following recommendations:

   Transnet and National Treasury should make a cash injection of R1.963
   billion into the Funds which will be a funding solution for TSDBF and
   TPF:


   a) An ex gratia payment of 5 months’ pension;
   b) A base upliftment of 3.21% and
   c) A 75% of CPI annual increase going forward on the 3.21% uplifted base


   5. Conclusion

   Both Transnet and National Treasury participated in the process that led
   to the recommendations, and the figures above were derived from
   presentations on both TSDBF and TPF combined. They agreed that the
   funding solution was affordable.
   Report to be considered


                          TUESDAY, 9 NOVEMBER 2010


ANNOUNCEMENTS

National Assembly and National Council of Provinces

The Speaker and the Chairperson

1.    Introduction of Bills


     (1)    The Minister of Trade and Industry


          a) Companies Amendment Bill [B 40 – 2010] (National Assembly –
             proposed sec 75) [Explanatory summary of Bill and prior notice
             of its introduction published in Government Gazette No 33695
             of 27 October 2010.]


             Introduction and referral to the Portfolio Committee on Trade
             and Industry of the National Assembly, as well as referral to
             the Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM) for classification in terms
             of Joint Rule 160.


             In terms of Joint Rule 154 written views on the classification
             of the Bill may be submitted to the JTM within three
             parliamentary working days.


2.    Bills passed by Houses – to be submitted to President for assent

    (1)    Bills passed by National Council of Provinces on 9 November
         2010:


          a) Black Authorites Act Repeal Bill [B 9 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 76).


          b) Local Government: Municipal Electoral Amendment Bill [B 27 –
             2010] (National Assembly – sec 75).
3.    Membership of Committees

     (1)    Hon. Mr JB Sibanyoni (NA) and Hon. Mr AG Matila (NCOP) were
        elected as co-chairpersons of the Ad Hoc Joint Committee on Code of
        Judicial Conduct and the Regulations on Judges’ Disclosure of
        Registrable Interests on 9 November 2010.

4.    Classification of Bills by Joint Tagging Mechanism (JTM)

    (1)    The JTM in terms of Joint Rule 160(6) classified the following
         Bills as section 75 Bills:

          a) Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of
             Communication-related Information Amendment Bill [B 38 – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75).


          b) Criminal Procedure Amendment Bill [B 39 – 2010] (National
             Assembly – sec 75).

National Assembly

The Speaker

1.    Message from National Council of Provinces to National Assembly in
     respect of Bills passed by Council and returned to Assembly


      1) Bills, subject to proposed amendments, passed by National Council
         of Provinces on 9 November 2010 and returned for consideration of
         Council’s proposed amendments:


          a) South African Citizenship Amendment Bill [B 17B – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendments, see
             Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 3 November 2010,
             p 3662).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home
             Affairs of the National Assembly for a report on the amendments
             proposed by the Council.


          b) Births and Deaths Registration Amendment Bill [B 18B – 2010]
             (National Assembly – sec 75) (for proposed amendment, see
             Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports, 2 November 2010,
             p 3611).


             The Bill has been referred to the Portfolio Committee on Home
             Affairs of the National Assembly for a report on the amendment
             proposed by the Council.

2.    Membership of Committees

    (1)     Hon Ms D M Ramodibe was elected as chairperson of the Ad Hoc
        Committee on the Commission for Gender Equality Forensic
        Investigation on 9 November 2010.

COMMITTEE REPORTS

National Assembly

CREDA INSERT - T101109e-insert1 – PAGES 3722 - 3738

2.    Progress report of the Portfolio Committee on  Communications  on  the
   process  followed  on  recommending  a  person  for  appointment  to  the
   Independent Communications Authority of  South  Africa  (ICASA)  Council,
   dated 09 November 2010.

   The  Portfolio  Committee  on  Communications,  having   considered   the
   nominations of candidates submitted for appointment to serve on the ICASA
   Council in terms of ICASA  Act,  13  of  2000  (as  amended)  reports  as
   follows:

   Request from the Minister of Communications to fill in a vacancy at ICASA
   was referred to the Portfolio Committee on Communications on 04  November
   2010 (see ATC 05 November 2010).

   The Committee called for nominations and received 24 CV’s. The  Committee
   subsequently shortlisted the following candidates:

   Dr Marcia Socikwa
   Ms Katheryn Berman
   Dr Sadhasivan Perumal
   Ms Nomonde Pearl Gongxeka
   Mr Cornwell Ismail Dauds

   The interviews are scheduled for 25 November 2010.




3.    Report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional
   Development on the Regulation of Interception of Communications and
   Provision of Communication-Related Information Amendment Bill [B 38 -
   2010] (National Assembly – sec 75), dated 9 November 2010:


      The Portfolio Committee on Justice and Constitutional Development,
      having considered the Regulation of Interception of Communications and
      Provision of Communication-Related Information Amendment Bill [B 38 -
      2010] (National Assembly – sec 76), referred to it and classified by
      the Joint Tagging Mechanism as a section 75 Bill, reports the Bill
      without amendment.

