---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol13 - MONDAY 25 JANUARY 1965'
layout: debate
year: 1965
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading><span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0022"/>MONDAY, 25 JANUARY 1965</heading>

<debateSection name="#bills_to_be_introduced_in_the_senate">

<heading>BILLS TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE SENATE</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1965-01-25T14:20:00">2.20 p.m</recordedTime>.

</narrative>

</prayers>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>In accordance with the provisions of Section 32 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, announced that the under mentioned Bills would be introduced in the Senate during the present Session of Parliament:</p>

<ol>

<li>(i) Public Service Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(ii) National Welfare Bill;</li>

<li>(iii) Suid-Afrikaanse Akademie vir Wetenskap en Kuns Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(iv) Land Bank Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(v) Public Accountants&#x2026; and Auditors&#x2019; Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(vi) Securities&#x2019; Transfer Bill;</li>

<li>(vii) Sea Fisheries Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(viii) Explosives Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(ix) Companies Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(x) Performers&#x2019; Rights Protection Bill;</li>

<li>(xi) Shipping Board Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xii) Bill to amend the Dairy Industry Act, 1961;</li>

<li>(xiii) Bill to amend the Perishable Agricultural Produce Sales Act, 1961;</li>

<li>(xiv) National Institute for Metallurgy Bill;</li>

<li>(xv) Atomic Energy and Nuclear Installations (Licensing and Security) Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xvi) Immovable Property (Removal or Modification of Restrictions) Bill;</li>

<li>(xvii) Arbitration Bill;</li>

<li>(xviii) Wills Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xix) Gambling Bill;</li>

<li>(xx) Magistrates&#x2019; Courts Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xxi) Justices of the Peace and Commissioners of Oaths Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xxii) National Parks Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xxiii) Cape Town Fore shore Amendment Bill;</li>

<li>(xxiv) Statistics Amendment Bill; and</li>

<li>(xxv) Census Amendment Bill.</li>

</ol>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_of_the_house">

<heading>BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_transport">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF TRANSPORT</person>:</from>

<p>In regard to the work of the House I wish to announce that the hon. the Minister of Finance will present his Budget on 24 March and that I shall present the Railway Budget on 3 March. The second reading of the Part Appropriation Bill for the coming financial year will be taken on 10 February and Parliament will go into the Easter recess from 9 to 20 April.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#first_reading_of_bills">

<heading>FIRST READING OF BILLS</heading>

<p>The following Bills were read a first time:</p>

<p>Financial Relations Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Insurance Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Part Appropriation Bill.</p>

<p>Railway Construction Bill.</p>

<p>Provincial Affairs Bill.</p>

<p>University of Cape Town Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Fuel Research Institute and Coal Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Copyright Bill.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#select_committees">

<heading>SELECT COMMITTEES</heading>

<p>The following Select Committees were appointed:</p>

<p>S.C. on Public Accounts.</p>

<p>S.C. on Internal Arrangements.</p>

<p>S.C. on Railways and Harbours.</p>

<p>S.C. on Pensions.</p>

<p>S.C. on Library of Parliament.</p>

<p>S.C. on Bantu Affairs.</p>

<p>S.C. on Irrigation.</p>

<p>S.C. on State-owned Land.</p>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1965-01-25T14:29:00">2.29 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

