---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol17 - WEDNESDAY 7 SEPTEMBER 1966'
layout: debate
year: 1966
month: SEPTEMBER
month_slug: Sep
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>WEDNESDAY, 7TH SEPTEMBER, 1966</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

Prayers&#x2014;<recordedTime time="1966-09-07T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#vacancy">

<heading>VACANCY</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I deeply regret to have to announce that a vacancy has occurred in the representation in this House of the electoral division of Heidelberg owing to the death yesterday of Dr. The Honourable H. F. Verwoerd.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#condolence">

<heading>CONDOLENCE</heading>

<p><i>Late Dr. the Honourable H. F. Verwoerd</i></p>

<speech by="#acting_prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">ACTING PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House, deeply aware of the irreparable loss sustained so tragically by South Africa yesterday through the death of Dr. the Honourable Hendrik Frensch Verwoerd, places on record its deep appreciation of the distinguished service rendered by the deceased in Parliament over a period of more than 18 years&#x2014;nearly ten years as a member of the Senate, more than eight years as a member of the House of Assembly, eight years as Minister of Native Affairs and for the past eight years as Prime Minister.</block>

<block name="quote">In paying sincere and grateful tribute to his memory, this House also expresses its heartfelt acknowledgment of the invaluable services which this resolute and indomitable leader and statesman rendered to his country and people.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that its profound sympathy be conveyed to his widow and family in their sad bereavement.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we have lost a great man, a man who was outstanding in every respect, a man who was richly endowed with gifts of spirit and intellect, all of which he freely and abundantly employed in the service of his people. He never asked; he always did what had to be done. His Prime Ministership of eight years was probably one of the most eventful periods in the history of our people. I recall to mind a few of these events: the previous attempt made on the life of Dr. Verwoerd six years ago, our withdrawal from the Commonwealth in 1961, the referendum and the establishment of the Republic. In the international sphere, too, events of great importance took place in these eight years. I refer to the South West Africa case. I refer to the Rhodesian question. I refer to all the threats of boycotts and sanctions. All those events were concentrated into this brief period of eight years. Dr. Verwoerd&#x2019;s life was a full one, a rich one, and in looking at the way in which he handled affairs, I think one has to declare to-day that he never took a false step. He always gave dynamic leadership to the country, to this House and to his party, and while he was in charge of affairs in this country he caused South Africa&#x2019;s prestige abroad to rise considerably. He became a world figure in large measure. His name became known far beyond the borders of our country, and he was looked upon with respect and with esteem for the work he was doing for South Africa. He was able to do all those things because there were certain essential principles to which he adhered. One of his outstanding characteristics was his selflessness. He never shrank from any sacrifice he was called upon to make for his country or his people. We recall his determination, his singleness of purpose and the thoroughness with which he always fulfilled his daily task. It is a tragic thought that he was still with us some 24 hours ago, and that death has deprived us of him in this brief space of time. He was a member of the House of Assembly for only eight years, as you have heard, but it is to me as though he had a rare instinct for parliamentary practices and traditions. He soon became steeped in the traditions of this House, and he became a great parliamentarian. And now he has departed. South Africa is the poorer for his death. The entire country has been plunged into mourning now that they have lost one of their greatest statesmen, a man whose peer we shall surely not look upon for a long time.</p>

<p>But in this moment our thoughts also go out particularly to her who was his partner in life, who was more than that, who shared in all his joys and sorrows, who was the inspiration behind him, who always stood by him and helped him, and who cared for him so faithfully. Her <span class="col_2007-2008" refersTo="page_1015"/>loss is indescribable. Our hearts go out to her and her family in these dark days, and we can only pray that she will be granted strength and comfort by the Great Comforter. She will need that not only in these dark days, but also in the future, when she will experience loneliness, she will perhaps have an even greater need of being remembered in our prayers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I think the words of the burial service, &#x201C;In the midst of life we are in death,&#x201D; were poignantly brought home to all members of this House yesterday afternoon. At one moment we saw a happy and relaxed Prime Minister, joking and speaking to his associates. A moment later he had been the victim of an assassin&#x2019;s wanton act. Now I know the sense of loss and of shock that we on this side of the House suffered. I am sure the sense of loss and shock suffered by hon. members opposite was even greater, and was even greater to his friends and associates and supporters throughout South Africa. That is one of the reasons why I want to associate myself with this motion and second it, and also to associate myself with the words that have fallen from the hon. the Acting Prime Minister, and to associate myself most respectfully. This has been a shock not only to the whole of Parliament; it has been a disaster for the whole of South Africa.</p>

<p>A man of the personality and of the dominance of the late Prime Minister undoubtedly created different images among different sections of the population. To us here in the Opposition he created the image of an overwhelming master-mind directing the philosophy, the policies and the strategy of the Government side of the House. We saw him change what had been mere aspirations into immediate decisions which could be put into operation. We saw him change the old constitutional position in South Africa into a Republic by means of a referendum. We saw him responsible for our withdrawing from the Commonwealth. We saw him give shape and meaning to the whole philosophy of apartheid and convert it into a policy which became an actuality and could be used for guiding the administration and could have, by means of legislation, a permanent effect upon the future of our country. We saw the first steps towards self-government in the Transkei. I have no hesitation in saying that he has earned a significant place in our history. I think it will be agreed that he was one of the most outstanding men who has served South Africa as a Prime Minister and as a political leader. I suppose we are too close to the events of our time and too much still under the emotional stress of what happened yesterday to be able to evaluate how great that place will be in our history. Time alone can judge that. But we are assured that he will have a place, and a significant place, because of his resolution, because of his dedication and because of his steadiness in times of difficulty.</p>

<p>You know, Sir, it is given to few men to succeed in one walk of life alone. The late Prime Minister succeeded in four walks of life. He succeeded in the academic field and became a professor at a university at a very early age. He succeeded in the field of journalism, where he achieved very high standards. He succeeded in the business world, and finally he succeeded in the political field. I think he did all those four things as the result of his hard work, his application and his determination, and the way in which he stood by his principles and ideals in the most inflexible manner.</p>

<p>In the personal sphere I found him a man of great personal charm, a man of outstanding mental ability, a man of great courtesy both to his friends and to his opponents. Sir, it was my privilege to be in the position I now hold as Leader of the Opposition during the entire period of his premiership. I would like to attest that throughout that period, despite the stresses and strains and the crises and difficulties, our personal relations were on a most cordial level. I want to attest also that he made it possible through his co-operation for us here in Parliament to uphold the highest ideals and traditions of this House and to make our Parliamentary institution an efficient instrument and a reflection of the attitudes and feelings of our people from time to time. I think it was most clearly expressed in his attitude towards the Committee on the Rules of Procedure in this House. He had the majority and he could have enforced what rules he wished. But he took up the line that nothing would be accepted that was not unanimously accepted by the members of the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders. I think, Sir, you know what that has meant to this House.</p>

<p>I have expressed elsewhere, and I want to express again, the sympathy of this side of the House with Mrs. Verwoerd and the members of her family in this ghastly tragedy. She will be remembered in our prayers and we shall pray that she will be given strength from whence strength always comes. It is more than a tragedy that she should have had to suffer this trial on two occasions, once when he was attacked before but recovered miraculously, and again on this most tragic occasion. I also want to extend from this side of the House our very real sympathy with our friends opposite who, although political opponents, are still friends and fellow-South Africans, because I know their sense of loss must be even greater than ours.</p>

<p><span class="col_2009-2010" refersTo="page_1016"/>Now, what memory will we bear of the hon. the Prime Minister? I think the abiding memory that will go with me is of a man with a tremendous personality, a man with the ability to apply himself unflaggingly to his task; of a Parliamentary and political leader whose conviction and perseverance made a tremendous impact upon all those with whom he was in contact. I feel that I cannot do better perhaps than to quote what was written of one other great statesman who died in office, also by the hand of an assassin&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Now he belongs to the ages,<br/> Events go by and upon circumstance<br/> Disaster strikes with the blind sweep of chance.<br/> But as we spoke, presiding everywhere<br/> Upon events was one man&#x2019;s character<br/> And that endures; it is the token<br/> Sent always to man for man&#x2019;s own government.</block>

<p>Sir, I second.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_transport">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF TRANSPORT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I stood here yesterday afternoon and saw the Prime Minister of South Africa and my friend die. I stood and saw him carried out, and involuntarily I recalled the words of the poet&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;Stil, broers, daar gaan &#x2019;n man verby, hy groet,<br/> en dis verlaas.<br/> Daar&#x2019;s nog maar &#x00E9;&#x00E9;n soos hy;<br/> bekyk horn goed.&#x201D;</block>

<p>&#x201C;Daar is nog maar &#x00E9;&#x00E9;n soos hy.&#x201D; One asks oneself why this had to happen; why a worthless scoundrel should be allowed the power to deprive us of the life of such a man; because we know what work still awaited him, the ideals that he cherished and still wanted to realize. We know what an irreparable loss his death is to South Africa; we know how dark the future may be. But man proposes and God disposes, and it was fated that we were to be deprived of him.</p>

<p>For 16 years I served with him in the Cabinet. For more than a quarter of a century I worked with him. We came to know one another in those very dark war years, when we had to fight for our survival as a party and as an Afrikaner people; when we had to rebuild from the ground; when we had to endure scorn and abuse, but he was always like a rock, a man on whom one could rely under all circumstances. In those years we had our triumphs and we achieved victories, and then he was charged with the great task of acting as the architect of our colour policy. Later he became Prime Minister, and for eight years I served under his Prime Ministership. I have also served under other Prime Ministers, but to-day I have no hesitation in saying that he was one of the greatest.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker, his death is a great and irreparable loss to us; one can still not quite comprehend it. It can still not penetrate to one that this dynamic personality, this man with his endearing nature, this man with his tremendous drive and passion for work, this man with his resolution and determination, this man with his capability and his brilliant mind, had to be taken away from us, and that he is no longer there. We shall just have to carry on; we shall just have to keep on building on the foundations he laid, because men come and go, but the life of one&#x2019;s country and one&#x2019;s people endures. We shall miss him, and when I look at this blood-stain I feel that it should stay here to serve as an inspiration to those of us who are here, and as an inspiration to those who succeed us, because it is the lifeblood of one of South Africa&#x2019;s greatest sons, the blood he shed in the service of his people and his beloved country, South Africa.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bloomberg">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. BLOOMBERG</person>:</from>

<p>Sir, I rise to associate my colleagues and myself as well as the Coloured people of South Africa with the motion before the House and with the tributes paid to the memory of our lamented Prime Minister. Mr. Speaker, I do not know of any incident in the long and glorious history of South Africa which equals in its pathos the sudden grief which has befallen our citizens and which has found an echo in every civilized country in the world. The ghastly and revolting tragedy which the stern hand of fate inflicted upon our country yesterday, is so close to us that it is humanly not possible to pay adequate tribute to his memory. Our hearts are all filled with such grief that it renders it almost impossible properly to express our innermost thoughts on this very sad occasion. Sir, South Africa feels that it is the nation&#x2019;s sorrow, and to-day all South Africans, irrespective of race or colour or creed or, indeed, of political affiliation, join to pay respect to his revered memory and turn with heartfelt anxiety to alleviate the indescribable grief of the loyal and devoted wife and children he has left behind. Our thoughts are with them to-day. Sir, I would like to speak simply and sincerely, without any idle flattery, of the man whose death has made a nation mourn. When the history of our time comes to be written the life of Dr. Hendrik Verwoerd will serve to recall to the memory of future generations the character of one who has filled such a space in our history and the enormous part which he has played and the great contributions which he made in the building up of our Republic of South Africa. His life will <span class="col_2011-2012" refersTo="page_1017"/>reveal a glowing example of a national figure who dedicated himself honestly and conscientiously to public service and whose strength of character and political integrity were unimpeachable, whether we agreed or disagreed with his politics. He was manifestly a man of absolute sincerity and of tremendous ability. These attributes, coupled with an unfailing courtesy, were undoubtedly responsible for arousing a great and sincere response from his many followers in this country and at the same time earned for him the admiration of his political opponents. It is impossible to sum up the aggregate of the service of his public life at a moment such as this. Of necessity, Sir, this remains a task for our historians. All I can say to-day is that Dr. Verwoerd has won for himself a place of singular distinction in the annals of our country which, I am certain, will always remain a great source of pride and consolation to the members of his family and will always be a great inspiration to his many ardent followers. To-day our hearts are filled with deep sorrow for Mrs. Verwoerd and her family, who have been so tragically bereft of their beloved one. We know how irremediable is their grief. It is our fervent prayer that the Almighty will sustain them in this sad hour of affliction. Sir, I beg to associate myself with the motion before the House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_community_development_of_public_works_and_of_social_welfare_and_pensions">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, OF PUBLIC WORKS AND OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND PENSIONS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, it is for me a heartfelt need to associate myself with the motion before this House. It is for me a heartfelt need in the first place because to me personally Dr. Verwoerd was more than a leader, more than a Prime Minister. As a politician he was in many respects more a father to me. I grew up in the same town where the Verwoerd family lived. I knew and respected his father. His father already had a great influence on my life. During years of close co-operation, initially in the then Native Affairs Commission, in other party connections, and subsequently as Minister, nobody made a greater impression upon me than Dr. Verwoerd. I came to know him as a true, dedicated Christian; I came to know him as an unimpeachable person; I came to know him as a gentle, endearing leader who never forced his will upon his associates, who was always prepared to listen, who was always prepared to co-operate with the team that stood at his side. I came to know him as a man who rendered unselfish service to his country and his people under all circumstances, as a man who never thought of himself, a man who often never thought of his party either, but always thought in the first place of his country and his people, a man who was always prepared to make every sacrifice for what he honestly believed to be in the best interests of South Africa. I think that his influence extended much further than the ranks of his own party. I think that his influence extended over the whole of South Africa, where he became the symbol of faith in the future. I think his influence extended further than the Whites of South Africa, for from the experience which I have gained in various capacities, I know of the growing understanding and the growing appreciation of his leadership and of himself which existed amongst the non-White population groups as well.</p>

<p>But in particular I want to pay tribute to his memory here for what he did in another field, namely what he did as a person who was intensely interested in the needs and the problems of the underprivileged people of our nation. Through his guidance and through his actions in the academic world, where he was a founder and a leader in the sphere of sociological studies and social work, he did pioneering work. Through his participation in the national congress on the poor-white problem in 1934 he played a particular part in the building up of social services and the upliftment which followed, and throughout his life, right up to the end, even as recently as last week, he demonstrated to me that in all his activities, with all the duties which rested upon him, he continually had the needs and the problems of the underprivileged people very much at heart. On various occasions he discussed the problems of our elderly people, our poor people and our socially maladjusted people with me. As far as I am aware he probably did more in that sphere than anybody else in South Africa. He meant a particularly great deal to the province which I represent and where I am leader of the National Party, because I think that in him not only his party followers, but all White people saw the personification of true South African citizenship and true South African loyalty. Through a treacherous attack his place has become empty, but in our hearts and in the hearts of our people he will live on, the ideals for which he stood will live on. His mark upon us and upon our people is ineffaceable.</p>

<p>In these sad times we think, too, of his wife. Not only did Mrs. Verwoerd support him faithfully in his difficult task, but the personal influence which emanated from her&#x2014;she who is the personification of true motherhood, she who has always been an example of a truly dedicated wife&#x2014;will also be remembered for a long time. We shall never forget her; we shall support her and our prayers will accompany her on the difficult road which lies ahead for her and her children. I beg to associate myself with the motion before this House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#suzman">

<from><span class="col_2013-2014" refersTo="page_1018"/>Mrs. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. SUZMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my party I wish to associate myself with the sentiments expressed here to-day. Those of us who worked in this House with the late Prime Minister could not help but respect his dedication and his undoubted ability. That we disagreed with his policy is neither important nor relevant on this sad occasion. All of us are at one in condemning the dreadful deed that we witnessed in this Chamber yesterday. To Mrs. Verwoerd and her family we wish to extend our sincere condolences. Speaking as a woman, rather than as a politician, I extend to Mrs. Verwoerd and her children my deep sympathy in their tragic loss.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agricultural_technical_services_and_of_water_affairs">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURAL TECHNICAL SERVICES AND OF WATER AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, overcome by grief, but deeply grateful for what our late Prime Minister has meant to us, I want to salute this afternoon the memory of one of the greatest men our country has ever known. It is clear after the speeches, the moving speeches we have heard here from both sides of the House, that the entire House has been plunged into deep mourning by the tragic death of our Prime Minister. We are living at a stage where there is a tremendous deal at stake for South Africa. Both in our country and beyond our borders friend and foe alike acknowledged the late Dr. Verwoerd as a great mind and a dynamic leader, and it goes without saying that, with the death of such a man, South Africa is the poorer. Not only are we in South Africa the poorer, but also his friends outside South Africa. The death of the late Dr. Verwoerd leaves our country the poorer, and it may be that our friends in the economic sphere may at this stage, with the loss of such a man in South Africa, shrink back for the time being; it may also be that as a result of his death our enemies may consider South Africa to be the poorer and that they may see in this an opportunity for taking stronger action against South Africa. We are the poorer because we have lost such a man, but, Mr. Speaker, we cannot lose sight of the future. Greater responsibility has always led to the generation of greater energy and greater vitality, and I want to express the hope that the greater responsibility which has now been cast upon the rest of South Africa will lead us to making a more concerted effort than ever before to build up this wonderful fatherland of ours. Together with the world we want to express to-day our deep sorrow at the death of a great man, who died in such a treacherous manner. But I believe that we in South Africa and in this House will show the world that the treacherous dagger of an assassin will never force this fine country of ours to its knees economically, nor break it spiritually. In this hour of trial I want to appeal to the inherent solidarity of our State as a whole and of our entire population to show the world that we shall solve our own problems of our own fatherland in our own right, according to our own will and in our own way. Mr. Speaker, we have been dealt a cruel blow, but in the words of the well-known Free State saying I want to say to this House this afternoon: &#x201C;Alles sal regkom as ons elkeen ons plig doen.&#x201D; (<i>All will be well if we all do our duty)</i> In these tragic circumstances South Africa, and every citizen of South Africa, are now called upon to do their duty. I know we can rely on the loyal citizens of South Africa.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I too want to express my deep sympathy with Mrs. Verwoerd and her family. All I want to say is, &#x201C;May the Almighty keep His hand of mercy over them in these days and in the days and years to come.&#x201D;</p>

<p>I wish to associate myself with this motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_minister_for_south_west_africa_affairs">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY MINISTER FOR SOUTH WEST AFRICA AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we knew Dr. Verwoerd as an able, hardworking and thorough Minister, but it was as Prime Minister that he came to the fore with his outstanding qualities of leadership and statesmanship, which grew and increased in stature and scope and made him a world figure. One of his most outstanding qualities was his humaneness. Those of us who knew him were always aware of his friendliness, his courtesy and his accessibility. Also in his association with other people, wherever he came into contact with them&#x2014;in his office, at his home or in public&#x2014;he had the knack and the gift of setting at ease those whom he met and of making them happy. He was a dynamic personality. He compelled the respect of all who came into contact with him. Thus we learned to love him.</p>

<p>To me, who worked in such close association with him as his Deputy Minister, it was a great privilege to be able to work together with such a great man. The inspiration that emanated from him to those who sought with him to serve our people, compelled one to give only one&#x2019;s best. As Prime Minister he was also responsible for South West Africa. He was the Minister for South West Africa. He regarded South West Africa as part of South Africa. He regarded the people of South West Africa as part of the people of South Africa. He made no distinction, and regarded the destiny of South West Africa as the destiny of South Africa. One day, when things were very difficult, he told me that if we had to fight, he would fight for South West Africa just as he would fight for South Africa. He would give his whole life for South West Africa. He had his ideals, with which many people perhaps disagreed, but when he adopted a course, he adopted that course because he believed in it. The course he indicated as that for the future development of South Africa and of South West Africa was the course he believed would result in the highest good for all population <span class="col_2015-2016" refersTo="page_1019"/>groups in these two territories. South West Africa will remember him as the architect who planned the South West Africa case. I can testify to that, because I was present on every occasion when the case was discussed. We pay tribute to the other persons and bodies who were also concerned in the case, but he was the mind, the master-mind, behind all that planning, and therefore South West Africa will always remember him as that statesman, that Prime Minister, who did not place the interests of South West Africa second, but placed them first alongside of those of South Africa.</p>

<p>Our thoughts go out to his wife and her family, a brave woman, a woman who never shrank from her obligations towards her husband. Where they have to endure this tragic bereavement to-day, I want to assure her that she and her family are in the thoughts of the people in even the remotest corners of South West Africa.</p>

<p>Motion agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#state_funeral_of_the_late_dr_h_f_verwoerd">

<heading>STATE FUNERAL OF THE LATE DR. H. F. VERWOERD</heading>

<speech by="#acting_prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">ACTING PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr Speaker, I wish to make an announcement in connection with the arrangements for the state funeral of the late Dr. H. F. Verwoerd.</p>

<p>The state funeral of Dr. H. F. Verwoerd, the late Prime Minister of the Republic of South Africa, will take place from the Amphitheatre, Union Buildings, Pretoria, at 2.15 p.m. on Saturday, 10th September, 1966. His mortal remains will be laid to rest in the Heroes&#x2019; Acre in the Church Street Cemetery, Pretoria.</p>

<p>The service, which will be the only official memorial service, will be broadcast nationwide. Various denominations, however, will arrange for special memorial services throughout the country, the times and details of which will be given as soon as possible.</p>

<p>In consultation with the next of kin it has been decided that there will be no lying-instate.</p>

<p>Persons included in the official protocol list and other persons wishing to attend the memorial service in Pretoria should please get in touch with the Protocol Division of the Department of Foreign Affairs.</p>

<p>Further details about the composition and route of the funeral procession, traffic arrangements, etc., will be announced in Pretoria by the Protocol Division. My colleague, the Minister of Transport, will now make an announcement in connection with transport arrangements.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_transport">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF TRANSPORT</person>:</from>

<p>Special air transport is being arranged for Members of Parliament and their wives on Saturday, 10th September. The aircraft will depart from Cape Town on Saturday morning and will return on Saturday evening. Arrangements have been made for providing 588 seats and military aircraft as well as aircraft of the S.A.A. will be used. The military aircraft will depart from Ysterplaat and the S.A.A. aircraft from the D.F. Malan airport. Air transport on the said special flights between Cape Town and Pretoria will be free of charge and members who wish to avail themselves of this transport should please give their names to the Whips immediately. Air transport will be free of charge for members as well as for their wives. Bus transport will be arranged from the airports to Pretoria and to the funeral ceremony. As soon as the names of members who wish to make use of these travelling facilities have been received, members will be informed from which airport and at what time their aircraft will depart. I trust that hon. members of the Opposition will immediately inform their Whips who of them together with their wives wish to make use of these travelling facilities. The names must then be given to the Whips on this side of the House so that further arrangements may be made.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#adjournment_of_house">

<heading>ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_transport">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF TRANSPORT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I wish to move as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) That the House at its rising to-day, stand adjourned until Wednesday, 14th September, at 2.15 p.m.: Provided that if it appears to the satisfaction of Mr. Speaker after consultation with the Acting Prime Minister that the public interest or public business requires that the House should meet&#x2014;

<ol><li>(a) at an earlier time during such adjournment; or</li>

<li>(b) at any later time than the day to which it stands adjourned, Mr. Speaker may give notice to the members of this House that he is so satisfied and thereupon the House shall meet at the time stated in such notice; and</li></ol></li>

<li>(2) that Notices of Questions for those days on which the House stands adjourned, shall be dealt with on the first day on which Notices of Questions have precedence after the House has resumed.</li></ol>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1966-09-07T15:15:00">3.15 p.m.</recordedTime> until Wednesday, 14th September, at 2.15 p.m.</p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

