---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol17 - FRIDAY 29 JULY 1966'
layout: debate
year: 1966
month: JULY
month_slug: Jul
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading><span class="col_1-2" refersTo="page_0012"/>FRIDAY, 29TH JULY, 1966</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Pursuant to Proclamation No. 115 of the State President, dated 14th April, 1966, members assembled in the Assembly Chamber, Houses of Parliament, at 9.30 a.m.</p>

<p>The SECRETARY read the Proclamation.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING</heading>

<p>The SECRETARY announced:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) That the following letters had been received from the Secretary to the Prime Minister:

<ol>

<li>(a) Letter, dated 20th May, 1966, stating that the State President would open Parliament at 12 o&#x2019;clock noon today in the Senate Chamber;</li>

<li>(b) Letters, dated 4th and 25th March, and 12th April, 1966, respectively, notifying the names of persons declared duly elected as members of the House of Assembly at the general election; and</li>

</ol></li>

<li>(2) that the Honourable Mr. Justice L. C. Steyn, Chief Justice of South Africa, had been authorized by a Commission from the State President to administer the oath or affirmation to members of the House of Assembly.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oath">

<heading>OATH</heading>

<p>The SERJEANT-AT-ARMS announced the Hon. Mr. Justice Steyn, who was received by members standing, and having taken his seat at the Table, administered the oath to the members present and thereupon withdrew.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#election_of_speaker">

<heading>ELECTION OF SPEAKER</heading>

<p>The SECRETARY intimated that the House would proceed to the election of a Speaker.</p>

<speech by="#potgieter">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. E. POTGIETER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Mr. Henning Johannes Klopper do take the Chair of this House as Speaker.</block>

<p>This is the third time I have had the privilege of moving that Mr. Klopper be Speaker of this House. I want to refer briefly to the excellent and distinguished services he has rendered during his career in this House of Assembly. For the information of new members I want to state that Mr. Klopper has been a member of this House since 7th July, 1943, without interruption. During his period of service as a member he has also served on various Select Committees, <i>inter alia</i> as Chairman of the important Select Committee on Railways and Harbours. From 1954 to 1956 he was Deputy-Chairman of Committees of this House, from 1957 to 1960 Deputy-Speaker and Chairman of Committees, and from 1960 up to the present he has been Speaker of this House. He has had the honour of being the last Speaker of the Parliament of the Union of South Africa and the first Speaker of the Parliament of the <span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0013"/>Republic of South Africa. In this regard I want to state that the fact that the change-over from a monarchial to a republican form of government took place smoothly was due largely to the tactful and dignified conduct of Mr. Klopper in his capacity as Speaker.</p>

<p>Very closely connected with the change-over to a republican form of government is what I want to call the finishing-off process, i.e. the revision of the rules of this House. In his capacity as Speaker Mr. Klopper has been associated with this process as well. You yourself, Mr. McFarlane, have been overseas, where you obtained a great deal of information in regard to the matter. That, together with the help of other officials of the House of Assembly, has led to the modernization of the Standing Orders of this House, particularly with a view to the optimum utilization of the precious time of this House and the more expeditious dispatch of its business.</p>

<p>A particularly great contribution made by Mr. Klopper as Speaker, however, was in connection with the introduction of the Mace, with its unique design in solid gold, which is used here to-day as a wonderful and indispensable symbol of the authority of Parliament. The people of South Africa can be justly proud of it. It was Mr. Klopper as Speaker too, who strove for the incorporation of national and typically South African symbols on the Mace. We find that certain episodes and scenes from the history of our country are beautifully portrayed thereon, and that recognition has at the same time been accorded to certain national emblems, such as the protea and the crane.</p>

<p>Mr. Klopper has been a worthy Speaker and a dignified personality and as such has lent dignity and lustre to the proceedings of this House. An expert on parliamentary procedure. Sir Erskine May, has described the status of the Speaker as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The Speaker is the representative of the House itself in its powers, proceedings and dignities.</block>

<p>It is in this respect that Mr. Klopper has lent dignity and lustre to the proceedings of this House and to the Speaker&#x2019;s office during the time he has occupied the Chair of this House as Speaker. A Speaker is also expected to act with complete impartiality. In fact, that is one of the most essential attributes required in a Speaker, and this too, is one of the tributes that can be paid to Mr. Klopper, i.e. that he has fulfilled this requirement to the satisfaction of all. At the adjournment of the House of Assembly earlier this year the Leader of the Opposition paid tribute, <i>inter alia,</i> to this attribute of Mr. Klopper, and the fact that at the recent election Mr. Klopper was elected unopposed as a member of the House of Assembly is an indication of the regard we have for the office of Speaker and how far we are prepared to go in order to ensure the impartiality of that office. Sir Erskine May puts it as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The Speaker so chosen must not only be impartial in the Chair but every action outside must show the House and, indeed, the country that he is indeed impartial.</block>

<p>But the Speaker also has certain fundamental rights. Sir Erskine May puts it as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The Speaker has two fundamental rights to uphold. The one is that the minority must be given an ample opportunity to be heard but the majority has the responsibility to govern.</block>

<p>Every one, particularly the small constitutional groups, will acknowledge that in this respect Mr. Klopper acted in an irreproachable manner while holding the office of Speaker. As I say this I notice how happy even the hon. member for Houghton is, judging from the expression I see on her face.</p>

<p>Mr. McFarlane, in view of the fact that Mr. Klopper has in the past, when serving as Speaker in this House, lent such dignity and lustre to the proceedings and has even enhanced the traditions attaching to the office of Speaker, I am convinced that he will in the future carry out the responsibilities of this office in a similar manner.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#higgerty">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. W. HIGGERTY</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. McFarlane, it is indeed a great privilege for me to be able to second this motion on behalf of the Official Opposition. I think this is the first occasion in our Parliamentary history, both during the period of Union and since the establishment of the Republic, that a member of the Opposition has seconded the motion for the election of a Speaker. That the Official Opposition finds itself able to-day to indicate in this way its full support of the election of Mr. Klopper as our Speaker constitutes in the first place a tribute to the honourable gentleman himself and in the second place to the progress we have made in the Parliamentary sphere over the years.</p>

<p>As far as Mr. Klopper is concerned, we have got to know him well in his capacity firstly as Chairman of Committees and then as Speaker of this House. It is not necessary for me to expand on his qualities as a presiding officer. The hon. member who has just sat down has done that most adequately. I, however, should like to assure Mr. Klopper that he has earned the admiration of every one in this House for his impartiality and for his general qualities whilst presiding over the proceedings of this House. Moreover, I can assure him that he can count on our support in this difficult task. We all realise that he cannot please all of us all the time, particularly when he has to give a decision on a point of order or when he has to call a member to order. This applies particularly to the hon. member who has been called to order. This need cause no concern, however, as long as the presiding officer applies discipline fairly and equitably. This, we know, Mr. Klopper <span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0014"/>will do. The fact that I, as I have already said, am in a position to second this motion on behalf of the Official Opposition is also a tribute to the progress we have made in the Parliamentary sphere, progress which has been accelerated in recent years by the co-operation we have experienced in revising our rules. We have, of course, our political differences, but I think all members realise that the Parliamentary machine itself is above politics and this applies especially to the presiding officers.</p>

<p>I have pleasure in seconding the motion.</p>

<p>There being no other proposal, Mr. Klopper was called to the Chair by the Secretary.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#klopper">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. J. KLOPPER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. McFarlane, since this House has once again greatly honoured me by nominating me for the office of Speaker, I shall accept the nomination. The fact that both sides of this House, Government as well as Opposition members, are unanimous on this matter, makes this a great day in our history. I am deeply moved by this and I appreciate it very highly. I am only too well aware of the extent of my shortcomings when I think of the high qualifications required of a presiding officer. It has been my experience in the past, however, that I have had the wholehearted co-operation of both sides of this House, and I have reason to expect the same in the future. I have said on occasion that I am very proud of the representatives elected to this Parliament by the people. What has happened here to-day, proves that I have reason to be proud of them.</p>

<p>I wish to extend a particular welcome to the large number of new members sworn in to-day. In this regard I should like to express the thought that this House as an institution is a heritage of those who served our country in the past. It is a great heritage and the future of that heritage depends on us. We can either develop it into a great institution radiating its influence in all directions both in our father-land and beyond our borders, or we can break it down. But I believe that the representatives assembled here to-day will make their contribution towards developing this institution into a magnificent and precious possession which we shall be able to hand over to those who will succeed us.</p>

<p>I feel myself unworthy of holding this office, but I have always sought Divine guidance and I believe that God in His mercy will also in the future grant me the strength and the wisdom to fulfil the high expectations you have of me. I therefore bow to the will of this House and once again become your servant.</p>

<p>Mr. J. E. Potgieter and Mr. J. W. Higgerty conducted Mr. Klopper to the Chair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Before taking the Chair I desire to express my sincere thanks to my fellow members for the high honour they have once again conferred upon me. I fully appreciate the great responsibilities resting on the shoulders of the presiding officer of any democratic assembly, and I can only assure hon. members that I shall always endeavour to the best of my ability and with the help of Almighty God to discharge my duties in an impartial manner. I thank you.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasant duty and at the same time I regard it as an honour to be able to congratulate you on your reappointment as Speaker of this House. In the years that have gone by you have set us an example of what may be expected from the Chair of the Parliament of the Republic of South Africa. In the past you have occupied the office of Speaker in a manner which brought credit not only to you, but also to all of us. You are of course in the fortunate position of having a good Parliament to control, perhaps one of the best Parliaments in the world! That does of course facilitate your task, but it nevertheless remains a difficult one.</p>

<p>I am glad that we are able to congratulate you on your reappointment, and for the five years that lie ahead we wish you God&#x2019;s blessing both in your own life and in the proceedings here.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this side of the House it is my privilege to be able to congratulate you on your re-election to this high office. You yourself, Sir, have said that you are the recipient of the authority of this House and that at the same time you are also its servant. Well, as the recipient of the authority of this House you have shown yourself in the past a most worthy representative, whilst as the servant of the House you have shown yourself most diligent in looking after its interests and of maintaining the highest traditions attaching to this Parliament. We all wish you a successful term of office and as far as the Official Opposition is concerned, while knowing that our rights will be respected, we hope that you will have the easiest term of office you have enjoyed thus far.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to express my sincere appreciation to the hon. the Prime Minister, to the hon. the Leader of the Opposition and, through them, to all hon. members of this House for the kind words addressed to me on the occasion of my re-election as Speaker. I feel small, but at the same time I am deeply grateful that we are in such a fortunate position. I rely on your wholehearted co-operation as far as the execution of my duties is concerned. As the hon. the Prime Minister rightly said, I can consider myself fortunate to be the presiding officer of such a distinguished assembly. I know the value of goodwill and cooperation on the part of the hon. the Prime Minister and his Cabinet, the Leader of the Opposition and, in fact, the leaders of all political parties in this House. Firstly, I shall consider it my duty to afford the Government an opportunity of submitting its proposals and measures to this House.</p>

<p><span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0015"/>Secondly, I shall always consider it to be my duty to give the Opposition adequate opportunity to examine and scrutinize such proposals and measures and to comment upon them. I shall also consider it to be my duty to protect the interests of every hon. member of this House and to do it without fear or favour. In particular shall I deem it to be my duty to protect the interests and rights of minority parties, however small the minority may be. I am, however, afraid that sometimes I may even have to protect the majority against the minority!</p>

<p>In all events I shall try to be your obedient servant.</p>

<p>Proceedings suspended at 10.30 a.m. and resumed at 11.40 a.m.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#speaker_report">

<heading>MR. SPEAKER&#x2019;S REPORT</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I have to report that after the House had suspended proceedings this morning, I proceeded to Government House accompanied by Ministers and other honourable members, where we were received by the State President, to whom I presented myself pursuant to the Standing Orders of this House. The State President then congratulated me on my election.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and members proceeded to the Senate Chamber to attend the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and on their return,</p>

<block name="quote">Mr. Speaker took the Chair and read prayers.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker laid upon the Table:</p>

<block name="quote">Commission from the State President, dated 29th July, 1966, authorizing Henning Johannes Klopper to administer, as long as he holds the office of Speaker of the House of Assembly during the continuance of the Third Parliament of the Republic of South Africa, the oath or affirmation to members of the House of Assembly.</block>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening_speech">

<heading>OPENING SPEECH</heading>

<p>Mr. Speaker stated that at the opening ceremony he had received a copy of the State President&#x2019;s Address to members of the Senate and of the House of Assembly, which was in the following terms:</p>

<p>MNR. DIE PRESIDENT EN LEDE VAN DIE SENAAT:</p>

<p>MNR. DIE SPEAKER EN LEDE VAN DIE VOLKSRAAD:</p>

<block name="quote">I am glad to welcome you to this the First Session of the Third Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.<br/>Die inwoners van die Republiek het groot rede tot dankbaarheid en vertroue in die toekoms. &#x2019;n Skaduwee wat die afgelope jare oor die Republiek gehang het, as gevolg van die onsekerheid oor die uitspraak van die Internasionale Hof oor Suid-Afrika se bestuur van Suidwes-Afrika, is verwyder. Die bevinding het die Republiek se volgehoue ontkenning van enige reg tot inmenging deur ander state ten volle regverdig. Enige verdere poging om längs ander wee dieselfde doel te bereik sal uit vervolgsug spruit en behoort geen steun te vind by enige ordent-like Staat of organisasie van state nie. Die Regering wat tot dusver met kalmte en beslistheid Suid-Afrika se goeie reg en suiwer houding ten opsigte van alle bevolkingsdele en state verdedig het, sal voortgaan om alle aanslae ewe kragtig die hoof te bied. Nög Suid-Afrika nög Suidwes-Afrika nög enige ander Staat of liggaam kan enige twyfel he oor die onwrikbare wil en die aansienlike vermoe, beide ekonomies en militer, waar-mee die volk van Suid-Afrika sy belange te alle tye sal beskerm. Tegelykertyd kan daar ook geen twyfel bestaan oor die goedge-sindheid van die Republiek teenoor alle lande, en oor sy gereedheid om vriendskaps-bande met almal te sluit en om bystand te verleen binne sy vermoe aan iedereen wat dit vra, sonder enige poging tot inmenging in hui sake nie.<br/>Die Republiek het ook alle rede tot dankbaarheid oor die voortdurende stabiliteit van sy Regering, met die veiligheid en seker-heid wat dit meebring op ekonomiese sowel as op internasionale en politieke gebied.<br/>In teenstelling met toestande in die mees-te state van die wereld, insluitende diegene wat meen dat integrasie &#x2019;n resep vir rasse-vrede is, is Suid-Afrika geseen met die hoogste mate van vrede en ordelikheid onder alle dele van sy veelvolkige bevolking.<br/>Ook op ekonomiese terrein ag die Republiek hom gelukkig. Nieteenstaande die mees verwoestende en omvangryke droogte in die afgelope eeu, en terwyl magtige wereldstate worstel met diepgrypende ekonomiese Probleme, beur die Republiek nog steeds vooruit en is sy taak eerder om sy groeikoers in te perk as om na ontwikkeling te smag.<br/>Wereldtoestande is daarenteen nog steeds verontrustend. Dit is veral met spyt dat gekonstateer moet word dat toestande in Afrika, wat uiteraard ten nouste met die Republiek verband het, nog steeds verward en gevaarlik bly. Interne geskille, gekenmerk deur militere staatsgrepe, die belangrikste waarvan in die onlangse verlede in Nigerie en Ghana plaasgevind het, en deur bloedige opstande soos in die Suidelike Soedan, gaan gepaard met ongewenste buitelandse inmenging. Alhoewel Rusland en Rooi-China terugslae in Afrika ondervind het, en die kommunistiese offensief enigsins afgestomp is deur die Chinees-Russiese geskil en, so wil &#x2019;n mens hoop, &#x2019;n groeiende bewustheid in Afrika ontstaan van die gevare van die kommunistiese ideologie, bly die uitbreiding van die kommunisme, veral soos dit geopenbaar word deur &#x2019;n wereldstrewe tot onder-myning van burgerlike orde, nog altyd &#x2019;n wesentlike gevaar.<br/><span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0016"/>Des te meer word bevrediging geput uit die ordelike vooruitgang van die Republiek se onmiddellike bure, Basoetoland en Betsjoeanaland, op pad na soewereine onaf-hanklikheid. Die Regering sien uit na gesonde verhoudings en samewerking met hülle, streng op die grondslag van nieinmenging in mekaar se sake. Dit is dieself-de beginsel wat nog steeds die Republiek se optrede bepaal in verband met gebeure in Rhodesie, en met ander lande. Die Regering verwelkom die hervatting van samespre-kings tussen die Britse en Rhodesiese ower-hede en wil die hoop uitspreek dat dit spoe-dig mag lei tot heilsame gevolge en die opheffing van sanksies.<br/>Die Regering is bewus daarvan dat die strategiese ligging van die Republiek by die samevloeiing van twee uitgestrekte oseane dit noodwendig die skyf moet maak van kwaadwillige magte&#x2014;&#x2019;n feit wat ongelukkig nie altyd so duidelik besef of erken word deur belanghebbende Westerse state as wat &#x2019;n mens sou verwag nie. Alle inisiatief vir onderlinge samewerking met daardie lande wat besondere belange het by die handha-wing van stabiliteit en vooruitgang in die Suid-Atlantiese en Indiese Oseane word dus verwelkom.<br/>Die Verenigde Volke word helaas nog steeds gebruik as die brandpunt van redelose druk op die Republiek deur onervare en onderontwikkelde state. Bevriende en stamverwante state wat die gevolglike agter-uitgang van die nut en invloed van hierdie organisasie moet raaksien, huiwer ongelukkig om dit te hervorm. Die Regering sal nogtans voortgaan om al sy regte wat voort-vloei uit lidmaatskap van hierdie liggaam sowel as van verwante organisasies, te verdedig, in stand te hou en te gebruik solank as Suid-Afrika se nasionale selfrespek dit toelaat en sy nasionale belang dit verg.<br/>Die primere taak van die Suid-Afrikaanse Weermag moet nog gesien word teen die agtergrond van algemene wereldspanning en spesifieke dreigemente teen Suid-Afrika en sy mense. Met die oog hierop word alle normale voorbereiding van die Weermag nagekom. Die Weermag betree nou &#x2019;n fase waarin die konsolidasie van die voorafgaan-de vinnige ontwikkeling nougesetter aandag sal ontvang met besondere nadruk op die bevel-en beheerstrukture op alle vlakke, die opleidingsmetodes en die strydmagte beno-dig vir besondere vorins van oorlogvoering.<br/>Die land se industriele potensiaal word al meer ingespan om &#x2019;n aansienlike bydrae tot krygstuigproduksie te maak, en Suid-Afrika word steeds meer selfversorgend in hierdie opsig.<br/>Met die oog op die ontwikkeling van wereldtoerisme en wat Suid-Afrika bied in natuurprag, klimaat, vooruitgang en bevol-kingsverskeidenheid, behoort hierdie land &#x2019;n veel groter deel van die toeristestroom te ontvang as wat die geval in die verlede was. Hierin kom algaande &#x2019;n verandering. Sodra die grootste knelpunt, naamlik die tekort aan hotelhuisvesting van &#x2019;n hoe standaard, oorbrug is, sal steeds meer en meer toeriste na Suid-Afrika gelok word. Maatreels wat deur die Parlement aanvaar is in hierdie verband, begin reeds vrugte dra.<br/>Die tydfaktor wat nog altyd ten opsigte van Suid-Afrika as &#x2019;n stremming deur toeriste beskou is, word oorkom deur moderne straalaangedrewe vliegtuie.<br/>Hierdie land is vandag oorsee een van die mees gesogte immigrasielande. Ten spyte van skerp mededinging slaag die Republiek daarin om die voortdurende tekort aan opgeleide en geskoolde werkkragte in &#x2019;n groot mate deur middel van selektiewe immigrasie aan te vul. Dit moet elkeen se strewe wees om hülle in die Suid-Afrikaanse samelewing te help opneem, en die Staat sal daartoe meehelp deur die fasiliteite beskikbaar te stel waardeur hülle die twee landstale kan aanleer en by hui nuwe vaderland se besondere probleme en lewenswyse kan aanpas.<br/>Die Republiek se hantering van sy kleur-vraagstukke wek nog steeds belangstelling sowel in die binne-as in die buiteland.<br/>Ten opsigte van die Bantoe is die afgelope jaar gekenmerk deur volgehoue vooruitgang, rus en vrede. Die vyfjaar-ontwikkelingsplan wat gedurende 1961 aangekondig is, het die end van sy beplande periode bereik en tas-bare vorderingsresultate is gelewer. In sommige opsigte is die gestelde doelwitte selfs verbygesteek. Vanwee die geweldige om-vang van die taak van volkerebou by die Bantoe is dit egter noodsaaklik dat hierdie ontwikkelingswerk nog intensief en ononder-broke moet voortgaan. Die nodige beplanning en programmering ten opsigte van &#x2019;n verdere ontwikkelingsperiode is reeds uitge-werk.<br/>Uitvoering van Regeringsbeieid vereis dat die Bantoe seif meer en meer skeppend betrek moet word in die wydvertakte bedry-wighede van sy Bantoevolk ten einde met-tertyd die voortou te kan neem in hui eie volkshuishoudings. Hiermee is reeds aan-sienlik gevorder, en word die mikpunte steeds hoer gesteh<br/>Wat die Kleurlinge betref word, naas die reeds bekende ontwikkelinge op die politieke terrein, al meer ingetree om hui ekonomiese vooruitgang te bevorder.<br/>Die Kleurling-ontwikkelingskorporasie wat gedurende 1962 in die lewe geroep is, het aansienlike vordering met sy werksaam-hede gemaak. Hy ondersoek tans die moont-likheid om seif ondernemings op die gebied van handel, nywerheid en finansiewese in Kleurlingwoongebiede te stig wat later deur die Kleurlinge seif oorgeneem sal kan word.<br/>Terwyl daar &#x2019;n tekort aan Kleurlingar-beid bestaan, is daar baie jeugdige Kleurlinge wat die skole vroeg verlaat en by gebrek aan inisiatief, wilskrag en koersvast-heid, nie daarin slaag om vaste betrekkings te bekom en te behou nie. Hui dienste gaan derhalwe vir hui gemeenskap en vir die land <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0017"/>verlore en later skep hulle maatskaplike probleme. &#x2019;n Skema van jeugkampe op &#x2019;n vrywillige basis en in samewerking met die ouers word beoog. Aan sulke jong seuns in die kritieke stadium van adolessensie tussen skoolverlating en toetrede tot die arbeidsmark, sal die adel van arbeid tuis gebring word sodat hulle kan leer om goeie, ywerige en gelukkige werkers te wees.<br/>Wat betref diegene wat egter reeds die leeftyd tussen 18 en 24 jaar bereik het en ongeskik, onopgelei of werksku skyn te wees, sal wetgewing ingedien word vir die daarstelling van inrigtings waarin hulle volgens aanleg en vermoens opgelei kan word.<br/>Met die bevordering van die belange van die Indiergemeenskap word ook toenemend sukses behaal. Die jongste onderneming le op die terrein van die onderwys. Primere en sekondere onderwysdienste ten opsigte van Indiers in Natal, asook die Opleidingskollege vir Indieronderwysers in Transvaal, is met ingang van 1 April 1966 van die provinsiale owerhede deur die Sentrale Regering oorgeneem. Die oorname het vlot verloop en die Departement van Indiersake is besig om vir Indiers &#x2019;n onderwysstelsel daar te stel wat in hul besondere behoeftes sal voorsien.<br/>Alle bevolkingsgroepe het die geleentheid verwelkom om aan die viering van die vyfde verjaardag van die totstandkoming van die Republiek van Suid-Afrika deel te neem. Die spontane bydrae en deelname van elke afsonderlike volksgroep was &#x2019;n groot sukses. Die republikeinse ideaal van geslagte is in voorspoed, vrede en eensgesindheid bewerkstellig en dit is met geesdrif en waardigheid gevier.</block>

<p>In the economic field, one of the outstanding features of the first seven months of 1966 was the notable improvement in the Republic&#x2019;s balance of payments and the almost dramatic rise in the official gold and foreign exchange reserves. Not only did the various stabilization measures applied by the Government, such as credit and import control, succeed in transforming the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments into a small surplus, but large amounts of foreign capital also flowed into the country. A substantial part of this inflow represented long-term capital for productive investment.</p>

<p>Like most other developed countries, however, the Republic has for some time now been experiencing a degree of inflation. Prices have tended upwards and the purchasing power of money has decreased. This state of affairs has been brought about mainly by excessive capital and consumer spending, which, in turn, was made possible and encouraged by the existence of too much money and other liquid assets in the economy.</p>

<p>Although this inflation has been associated with rapid economic growth, it is nevertheless an undesirable development which will severely affect all groups of the population if not counteracted in time.</p>

<p>The Government is, therefore, determined to preserve a high degree of economic stability by not allowing inflationary forces to gain the upper hand. Various further measures have consequently been applied from time to time to restrain the increase in both capital outlays and consumer spending and to prevent inflationary financing in both the public and private sectors. If necessary, still further steps will be taken.</p>

<p>A milestone in the monetary history of South Africa was reached in May this year, when the last of the new coins, the one cent coin, was issued. Considerable progress has also been made with the preparation for issuing the Republic&#x2019;s new series of bank notes.</p>

<p>During the first five years of the Republic&#x2019;s existence, domestic as well as foreign trade experienced a period of exceptional growth and expansion.</p>

<p>The sharp increase in imports was, on the one hand, due to the great demand for capital goods and raw materials for production purposes, and, on the other hand, to the rapidly growing domestic demand for consumer goods. This resulted in South Africa becoming an increasingly important outlet for the products of various other countries.</p>

<p>The relatively smaller increase in exports is to be ascribed to the bigger domestic demand for goods and services, as well as to unfavourable climatic conditions which detrimentally affected the export of agricultural products.</p>

<p>The sound basis on which industrial development in the Republic is founded ensures sustained and healthy industrial growth in the country. Although industrial development has had to be retarded during the past few months, the rate of development is nevertheless still high. The export of manufactured goods already makes a valuable contribution to the solution of the Republic&#x2019;s balance of payments.</p>

<p>During the last two decades the fishing industry developed into a large and healthy industry within the framework of the carefully designed control and conservation measures of the Government. Unfortunately there are indications that this industry is being jeopardized by the present abnormal catches by ships of foreign countries, without regard to the fish resources along the South and South West African coasts. The stage has been reached where further steps must be taken to safeguard this South African industry.</p>

<p>The maintenance of balanced economic growth within a sound industrial environment has created an unparalleled need for technological research in the Republic. This arises not only from the multiple problems which inevitably accompany a country&#x2019;s rapid industrialization, but it also stems from the realization that factual knowledge should form the material basis for future planning. <span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0018"/>Research must be seen as part of the planning necessary to realize the broad national aims.</p>

<p>A Resources and Planning Advisory Council has been established to co-ordinate physical planning on a national basis. A Bill will be laid before you on Physical Planning and the Utilization of Resources in substitution for the Natural Resources Development Act, 1947.</p>

<p>Gold production is still rising. Negotiations are in progress with a view to establishing a new gold mine in an area south of the Vaal River. A beginning has been made with aeromagnetic surveys in four areas in the Republic in an attempt to locate further deposits of minerals.</p>

<p>The uranium market is now showing definite signs of revival and the Republic&#x2019;s uranium sales can, therefore, be expected to increase considerably in the years to come. In the meantime, successful scientific research on uranium refining has resulted in the development of a process which, after slight modification to the existing uranium plants on the mines, will make possible the manufacture of uranium oxide of higher purity. This will greatly increase market prospects for the South African product.</p>

<p>The first oil rig, which is capable of drilling to a depth of 20,000 feet, has been put into operation. Negotiations are also being conducted in connection with prospecting for natural oil on the continental shelf.</p>

<p>The following mining legislation will be placed before you: The Mineral Rights Bill; and the Registration of Mining Titles Bill.</p>

<p>Problems which tended to retard the development of the agricultural industry, have been accentuated materially by the long-drawn-out and widespread droughts and other unfavourable natural conditions. The Government is aware of the devastating effects which the protracted drought, which is still continuing in many areas, had on the natural veld and is convinced that special measures will be required to effect its recovery. Special financial assistance is therefore being made available to farmers in such areas for the voluntary withdrawal from grazing of portions of farms which cannot otherwise in normal circumstances and with good management regain productivity within a reasonable time. The scheme will come into operation on the 1st September, 1966. This special form of state assistance embraces a new principle aimed at keeping the farmer on the farm while rehabilitating the soil and vegetation.</p>

<p>The conditions thus exposed moved the Government to appoint an expert Commission of Inquiry into Agriculture.</p>

<p>Welcome rains in the late summer of 1966 saved part of the summer crops. As no follow-up rains occurred, however, drought conditions continued with the result that the desired production levels could in the main not be attained.</p>

<p>In the expectation of a normal season, crop farmers incurred costs in respect of production requisites, while stock farmers had to buy large quantities of fodder, at high prices, in order to maintain production and in many instances merely to prevent stock losses.</p>

<p>The relatively low yields, obtained at a high cost, necessitated increases in the producers&#x2019; prices of practically all agricultural products and especially of foodstuffs, with a resultant upward movement also in the consumers&#x2019; prices of these commodities. Fortunately local consumption could be maintained at a high level, notwithstanding the higher consumers&#x2019; prices.</p>

<p>The production of locally-grown timber is steadily rising and the country is becoming increasingly independent of imported supplies. Softwood, building timber, wooden containers for the packaging industry, supporting timbers for the mines, poles for electric power and telephone lines and for farming and other purposes, fine and kraft paper and newsprint are all provided by South Africa&#x2019;s forests. Considerable tonnages of rayon pulp and more than half of the production of hardboard and chipboard are to-day being exported.</p>

<p>Water supply to the various consumer sectors is playing a steadily increasing role in the economy of the Republic. Owing to drought conditions the dams in the Republic taken as a whole held 43 per cent of their full capacity on 31st May this year, compared with 61 per cent for the corresponding period in the previous year.</p>

<p>The seasonal replenishment of the Vaal Dam during the past summer was the fourth lowest on record. Owing to the increasing demand on this vital river complex, the Government has decided to allot a large additional amount during the current financial year in order to expedite the construction of the Oppermansdrift Dam at Bloem-hof, and Parliament will be approached for the necessary financial approval during this session.</p>

<p>Although many other projects throughout the country have been completed and are functioning well, while others are in the process of construction, the need for the proper conservation and correct use of water in South Africa makes a complete survey at this stage of the whole field of water affairs most desirable. Consequently the appointment of a highly skilled and widely experienced Commission of Inquiry into Water Matters was announced by the Government.</p>

<p>There is still full employment in the Republic despite a slowing down of activities in certain industrial undertakings. Efforts to summer South Africa&#x2019;s skilled labour resources continue unabated and increasing attention is being devoted to the question of <span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0019"/>higher productivity. With judicious planning, reorganization of staff structures and specialized training methods it should be possible to achieve this object.</p>

<p>With the co-operation of employers and employees, satisfactory labour relations are still being maintained. It is trusted that all concerned will enable the Republic to continue on the path of industrial peace which is so essential for industrial development.</p>

<p>It is proposed to introduce a Bill designed to consolidate the provisions of the Unemployment Insurance Act and a Bill to amend the Factories, Machinery and Building Work Act, 1941. Furthermore, it is intended to proceed with the Industrial Conciliation Amendment Bill which was presented to Parliament by a Select Committee during the previous session.</p>

<p>The National Welfare Act, 1965, has come into operation. The specialized commissions for welfare planning, family life and social work reflect a new approach which will undoubtedly lend greater depth to social work in the Republic. Particular attention will be given to the care of the aged.</p>

<p>In addition to measures already announced and others standing over from the previous short session, draft legislation will be laid before you dealing, <i>inter alia,</i> with: university education, including an Afrikaans University for the Witwatersrand; monopolies; the prohibition of interference by one population group in the political affairs or institutions of another population group; an abattoir commission; prescription; family subsistence; and the resettlement of Coloured from Bantu areas.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">Estimates of revenue and expenditure for the current financial year will be laid before you.</block>

<p>Mr. President and Members of the Senate:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.<br/>I now declare this the First Session of the Third Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</block>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1966-07-29T12:50:00">12.50 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>MONDAY, 1ST AUGUST, 1966</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

Prayers&#x2014;<recordedTime time="1966-08-01T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#first_reading_of_bills">

<heading>FIRST READING OF BILLS</heading>

<p>The following Bills were read a First Time:</p>

<p>South African Mint and Coinage Further Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Constitution Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>State-aided Institutions Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Perishable Agricultural Produce Sales Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Agricultural Credit Bill.</p>

<p>Land Tenure Bill.</p>

<p>Emergency Planning Bill.</p>

<p>Mining Rights Bill.</p>

<p>Reservation of Separate Amenities Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Industrial Conciliation Amendment Bill</p>

<p>Motor Vehicle Insurance Further Amendment Bill.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#audit_of_accounts_of_board_of_trustees_of_national_cultural_history_and_open_air_museum">

<heading>AUDIT OF ACCOUNTS OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF NATIONAL CULTURAL HISTORY AND OPEN AIR MUSEUM</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That as it is in the public interest that the accounts of the Board of Trustees of the National Cultural History and Open Air Museum, a body which is not a statutory body, should be audited by the Controller and Auditor-General, this House in terms of Section 58 (2) of the Exchequer and Audit Act, 1956, hereby requires the Controller and Auditor-General to undertake the audit of such accounts with effect from 21st August, 1964.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I want to furnish the following brief explanation. Previously the Transvaal Museum consisted of a Natural History Section and a Cultural History Section. On 21st August, 1964, the Cultural History Section was detached and, together with the new Open Air Museum, placed under the Control of a separate Board of Trustees and, in terms of Act No. 23 of 1931, declared a state-aided institution.</p>

<p>The accounts of the Transvaal Museum are audited by the Controller and Auditor-General, but in view of the fact that the Cultural History and Open Air Museum is now a separate institution with its own accounts, the Controller and Auditor-General cannot audit <span class="col_17-18" refersTo="page_0020"/>the accounts of the new institution unless authorized to do so by resolution of both Houses of Parliament in terms of the provisions of Section 58 (2) of the Exchequer and Audit Act, 1956.</p>

<p>As a considerable State subsidy is being paid to the museum (approximately R52,000 for the current financial year), the House is now being requested to adopt such a resolution.</p>

<p>Similar resolutions have been adopted in the past in respect of, for example, the accounts of the William Fehr collection, the Republic Festival Committee, the Union Festival Committee and the Relief Fund for Hungarian Refugees (1957).</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#select_committees">

<heading>SELECT COMMITTEES</heading>

<p>The following Select Committees were appointed:</p>

<p>On Public Accounts.</p>

<p>On Railways and Harbours.</p>

<p>On Internal Arrangements.</p>

<p>On Library of Parliament.</p>

<p>On Pensions.</p>

<p>On State-owned Land.</p>

<p>On Irrigation Matters.</p>

<p>On Bantu Affairs.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#deputy-speaker_and_chairman_of_committees">

<heading>DEPUTY-SPEAKER AND CHAIRMAN OF COMMITTEES</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Mr. Petrus Cornelius Pelser be appointed Deputy-Speaker and Chairman of Committees of the whole House.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#deputy-chairman_of_committees">

<heading>DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN OF COMMITTEES</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF TRANSPORT: I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Mr. Daniel Johannes Gertruida van den Heever be appointed Deputy-Chairman of Committees of the whole House.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1966-08-01T14:33:00">2.33 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

