---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol16 - THURSDAY 10 FEBRUARY 1966'
layout: debate
year: 1966
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>THURSDAY, 10 FEBRUARY 1966</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Prayers&#x2014;<recordedTime time="1966-02-10T17:35:00">5.35 p.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<p><b>MR. SPEAKER: MOTION OF APPRECIATION</b></p>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="#hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that this is the last sitting of the House of Assembly of this Parliament, I have the honour to move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House places on record its appreciation for the service of the Honourable Henning Johannes Klopper as Speaker of this House and for the competent and impartial manner in which he has discharged the traditional duties of his high office during the Second Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to move this motion, all the more since it affords me an opportunity of according recognition to the long and important service which you have rendered to Parliament, and especially to the House of Assembly, in the past years. I should like to call to mind that you have been a member of the House of Assembly uninterruptedly since 7 July 1943. During that time you were a memer of several important Select Committees, <i>inter alia</i> also Chairman of the Select Committee on Railways and Harbours. For three years, that is, from 1954 to 1956. you served as Deputy-Chairman of Committees of this House. Subsequently you were Deputy-Speaker and Chairman of Committees from 1957 to 1960, and you have held the office of Speaker since 20 January 1961 to date. You had the honour of being, and we had the privilege of having you as, the last Speaker of the Union Parliament and the first Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of South Africa. You therefore took part in a momentous change in the history of South Africa. These were agitated times in which Parliament necessarily had to fulfil a major function officially. These were times of tension. They made great demands on the Chair. You have a Parliament of civilized people&#x2014;and that was your good fortune. But we had an impartial Speaker&#x2014;and that was our good fortune! And that is why it affords me very great pleasure, in honouring you for the way in which you perform the duties of your office and for the treatment accorded to us as Members, to be able at the same time to express my gratitude that it was given to you especially in these years to carry out such an onerous duty and to render so great a service to our country and our people in this office. I thank you for the attitude which you have always adopted, for the confidence which you have inspired, and for the easy manner which you have displayed in your relations with both sides of the House. It is to South Africa&#x2019;s credit that its Parliament is <span class="col_1251-1252" refersTo="page_0636"/>presided over with such dignity and that South Africa, in contrast to what happens in so many countries, can pride itself on being able to maintain order not only in the country outside, but also&#x2014;and this is due to you&#x2014;here in our midst. I pay tribute to you.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="#hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege on this side of the House to associate myself with the words which have fallen from the lips of the hon. the Prime Minister in regard to yourself, Sir, on the manner in which you have conducted yourself in the high office which you hold. That office, Sir, has three important functions. First of all, you are the guardian of the privileges of Parliament. You have jealously guarded those privileges. I believe that you have contributed greatly to the traditions which existed in both the old Parliament and the new Parliament under a new constitutional regime.</p>

<p>Your second function is one which is of more importance to the Opposition than to the Government. This is to be the guardian of the rights of minorities in this House. In that regard too we feel you have acquitted yourself with distinction.</p>

<p>But there is a third capacity, Mr. Speaker, in which we also know you, and that is that you are the servant of this House. May I say, Sir, that I believe you have been a model servant. In your devotion to duty and the enthusiasm with which you have tackled your task you have set an example to us all. And it is because of our appreciation of what you have done that we intend following what I believe should be tradition in our politics, namely to see to it that you will not be opposed in the coming election.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barnett">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">BARNETT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, on behalf of our group, I wish to say that we sincerely associate ourselves with the motion and with the well-merited tribute paid to you, Sir, by the hon. the Prime Minister and the hon. the Leader of the Opposition.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#suzman">

<from>Mrs. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">SUZMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, speaking on behalf of the smallest minority in this House, I should like to associate myself very sincerely indeed with the motion moved by the hon. the Prime Minister. I should like to thank you very much indeed for the assistance, the guidance and the protection which you have given me in this House over the last four years&#x2014;somewhat turbulent and difficult years. I trust that I have in no way added to the difficulties of your office. I should like to express my sincere appreciation for your extremely kind and impartial treatment of myself.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_byl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">VAN DER BYL</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, this is the first impromptu speech that I have made which I have not prepared carefully beforehand! Mr. Speaker, I am the father of the House, and would like to express, on behalf of us all, our appreciation of your dignity and kindness, as well as my deep appreciation of your kindness to me personally. Sir, you are the only Speaker who has never had me thrown out of the House. For that I am very grateful. May you control the destinies of the House for many years.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to express my appreciation of the kind words of the mover and the seconder of the motion which has just been agreed to by the House. What man can feel himself worthy of such words? I least of all. I am deeply grateful to hon. members for the help which I have received from them, for their assistance and for their patience.</p>

<p>You have been most kind and helpful to me. I think we have a model Parliament in this country of ours. The hon. the Prime Minister was correct when he lauded this House and, for my part, I am proud to have had the privilege of presiding over such an assembly. Whatever I have done to maintain the dignity of this great institution and to promote its well-being has been my pleasure and my joy.</p>

<p>Over all the years that I have been in the service of this House, I have received the closest co-operation and goodwill from everyone, especially from the leaders of the various parties. In particular I wish to thank the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition. It has been a pleasure and an honour to me to have worked together with you all. Compared to other parliaments, I think our Parliament may pride itself in the fact that its members impose the greatest measure of voluntary discipline on themselves. It is this voluntary selfcontrol and discipline which makes it possible for a Speaker to carry out his task.</p>

<p>I also wish to thank the staff which has been placed at my disposal, As far as devotion to duty, loyalty and efficiency are concerned, I think we have in them a team of officials second to none. They are all sons of our own country, products of our people, and I am thankful to have had a staff such as they, every single one of them, to assist me.</p>

<p>Finally, I wish to thank the Lord God above all. Had it not been for the grace which I received from Him, it would have been impossible for me to fulfil the duties which have been entrusted to me. As your Speaker I desire to bring also your thanks to Him for the way in which He has led, taught and sustained us to this day; for what we were, for what we are and for what we shall be&#x2014;to Him be the glory.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1966-02-10T17:50:00">5.50 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_dropped">

<heading>BUSINESS DROPPED</heading>

<p>At the prorogation of Parliament on 10 February 1966, the following matters had not been disposed of and consequently dropped:</p>

<p><span class="col_1253-1254" refersTo="page_0637"/><b>Orders of the Day:</b></p>

<ol>

<li>1. Second Reading,&#x2014;Agricultural Credit Bill [A.B. 23&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;(Minister of Agricultural Credit and Land Tenure).</li>

<li>2. Second Reading,&#x2014;Land Tenure Bill [A.B. 24&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;(Minister of Agricultural Credit and Land Tenure).</li>

<li>3. Second Reading,&#x2014;Emergency Planning Bill [A.B. 18&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;(Minister of Justice).</li>

<li>4. Second Reading,&#x2014;Reservation of Separate Amenities Amendment Bill [A.B. 14&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014; (Minister of Planning).</li>

<li>5. Second Reading,&#x2014;Suppression of Communism Further Amendment Bill [A.B. 21&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;(Minister of Justice).</li>

<li>6. Second Reading,&#x2014;Dessinian Collection Bill [S.B. 2&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;[A.B. 32&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;(Minister of Education, Arts and Science).</li>

<li>7. Second Reading.&#x2014;Births, Marriages and Deaths Registration Amendment Bill [S.B. 1A &#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;[A.B. 33&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;(Minister of the Interior).</li>

<li>8. Second Reading,&#x2014;Wild Birds Protection and Export Prohibition Laws Repeal Bill [S.B. 3&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;[A.B. 34&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;(Minister of Agricultural Technical Services).</li>

<li>9. Second Reading,&#x2014;Registration of Pedigree Livestock Amendment Bill [S.B. 4&#x2014;&#x2019;66] &#x2014;[A.B. 35&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;(Minister of Agricultural Technical Services).</li>

<li>10. Second Reading.&#x2014;Aliens Amendment Bill [S.B. 10&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;[A.B. 36&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;(Minister of Immigration).</li>

<li>11. Second Reading,&#x2014;Agricultural Pests Amendment Bill [S.B. 5A&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;[A.B. 40&#x2014;&#x2019;66] &#x2014;(Minister of Agricultural Technical Services).</li>

<li>12. Second Reading,&#x2014;Livestock and Produce Sales Amendment Bill [S.B. 9&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;[A.B. 41 &#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;(Minister of Agricultural Economics and Marketing).</li>

<li>13. Second Reading,&#x2014;Industrial Conciliation Amendment Bill [A.B. 42&#x2014;&#x2019;66]&#x2014;(Minister of Labour).</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions_to_ministers">

<heading>Questions to Ministers:</heading>

<p><i>For oral reply:</i></p>

<oralStatements>

<question by="#taylor" to="#minister_of_community_development">

<num>1.</num>

<from>Mrs. Taylor</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:</p>

<block name="quote">How many Indians and/or Malays have been moved from Coloured group areas in the Cape Peninsula since the proclamation of the Indian group area?</block>

</question>

<question by="#taylor" to="#minister_of_coloured_affairs">

<num>2.</num>

<from>Mrs. Taylor</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF COLOURED AFFAIRS:</p>

<block name="quote">Whether lecturers at the University College of the Western Cape use both official languages for their lectures; if not, which language do they use?</block>

</question>

<question by="#taylor" to="#minister_of_coloured_affairs">

<num>3.</num>

<from>Mrs. Taylor</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF COLOURED AFFAIRS:</p>

<block name="quote">How many Coloured students from Natal have geen admitted to the University College of the Western Cape since 1960?</block>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_coloured_affairs">

<num>4.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF COLOURED AFFAIRS:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many Coloured teachers were in the employ of each of the Provincial Administrations at the time of the transfer of Coloured education to his Department;</li>

<li>(2) how many teachers were in the employ of his Department as at December, 1964 and 1965 respectively;</li>

<li>(3) how many teachers (a) resigned from and (b) entered into the employ of his Department in each of these years?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#oldfield" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>5.</num>

<from>Mr. Oldfield</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</p>

<block name="quote">Whether a commission has been appointed to investigate betting on horse racing; if so (a) when, (b) what are the names of the members of the commission and (c) what are the terms of reference; if not, why not?</block>

</question>

<question by="#moolman" to="#minister_of_ecnomic_affairs">

<num>6.</num>

<from>Dr. Moolman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF ECNOMIC AFFAIRS:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the percentage of an importers assessment basis according to which import permits for Group B consumer goods are granted;</li>

<li>(2) whether all importers of Group B consumer goods are dealt with on the same basis; if not, (a) in how many cases were additional permits granted at the latest allocation of import permits and (b) on what basis were they granted?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#moolman" to="#minister_of_defence">

<num>7.</num>

<from>Dr. Moolman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether any distinction is made between military trainees of robust health and those of sub-average health in exercises calling for exceptional physical exertion; if not,</li>

<li>(2) whether he will give instructions for additional precautions to be taken in the case of trainees who do not enjoy robust health and especially in excessive heat?</li>

</ol></question>

<question by="#lewis" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num><span class="col_1255-1256" refersTo="page_0638"/>8.</num>

<from>Mr. Lewis</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) When will the demand for telephones on the Bluff and in the South of Durban be satisfied and (b) what are the reasons for the delay in satisfying the demand?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>9.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether Senator Robert Kennedy of the United States of America has applied for a visa to visit South Africa; if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether a decision has been reached; if so, what decision?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#du_basson" to="#minister_of_planning">

<num>10.</num>

<from>Mr. J. D. du P. Basson</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF PLANNING:</p>

<block name="quote">Whether he will lay upon the Table the report or reports as well as any minority report of the committee of inquiry into the reservation of separate seaside resorts in the Cape Province; if not, why not?</block>

</question>

<question by="#gorshel" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>11.</num>

<from>Mr. Gorshel</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to reports of an incident in a night club in Fordsburg on 6 February 1966 which resulted in the death of ten non-Whites;</li>

<li>(2) whether he will make a statement in regard to the matter?</li>

</ol></question>

<question by="#miller" to="#minister_of_public_works">

<num>12.</num>

<from>Mr. Miller</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the plans and specifications of a new post office for Florida have been completed; if not, when will they be completed; if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether tenders have been called for if not, when will tenders be called for;</li>

<li>(3) when is it intended to proceed with the erection of the post office?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#oldfield " to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>13.</num>

<from>Mr. Oldfield </from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether applications have been received for grocer&#x2019;s wine licences; if so, (a) how many, (b) how many have been granted and (c) from what date were they effective;</li>

<li>(2) whether objections to the issue of grocer&#x2019;s wine licences have been received; if so, (a) how many and (b) from whom;</li>

<li>(3) whether consideration has been given to objections; if so, what steps have been taken or are contemplated?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>14.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is common practice for the South African Police to use police dogs indoors to control crowds; if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether he will give an instruction that this practice be discontinued?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<p><i>Replies standing over from Tuesday, 8 February 1966</i></p>

<question by="#minister_of_education_arts_and_science" to="#gay">

<num>29.</num>

<from>The MINISTER OF EDUCATION ARTS AND SCIENCE</from>

<p>to Question put by Mr. Gay:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) When is it expected that the nautical training establishment at Grainger Bay will be (a) completed and (b) opened for training;</li>

<li>(2) what is the (a) cost to date and (b) estimated final cost of the establishment;</li>

<li>(3) (a) what is the total number of cadets for which accommodation will be provided and (b) how many applications have been received to date;</li>

<li>(4) who is to be in charge of the establishment;</li>

<li>(5) what will be the nature and the maximum standard of nautical education at the establishment;</li>

<li>(6) what is to be the official title of the establishment?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#minister_of_agricultural_economics_and_marketing" to="#moolman">

<num>30.</num>

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS AND MARKETING</from>

<p>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS AND MARKETING to Question put by Dr. Moolman:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether meat was exported by the Meat Control Board during the period 1 July to 31 December 1965; if so, how much; if not, (a) by which persons and bodies was meat exported and (b) to which countries;</li>

<li>(2) whether the meat which was exported was purchased from the Meat Control Boardd; if so, at what price did the Board (a) purchase and (b) sell the meat?</li>

</ol>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<p><i>For written reply:</i></p>

<writtenStatements>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development">

<num>1.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many Bantu (a) males and (b) females were found during 1965 to be (i) idle or (ii) undesirable in terms of section 29 of the Bantu (Urban Areas) Consolidation Act, 1945;</li>

<li><span class="col_1257-1258" refersTo="page_0639"/>(2) how many in each category were dealt with in terms of each paragraph of sub-section (7) and in terms of subsection (8) respectively;</li>

<li>(3) (a) how many of those declared to be undesirable were so declared in terms of section 29 (3) (j) and (b) how many of them were dealt with in terms of each paragraph of sub-section (7) and in terms of sub-section (8) respectively?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>2.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether an application for a passport was received from Chief Gatsha Buthelezi during 1965; if so, on what date;</li>

<li>(2) whether the application was granted; if so, on what date; if not, on what date was the applicant informed;</li>

<li>(3) whether there was any delay in replying to the application; if so, what was the reason for the delay?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>3.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</p>

<block name="quote">Whether Bantu applicants for passports are required to deposit a sum of money with the Department: if so, (a) what sum and (b) (i) when and (ii) for what reason was this requirement introduced?</block>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF FINANCE:</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) How many (i) White, (ii) Coloured, (iii) Asiatic and (iv) Bantu persons were assessed for income tax in the 1964-’65 tax year and (b) what was the total amount for each group?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_health">

<num>5.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF HEALTH:</p>

<block name="quote">How many cases of kwashiorkor among (a) Whites, (b) Bantu, (c) Coloureds and (d) Asiatics were notified in each province during 1965?</block>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development">

<num>6.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT:</p>

<block name="quote">Whether any representatives of Bantu in urban areas have been appointed in terms of section 4 of the Promotion of Bantu Self-government Act, 1959; if so, (a) how many, (b) when, (c) in which urban areas and (d) in respect of which territorial authorities?</block>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>7.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</p>

<block name="quote">Whether his Department has made an <i>ex gratia</i> payment to Max Mhlangan of Cape Town who was awarded damages by the Cape Provincial Division of the Supreme Court on a claim against two policemen; if so, what amount; if not, why not?</block>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>8.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</p>

<block name="quote">How many policemen were (a) killed and (b) seriously injured in the performance of their duties during 1964 and 1965 respectively?</block>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>9.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</p>

<block name="quote">How many suspected offenders were shot and (a) killed and (b) seriously injured by members of the police force during 1964 and 1965 respectively?</block>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_coloured_affairs">

<num>10.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF COLOURED AFFAIRS:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether any Coloured teachers&#x2019; organizations have applied for official recognition by his Department; if so, (a) what are the names of the organizations and (b) what is the membership of each;</li>

<li>(2) whether all the applications have been granted; if not, (a) which applications have been refused and (b) for what reasons?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development">

<num>11.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether any persons are at present subject to removal orders in terms of the Bantu Administration Act, 1927; if so, (a) how many, (b) what are their names and (c) from and to what place was each removed;</li>

<li>(2) whether any removal orders have (a) been withdrawn and (b) lapsed since 1 June, 1965; if so, (i) how many, (ii) what are the names of the persons concerned and (iii) on what dates were the orders withdrawn or did they lapse;</li>

<li>(3) whether any persons against whom removal orders were in force have died since 1 June, 1965; if so, (a) what are their names, (b) when and (c) where did they die and (d) from which places had they been removed?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_economic_affairs">

<num>12.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS:</p>

<block name="quote">What was the national consumer price index (a) for all items and (b) for food in October of each year since 1958?</block>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development">

<num><span class="col_1259-1260" refersTo="page_0640"/>13.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) (a) How many loans were granted by the Bantu Investment Corporation to Bantu business men during 1965 and (b) what was the amount of these loans;</li>

<li>(2) whether any undertakings were established by the corporation during 1965; if so, (a) how many, (b) what is their nature, (c) where are they situated, (d) how many (i) White and (ii) Bantu persons are employed in each undertaking and (e) what was the cost of establishing each undertaking?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development">

<num>14.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p> to ask the MINISTER OF BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) (a) What sum was spent and (b) how many morgen of land were purchased in each year since 1937 for the enlargement of Bantu reserves in the Republic in terms of the Bantu Land Act, 1913 and the Bantu Trust and Land Act, 1936;</li>

<li>(2) (a) how many morgen had been acquired by the end of 1965 in each province and (b) how many morgen have still to be acquired in each province?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>15.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF FINANCE:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) (a) What long-term, medium-term and short-term foreign loan facilities respectively were available to the South African Government as at 31 January 1966 with (i) the International Monetary Fund, (ii) international banks and (iii) other sources and (b) what in each case (i) was the name of the source, (ii) was the amount involved, (iii) were the terms and (iv) was the purpose for which the loan was concluded;</li>

<li>(2) (a) what drawings were made on loan facilities abroad by the South African Government in each quarter of 1965, (b) from whom were they made and (c) what balance remained for future drawings in each case;</li>

<li>(3) whether any new foreign loans were concluded in 1965; if so, (a) with whom, (b) for what amounts, (c) on what terms and (d) for what purpose;</li>

<li>(4) whether he intends to conclude new foreign loans in the coming year;</li>

<li>(5) (a) what other official agencies, other than the Central Government, and banks in South Africa haye negotiated and/or drawn on loan facilities abroad in each quarter of 1965 and (b) what in each case was (i) the amount involved, (ii) the terms and (iii) the purpose for which the loan was concluded?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>16.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p> to ask the MINISTER OF FINANCE:</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) What was the nett inflow of private capital into South Africa during each quarter of 1965, (b) (i) from what countries and (ii) in what amounts did this capital come, (c) what amounts were (i) long-term, (ii) medium-term and (iii) short-term money in each case and (b) what amounts were (i) direct and (ii) portfolio?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_of_bantu_administration_and_development">

<num>17.</num>

<from>Mr. E. G. Malan</from>

<p> to ask the MINISTER OF BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT:</p>

<block name="quote">Whether any applications for permission for the employment of Bantu labourers in the fishing industry in the Cape have been received since 1 January, 1964; if so. (a) what are the names of the applicants in each case, (b) how many labourers were applied for in each case and (c) for how many in each case was permission granted?</block>

</question>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_of_agricultural_economics_and_marketing">

<num>18.</num>

<from>Mr. E. G. Malan</from>

<p> to ask the MINISTER OF AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS AND MARKETING:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether any (a) kinds of grain, (b) baled lucerne, (c) milled lucerne and (d) other fodder have been exported to the Protectorates since 1 January 1964; if so, what other fodder:</li>

<li>(2) what is (a) the quantity exported to each protectorate, (b) the reason or reasons for exporting, (c) the export price paid per unit and (d) the total export price, in each category?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#wood" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>19.</num>

<from>Mr. Wood</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<p>Whether consideration has been given to amending the regulations to provide for the operation of single-engined aircraft at night under instrument flying conditions?</p>

</question>

<question by="#wood" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>20.</num>

<from>Mr. Wood</from>

<p>from to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<p>Whether women are eligible to apply for subsidies under the Civil Aviation Subsidy Scheme; if not, why not; if so, (a) how many women applied for subsidies during <span class="col_1261-1262" refersTo="page_0641"/>1965-’6, (b) how many were granted subsidies and (c) what was the total amount of subsidy granted to women applicants?</p>

</question>

<question by="#hughes" to="#minister_of_economic_affairs">

<num>21.</num>

<from>Mr. Hughes</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS:</p>

<p>What are the details of the concessions granted for rock lobster fishing between the Kei River Mouth and Port Edward?</p>

</question>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>22.</num>

<from>Mr. E. G. Malan</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<p>(a) How many train accidents occurred during each financial year since 1960-1 and (b) how many of these were due to (i) collisions and (ii) derailments?</p>

</question>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>23.</num>

<from>Mr. E. G. Malan</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<p>What was the (a) revenue, (b) expenditure and (c) profit or loss on departmental refreshment rooms and bookstalls for each financial years since 1960-1?</p>

</question>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>24.</num>

<from>Mr. E. G. Malan</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What tonnage of steel rails have the South African Railways required each year since 1960;</li>

<li>(2) how many tons were (a) imported and (b) obtained in the Republic from (i) the Iron and Steel Corporation and (ii) other sources?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>25.</num>

<from>Mr. E. G. Malan</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many accidents have occurred at railway crossings during the current financial year;</li>

<li>(2) how many persons were (a) killed and (b) injured in such accidents;</li>

<li>(3) how many railway crossings have been eliminated during the current financial year?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>26.</num>

<from>Mr. E. G. Malan</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<p>How many members of the Railway personnel were killed and injured, respectively, in (a) train accidents and (b) accidents which occurred during railway operations (i) during the period 1948 to 1964 and (ii) during the current financial year?</p>

</question>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>27.</num>

<from>Mr. E. G. Malan</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether any railway houses are at pre sent unoccupied; if so, (a) how many in each system, (b) what are the main reasons therefore and (c) what is the estimated value of the properties;</li>

<li>(2) whether any railway houses have been demolished since 1 April, 1961; if so, (a) how many and (b) for what reasons?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>28.</num>

<from>Mr. E. G. Malan</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<p>Whether the prefabricated house which stood at Okozongora in 1963 has since been moved to other places; if so, (a) to which places and (b) where is it at present?</p>

</question>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_of_tourism">

<num>29.</num>

<from>Mr. E. G. Malan</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TOURISM:</p>

<p>How many tourists from each country of Europe visited South Africa during the calendar year 1965?</p>

</question>

<question by="#oldfield" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>30.</num>

<from>Mr. Oldfield</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many White employees terminated their employment with the South African Railways during 1965 owing to (a) resignation, (b) retirement and (c) discharge;</li>

<li>(2) how many White employees entered the employment of the South African Railways during 1965?</li>

</ol>

<p><i>Reply standing over from Friday,</i> 28 <i>January</i> 1966</p>

</question>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>5.</num>

<from>Mr. E. G. Malan</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the South African Broadcasting Corporation is taking steps to keep abreast of developments in regard to television; if so, (a) what is the nature of the work being done and (b) what is the purpose thereof;</li>

<li>(2) whether he gave permission to the Corporation for the work to be done;</li>

<li>(3) whether there have been any changes in the Government&#x2019;s attitude towards the introduction of television; if so, what changes?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<p><span class="col_1263-1264" refersTo="page_0642"/><i>Reply standing over from Tuesday,</i> 1 <i>February</i>1966</p>

<question by="#wood" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>18.</num>

<from>Mr. Wood</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many tons of coal were (a) railed and (b) shipped to (i) Cape Town, (ii) Port Elizabeth and (iii) East London during 1965;</li>

<li>(2) what was the cost of railage per ton in each case?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<p><i>Replies standing over from Tuesday,</i> 8 <i>February</i> 1966</p>

<question by="#oldfield" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>8.</num>

<from>Mr. Oldfield</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF LABOUR:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What are the total accumulated funds at present standing to the credit of the Unemployment Insurance Fund;</li>

<li>(2) what amount is invested with the Public Debt Commissioners in (a) Government stock and (b) on deposit;</li>

<li>(3) whether any amount is invested with the Public Debt Commissioners in (a) other stock and (b) on deposit with other institutions; if so, what is (i) the amount invested, (ii) the terms of investment, (ii) the rate of interest received and (iv) the name of the institution in each case;</li>

<li>(4) (a) what amount has accrued to the Fund since 1 January. 1965, and (b) what amount has been received as (i) contributions from employees and employers. (ii) State contributions and (iii) interest from investments;</li>

<li>(5) what was the average rate of interest received on investments during 1964 and 1965 respectively;</li>

<li>(6) (a) what is the total amount paid from the Fund since 1 January, 1965. in respect of (i) benefits and (ii) administration costs and (b) what were the amounts in respect of (i) ordinary benefits, (ii) illness allowances, (iii) maternity benefits and (iv) benefits to dependants of deceased contributions;</li>

<li>(7) whether consideration has been given to amending the present rate of benefits; if so, what steps are contemplated; if not, why not?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#oldfield" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>9.</num>

<from>Mr. Oldfield</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF LABOUR:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What are the total accumulated funds standing to the credit of the Accident Fund in terms of the Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation Act;</li>

<li>(2) (a) what is the nature of the investments of the Fund and (b) what is the average rate of interest received;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Fund holds investments with institutions other than Government institutions; if so, (a) for what amounts, (b) what are the terms of the investments, (c) what rate of interest is received and (d) what is the name of the institution in each case;</li>

<li>(4) what amount has (a) accrued to and (b) been paid from the Fund since 1 January, 1965;</li>

<li>(5) whether consideration has been given to increasing the rate of benefits from the Accident Fund; if so, what steps are contemplated; if not, why not?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#suzman" to="#minister_of_information">

<num>10.</num>

<from>Mrs. Suzman</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF INFORMATION:</p>

<p>Whether his Department bought space in foreign publications during 1965; if so. (a) in which publications and (b) what was the cost in each case?</p>

</question>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>18.</num>

<from>Mr. E. G. Malan</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What has been the drop in the commission on (a) money orders and (b) postal orders in each financial year since 1962-3 as a result of the prohibition of participation by the public in lotteries or sports pools;</li>

<li>(2) what is the estimated value of money orders or postal orders represented by this commission?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<question by="#timoney" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>32.</num>

<from>Mr. Timoney</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<p>How many Bantu were employed in the railway workshops at Salt River during each of the years from 1962 to 1965?</p>

</question>

<question by="#timoney" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>34.</num>

<from>Mr. Timoney</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<p>What is the maximum size tanker which can be berthed when fuly laden at the new tanker dock in Cape Town?</p>

</question>

<question by="#timoney" to="#minister_of_transport">

<num>35.</num>

<from>Mr. Timoney</from>

<p>to ask the MINISTER OF TRANSPORT:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the average overtime worked by the staff at the Culemborg goods station;</li>

<li>(2) whether any complaints have been received in regard to the amount of overtime worked; if so. what is the nature of the complaints?</li>

</ol>

</question>

</writtenStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#proclamation">

<heading><span class="col_00" refersTo="page_0643"/>PROCLAMATION</heading>

<p>By The State President of the Republic Of South Africa Prorogation And Summoning Of Parliament</p>

<p>Under and by virtue of the power and authority vested in me by sub-section (1) of section <b><i>twenty-five</i></b> of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961 (Act No. 32 of 1961), I hereby prorogue Parliament until Friday, the Twenty-ninth day of July, 1966.</p>

<p>Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Republic of South Africa at Brandfort, on this the Tenth day of February, One Thousand Nine Hundred and Sixty-six.</p>

<p><b>C. R. SWART,</b></p>

<p>State President.</p>

<p>By Command of the State President-in-Council.</p>

<p><b>H. F. VERWOERD,</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#list_of_electoral_division_house_of_assembly_1966">

<heading><span class="col_" refersTo="page_0644"/>LIST OF ELECTORAL DIVISIONS&#x2014;HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY, 1966.</heading>

<table>

<tr>

<th><p>Electoral Division</p></th>

<th><p>Name</p></th>

</tr>

<tr>

<th colspan="2"><p>CAPE PROVINCE.</p></th>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Albany</p></td>

<td><p>Bennett, C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Aliwal</p></td>

<td><p>Botha, H. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Beaufort West</p></td>

<td><p>Muller, Dr. the Hon. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bellville</p></td>

<td><p>Haak, Hon. J. F. W.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Cape Town-Gardens</p></td>

<td><p>Connan, J. M.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Ceres</p></td>

<td><p>Muller, S. L.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Constantia</p></td>

<td><p>Waterson, Hon. S. F.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Cradock</p></td>

<td><p>Bekker, G. F. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>De Aar-Colesberg</p></td>

<td><p>Venter, M. J. de la R.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>East London-City</p></td>

<td><p>Moolman, Dr. J. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>East London-North</p></td>

<td><p>Field, A. N.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>False Bay</p></td>

<td><p>Uys, Hon. D. C. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Fort Beaufort</p></td>

<td><p>(Vacant.)</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>George</p></td>

<td><p>Botha, Hon. P. W.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Gordonia</p></td>

<td><p>Kotze, G. P.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Graaff-Reinet</p></td>

<td><p>Van der Ahee, H. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Green Point</p></td>

<td><p>Van der Byl, Maj. the Hon. Piet M.C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Hottentots-Holland</p></td>

<td><p>De Villiers, J. D.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Humansdorp</p></td>

<td><p>(Vacant.)</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Kimberley-North</p></td>

<td><p>Swanepoel, J. W. F.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Kimberley-South</p></td>

<td><p>Venter, Dr. W. L. D. M.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>King William&#x2019;s Town</p></td>

<td><p>Warren, C. M.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Kuruman</p></td>

<td><p>Du Plessis, H. R. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Maitland</p></td>

<td><p>Hickman, T.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Malmesbury</p></td>

<td><p>Van Staden, J. W.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Moorreesburg</p></td>

<td><p>Marais, P. S.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Mossel Bay</p></td>

<td><p>Rall, M. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Namaqualand</p></td>

<td><p>Maree, G. de K.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Oudtshoorn</p></td>

<td><p>Le Roux, Hon. P. M. K.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Paarl</p></td>

<td><p>Malan, W. C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Parow</p></td>

<td><p>Kotze, S. F.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Piketberg</p></td>

<td><p>Treurnicht, N. F.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pinelands</p></td>

<td><p>Thompson, J. O. N., D.F.C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Port Elizabeth-Central</p></td>

<td><p>Dodds, P. R.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Port Elizabeth-North</p></td>

<td><p>Nel, J. A. F.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Port Elizabeth-South</p></td>

<td><p>Plewman, R. P.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Port Elizabeth-West</p></td>

<td><p>Streicher, D. M.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Prieska</p></td>

<td><p>Stander, A. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Queenstown</p></td>

<td><p>Loots, J. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Rondebosch</p></td>

<td><p>Graaff, Sir De V.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Salt River</p></td>

<td><p>Timoney, H. M.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Sea Point</p></td>

<td><p>Basson, J. A. L.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Simonstown</p></td>

<td><p>Gay, L. C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Somerset East</p></td>

<td><p>Vosloo, A. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Stellenbosch</p></td>

<td><p>Smit, H. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Swellendam</p></td>

<td><p>Van Eeden, F. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Transkeian Territories</p></td>

<td><p>Hughes, T. G.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Uitenhage</p></td>

<td><p>Swiegers, J. G.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Vasco</p></td>

<td><p>Waring, Hon. F. W.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Vryburg</p></td>

<td><p>Labuschagne, J. S.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Worcester</p></td>

<td><p>Dönges, Dr. the Hon. T. E., S.C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Wynberg</p></td>

<td><p>Taylor, Catherine D.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p>NATAL.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Drakensberg</p></td>

<td><p>Van Niekerk, Susanna M.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Durban-Berea</p></td>

<td><p>Wood, L. F.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Durban-Central</p></td>

<td><p>Radford, Dr. A., M.C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Durban-Musgrave</p></td>

<td><p>Hourquebie, R. G. L.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Durban-North</p></td>

<td><p>Mitchell, M. L.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Durban-Point</p></td>

<td><p>Raw, W. V.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Durban-Umbilo</p></td>

<td><p>Oldfield, G. N.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Durban-Umlazi</p></td>

<td><p>Lewis, H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Natal South Coast</p></td> 

<td><p>Mitchell, D. E.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Newcastle</p></td>

<td><p>Maree, Hon. W. A.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pietermaritzburg-City</p></td>

<td><p>Odell, H. G. O.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pietermaritzburg-District</p></td>

<td><p>Henwood, Capt. B. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pinetown</p></td>

<td><p>Hopewell, A.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Umhlatuzana</p></td>

<td><p>Eaton, N. G.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Vryheid</p></td>

<td><p>Potgieter, D. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Zululand</p></td>

<td><p>Cadman, R. M.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p>ORANGE FREE STATE.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bethlehem</p></td>

<td><p>Knobel, G. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bloemfontein-District</p></td>

<td><p>Schlebusch, J. A.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bloemfontein-East</p></td>

<td><p>Van Rensburg, M. C. G. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bloemfontein-West</p></td>

<td><p>Fouch&#x00E9;, Hon. J. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Fauresmith-Boshof</p></td>

<td><p>Serfontein, Hon. J. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harrismith</p></td>

<td><p>Rall, J. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Heilbron</p></td>

<td><p>Froneman, G. F. van L.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Kroonstad</p></td>

<td><p>Schlebusch, A. L.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Ladybrand</p></td>

<td><p>Keyter, H. C. A.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Odendaalsrus</p></td>

<td><p>Meyer, Dr. T.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Smithfield</p></td>

<td><p>Pansegrouw, J. S.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Vredefort</p></td>

<td><p>Klopper, Hon. H. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Welkom</p></td>

<td><p>Van Wyk, H. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Winburg</p></td>

<td><p>Sadie, N. C. van R.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p>TRANSVAAL.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Alberton</p></td>

<td><p>Viljoen, Hon. M.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Benoni</p></td>

<td><p>Ross, D. G.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bethal-Middelburg</p></td>

<td><p>Rall, J. W.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bezuidenhout</p></td>

<td><p>Basson, J. D. du P.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Boksburg</p></td>

<td><p>(Vacant.)</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Brakpan</p></td>

<td><p>Bezuidenhout, G. P. C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Brits</p></td>

<td><p>Potgieter, J. E.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Christiana</p></td>

<td><p>Wentzel, J. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Edenvale</p></td>

<td><p>Koornhof, Dr. P. G. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Ermelo</p></td>

<td><p>Hertzog, Dr. the Hon. A.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Florida</p></td>

<td><p>Miller, H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Geduld</p></td>

<td><p>Jurgens, Dr. J. C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Germiston</p></td>

<td><p>Cruywagen, W. A.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Germiston-District</p></td>

<td><p>Tucker, H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Groblersdal</p></td>

<td><p>Bekker, M. J. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Heidelberg</p></td>

<td><p>Verwoerd, Dr. the Hon. H. F.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Hercules</p></td>

<td><p>Malan, Dr. A. I.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Hillbrow</p></td>

<td><p>Steenkamp, Dr. L. S.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Hospital</p></td>

<td><p>Gorshel, A.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Houghton</p></td>

<td><p>Suzman, Helen</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Innesdale</p></td>

<td><p>Marais, J. A.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Jeppes</p></td>

<td><p>Cronje, Dr. F. J. C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Johannesburg-North</p></td>

<td><p>Weiss, Ursula M.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Kempton Park</p></td>

<td><p>Coetzee, Dr. J. A.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Kensington</p></td>

<td><p>Moore, P. A.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Klerksdorp</p></td>

<td><p>Pelser, P. C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Krugersdorp</p></td>

<td><p>Van den Berg, M. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Langlaagte</p></td>

<td><p>Coetzee, P. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Lichtenburg</p></td>

<td><p>Van Niekerk, M. C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Losberg</p></td>

<td><p>Diedrichs, Dr. the Hon. N.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Lydenburg-Barberton</p></td>

<td><p>Hiemstra, E. C. A.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Maraisburg</p></td>

<td><p>Schoeman, Hon. B. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Marico</p></td>

<td><p>Grobler, M. S. F.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Mayfair</p></td>

<td><p>De Jager, P. R.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Nelspruit</p></td>

<td><p>(Vacant.)</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Nigel</p></td>

<td><p>Vorster, Hon. B. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>North-East Rand</p></td>

<td><p>Bronkhorst, Brig. H. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>North-West Rand</p></td>

<td><p>Schoeman, J. C. B.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Orange Grove</p></td>

<td><p>Malan, E. G.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Parktown</p></td>

<td><p>Emdin, S.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pietersburg</p></td>

<td><p>Niemand, F. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Potchefstroom</p></td>

<td><p>Steyn, Dr. J. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pretoria-Central</p></td>

<td><p>Van den Heever, D. J. G.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pretoria-District</p></td>

<td><p>Schoonbee, J. F.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pretoria-East</p></td>

<td><p>Otto, Dr. J. C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pretoria-Rissik</p></td>

<td><p>De Kock, H. C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pretoria-Sunnyside</p></td>

<td><p>Van Zyl, J. J. B.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pretoria-West</p></td>

<td><p>Van der Walt, B. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Prinshof</p></td>

<td><p>Visse, J. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Randfontein</p></td>

<td><p>Mulder, Dr. C. P.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Roodepoort</p></td>

<td><p>Botha, Hon. M. C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Rosettenville</p></td>

<td><p>Fisher, Dr. E. L.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Rustenburg</p></td>

<td><p>Bootha, L. J. C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Soutpansberg</p></td>

<td><p>Botha, S. P.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Springs</p></td>

<td><p>Taurog, L. B.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Standerton</p></td>

<td><p>Coertze, Dr. L. I.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Turffontein</p></td>

<td><p>Durrant, R. B.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Vanderbijlpark</p></td>

<td><p>Henning, J. M.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Ventersdorp</p></td>

<td><p>Greyling, J. C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Vereeniging</p></td>

<td><p>Coetzee, B.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Von Brandis</p></td>

<td><p>Higgerty, J. W.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Wakkerstroom</p></td>

<td><p>Martins, H. E.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Waterberg</p></td>

<td><p>Heystek, J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Westdene</p></td>

<td><p>Van der Spuy, J. P.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Witbank</p></td>

<td><p>Mostert, D. J. J.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Wolmaransstad</p></td>

<td><p>Van den Berg, G. P.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Wonderboom</p></td>

<td><p>Nel, Hon. M. D. C. de W.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Yeoville</p></td>

<td><p>Steyn, S. J. M.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p>SOUTH-WEST AFRICA.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Etosha</p></td>

<td><p>Webster, A.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Karas</p></td>

<td><p>Von Moltke, J. von S.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Middelland</p></td>

<td><p>Van der Merwe, P. S.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Namib</p></td>

<td><p>De Wet, J. M.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Omaruru</p></td>

<td><p>Frank, S., S.C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Windhoek</p></td>

<td><p>Van der Wath, Hon. J. G. H.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p>COLOURED REPRESENTATIVES.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Boland</p></td>

<td><p>Barnett, C.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Karoo</p></td>

<td><p>Eden, G. S.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Outeniqua</p></td>

<td><p>Holland, M. W.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Peninsula</p></td>

<td><p>Bloomberg, A.</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p><span class="col_0" refersTo="page_0645"/><b>REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA</b></p>

<p>INDEX TO THE <b>DEBATES</b>OF THE <b>HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY</b> (HANSARD)</p>

<p>FIFTH SESSION-SECOND PARLIAMENT</p>

<p>21st January to 10th February, 1966</p>

<p>(Vol. 16)</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#index_to_subjects">

<heading><span class="col_I1" refersTo="page_0646"/>INDEX TO SUBJECTS<noteRef href="note01_p648" marker="*"/></heading>

<debateSection name="#A">

<heading>A</heading>

<p><b>Agriculture&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Boring services, 279.</li>

<li>Butter and cheese, imports of, 1109, 1116.</li>

<li>Department of Agricultural Credit and Land Tenure, establishment of, 71.</li>

<li>Droughts, 34, 284, 292, 1110.</li>

<li>Extension officers, 33, 277.</li>

<li>Farmers: Economic position of, 32, 70, 223, 281, 288, 317, 952, 1094, 1162, 1195; assistance to, by Land Bank, 1052, and by State Advances Recoveries Office, 1053; credit committees, 1057; training of, 1057.</li>

<li>Irrigation, <i>see</i> <b> Water Affairs.</b></li>

<li>Livestock slaughtered, 1109.</li>

<li>Mealies, importation of, 1109, 1116, 1199, 1219.</li>

<li>Production, 278, 1054.</li>

<li>Reserves built up for certain commodities, 1054.</li>

<li>Soil conservation. 33, 276, 280, 316.</li>

<li>State Advances Recoveries Offices, assistance granted by, to farmers, 1053.</li>

<li>Wool, railway tariff on, 800, 847.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Airways,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Railways.</b></p>

<p><b>Artisans,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Labour.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#B">

<heading>B</heading>

<p><b>Bambata Rebellion,</b> 1131, 1156.</p>

<p><b>Bantu Affairs&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Black Spots, cleaning up of, 149.</li>

<li>Influx of Bantu into White areas, 97, 147, 319.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Bantu Homelands&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Boundaries of, 119, 1112, 1178.</li>

<li>Development of, 105, 1075.</li>

<li>Independence and, 38, 65, 1075, 1104.</li>

<li>Land for, 1073, 1178.</li>

<li>Transkei&#x2014;</li>

<li>Fishing concession on Transkei coast, 1176, 1184.</li>

<li>Liquor Act and, 1183.</li>

<li>Railway Staff in, 819.</li>

<li>Zoning and compensation, 102, 107, 119, 170.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Base Minerals,</b> Mining for, <i>see</i> <b>Bills.</b></p>

<p><b>Basutoland,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Protectorates.</b></p>

<p><b>Bills&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[R = Reading; &#x2020;= Dropped.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Advertising on Roads and Ribbon Development (amendment), (1R.), 15; (2R.), 484; (3R.), 487.</li>

<li>Agricultural Credit. (1R.). 163.&#x2020;</li>

<li>Agricultural Pests (amendment), 902.&#x2020;</li>

<li>Agricultural Settlements (Roodepoort and Weltevreden) Adjustment, (1R.), 15; motion that proceedings be suspended, 851.</li>

<li>Aliens (amendment), (1R.). 851.&#x2020;</li>

<li>Amenities, Separate, Reservation of (amendment), (1R.), 15.&#x2020;</li>

<li>Appropriation&#x2014;</li>

<li>Central Government&#x2014;</li>

<li>Additional, (1. 2, 3R.). 1232.</li>

<li>Part, (1R.), 24; (2R.), 594, 903, 1028; (3R.), 1161.</li>

<li><span class="col_I2" refersTo="page_0647"/>Railways and Harbours&#x2014;</li>

<li>Additional. (1R.), 486; (2R.), 546; (3R.), 620.</li>

<li>Part. (1R.), 517; (2R.), 517, 636. 759, (3R.), 851.</li>

<li>Base Minerals (amendment), (1R.), 902; (2R.), 1157, 1241; (Committee) 1248; (3R.), 1248.</li>

<li>Bethelsdorp Settlement (amendment). (1R.), 754; proceedings on Bill suspended, 989.</li>

<li>Births. Marriages and Deaths Registration (amendment), (1R.), 851.&#x2020;</li>

<li>Civil Judgments, Reciprocal, Enforcement of (1R.), 86; (2R.). 588; (Committee) 631, (3R.), 757.</li>

<li>Communism, Suppression of (amendment), (1R.), 15; (2R.), 565; (Committee) 626; (3R.), 754.</li>

<li>Communism, Suppression of (further amendment), (1R.), 86.&#x2020;</li>

<li>Community Development (consolidation). (1R.). 24; (2R.) and (3R.), 524.</li>

<li>Dessinian Collection, (1R.). 851.&#x2020;</li>

<li>Emergency Planning, (1R.), 86.&#x2020;</li>

<li>Factories. Machinery and Building Work (amendment), (1R.), 15; (2R.), 497; (Committee) 549; (3R.), 624.</li>

<li>Finance. (1R.), 517; (2R.), 1125; (3R.), 1126.</li>

<li>Housing (consolidation), (1R.), 24; (2R.) and (3R.), 524.</li>

<li>Industrial Conciliation (amendment). (1R.), 1232.&#x2020;</li>

<li>Judges&#x2019; Remuneration and Pensions (amendment), (1R.). 86; (2R.). 493: (Committee) 496; (3R.), 497.</li>

<li>Kimberley Leasehold Conversion to Freehold (amendment), (1R.), 163; (2R.), 592; (3R.), 635.</li>

<li>Land Tenure, (1R.), 163.&#x2020;</li>

<li>Livestock and Produce Sales (amendment).&#x2020;</li>

<li>Matrimonial Affairs (amendment), (1R.), 15; (2R.), 577; (3R.), 757.</li>

<li>Mint and Coinage (amendment). (1R.). 478; (2R.), 590; (3R.), 757.</li>

<li>Motor Carrier Transportation (amendment). (1R.), 15; (2R.). 487; (Committee) 548; (3R.), 624.</li>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment). (1R.), 15; (2R.), 331; (Committee) 483, 525; (3R.), 602.</li>

<li>Pedigree Livestock (amendment), (1R.). 851.&#x2020;</li>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment), (1R.), 754; (2R.), 1126: (Committee) 1232: (3R.), 1238.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Acts (amendment). (1R.), 15; (2R.). 487; (Committee) 546; (3R.), 620.</li>

<li>Railway Construction. (1R.). 15; (2R.). 403: (3R.), 546.</li>

<li>South-West Africa Constitution (amendment), (1R.), 15: (2R.), 479: (Committee) 524: (3R.). 602.</li>

<li>State Attorney (amendment), (1R.). 15: (2R.). 564; (3R.), 754.</li>

<li>Unauthorized Expenditure (Central Government), (1, 2, 3R.) 1027.</li>

<li>University of Stellenbosch (amendment). (1R.), 15; (2R.). 501; (3R.), 502.</li>

<li>Water (amendment). (1R.). 15; (2R.), 502; (Committee) 553: (3R.), 625; (Senate amendment) 1027.</li>

<li>Wild Birds Protection and Export Prohibition Laws (repeal).(1R.), 851.&#x2020;</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Border Industries,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Economic Affairs.</b></p>

<p><b>Buthelezi,</b> Chief. Refusal of passport to, 1191.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#C">

<heading>C</heading>

<p><b>Coal,</b> Handling of, on Vryheid-Hlobane section, 419.</p>

<p><b>Coinage,</b> Weight of nickel and bronze coins, 590.</p>

<p><b>Coloured Development Corporation,</b> Diamond and fish concessions and, <i>see</i> Concessions <i>under</i> <b>Economic Affairs.</b></p>

<p><b>Coloureds:</b> Employment of. in Railways, 782, 808, 886, 900: travelling facilities for, on Railways. 785.</p>

<p><b>Commerce and Industries,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Economic Affairs.</b></p>

<p><b>Communism,</b> Suppression of. Act, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Communism&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></p>

<p><span class="col_I3" refersTo="page_0648"/><b>Concessions,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Economic Affairs.</b></p>

<p><b>&#x201C;Conquered Territories&#x201D;,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Protectorates.</b></p>

<p><b>Credit,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Finance.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#D">

<heading>D</heading>

<p><b>Defence&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Ex gratia payments i.r.o. clothing and munitions, 1222.</li>

<li>Permanent Force, strength of, 960.</li>

<li>Trainees, 949, 955, 959.</li>

<li>Vehicles, protection to drivers of, when involved in accidents whilst on duty. 758.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>De Jongh</b> and crayfish concession on Transkei coast, i 176, 1184.</p>

<p><b>Dividends,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Finance.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#E">

<heading>E</heading>

<p><b>Economic Affairs&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Border industries, 70, 152.</li>

<li>Commercial representation abroad, 937.</li>

<li>Concessions: tenders and, 975, 1176; fish and diamonds, 1067, 1169, 1184.</li>

<li>Consumers price index, rise in, 596, 943.</li>

<li>Economic development and integration. 1032, 1079, 1088.</li>

<li>Imports 1965/66. 595, 907, 1109, 1116.</li>

<li>Income per capita. 1034, 1119; pensions and, 1212.</li>

<li>Projects for future, 70.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Education,</b> 28, 76, 180, 186, 193, 205.</p>

<ul>

<li>High Schools, 185.</li>

<li>Manpower shortage and. <i>see</i> <b>Labour.</b></li>

<li>Teachers, training of, 184, 313.</li>

<li>Trans Oranje Institute, grant to, 1218.</li>

<li>Universities, 184, 193. (Stellenbosch) 501.</li>

<li>Vocational Schools, 183.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Electricity,</b> Supply of, 74.</p>

<p><b>Estates:</b> Ex gratia payment i.r.o. D. &#x0026; J. H. Joubert, 1221.</p>

<p><b>Estimates&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Central Government&#x2014;</li>

<li>Additional, 1214.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Appropriation&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></li>

<li>Railways and Harbours&#x2014;</li>

<li>Additional, motion to go into committee on, 416; in committee, 426, 484.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Appropriation&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#F">

<heading>F</heading>

<p><b>Fehr Collection,</b> Board of trustees of. audit of accounts, 517.</p>

<p><b>Finance&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Balance of payments, 595.</li>

<li>Building societies, 910.</li>

<li>Capital, inflow of, 596, 905, 907, 1115.</li>

<li>Consumers price index, rise in, 596, 943.</li>

<li>Customs and excise, remission of, to S.A.R.. 1216.</li>

<li>Credit, purchase of capital goods on, 906, 1115.</li>

<li>Deposit taking institutions, control over, 925.</li>

<li>Dividends, transfer of. overseas, 906, 1115.</li>

<li>Inflation, 595; State expenditure and, 1120; steps against, 1121.</li>

<li>Insurance, <i>see that heading.</i></li>

<li>Investment allowance for machinery, 1161.</li>

<li>Loans, 599, 909, 916, 921, 1116.</li>

<li>National income: Contribution of various sectors to, 601, 944; taxation and, 946.</li>

<li>Reserves. 597, 905.</li>

<li>Savings, domestic, 598.</li>

<li>Surplus, expected for 65/66. 598.</li>

<li>Taxation, young married couples and, 939, 946, 1116.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Foreign Affairs&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Gifts to foreign dignitories, provision for, 1230.</li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#G">

<heading><span class="col_I4" refersTo="page_0649"/>G</heading>

<p><b>Groenewald Committee,</b> 955.</p>

<p><b>Guzana,</b> Refusal of passport for, 1183, 1191.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#H">

<heading>H</heading>

<p><b>Harbours,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;Harbours&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Railways.</b></p>

<p><b>Helicopters,</b> Use of, for conveyance of passengers to and from airports, 901.</p>

<p><b>Herschel,</b> 167.</p>

<p><b>Housing:</b> Expenditure on 75, 138; Loans, <i>see</i>&#x201C;Building Societies&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Finance.</b></p> 

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#I">

<heading>I</heading>

<p><b>Imports,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Economic Affairs.</b></p>

<p><b>Inflation,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Finance.</b></p>

<p><b>Insurance:</b> Rhodesia and, in South Africa, 923, 1116; Third Party, <i>see that heading.</i></p>

<p><b>Irrigation,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Water Affairs.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#J">

<heading>J</heading>

<p><b>Judges,</b> Salaries and pensions of, 493.</p>

<p><b>Justice&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Civil judgments, reciprocal enforcement of, see <b>Bills.</b></li>

<li>Detainees. 965.</li>

<li><i>Ex Gratia</i> payment: to Tevrede Slaghuis i.r.o. meat supplies, 1230; to Sergeant P. C. van Heerden. 1230. Police raid on non-White night club in Johannesburg, 1192.</li>

<li>Prisons and Prisoners, 966, 968.</li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#K">

<heading>K</heading>

<p><b>Khakhetla,</b> 157, 320.</p>

<p><b>Kimberley,</b> Conversion of leasehold to freehold in, <i>see</i> <b>Bills.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#L">

<heading>L</heading>

<p><b>Labour&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Artisans, training of, 195.</li>

<li>Manpower: Education and, 180; railways and, 639.</li>

<li>Trade Unions, membership of, 198.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Livestock,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Railways</b> <i>and</i> <b>Agriculture.</b></p>

<p><b>Lotteries,</b> 1049.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#M">

<heading>M</heading>

<p><b>Manpower,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Labour.</b></p>

<p><b>Maseribane,</b> 160.</p>

<p><b>Mines and Mineworkers,</b> 1045.</p>

<p><b>Mint,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Coinage.</b></p>

<p><b>Motions:</b> No confidence (Sir de Villiers Graaff), 24-330; Speaker. Motion of appreciation (Prime Minister), 1250.</p>

<p><b>Motor Transport,</b> Conveyance of persons and goods, 489.</p>

<p><b>Motor Vehicle Insurance,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Third Party Insurance.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#N">

<heading>N</heading>

<p><b>Nautical College,</b> Granger Bay, 1231.</p>

<p><b>Ndamse,</b> 1183.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#P">

<heading>P</heading>

<p><b>Parliament&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>House of Assembly&#x2014;</li>

<li>Members&#x2014;</li>

<li>Condolence&#x2014;</li>

<li>Late Mr. F. H. Badenhorst. 12.</li>

<li>Late Dr. A. H. Jonker, 13.</li>

<li>New&#x2014;</li>

<li>Coetzee, Dr. J. A., 2.</li>

<li>Swiegers, J. G. 2.</li>

<li>Personal explanation by (Mr. Gorshel). 1161.</li>

<li>Speaker, motion of appreciation, 1250.</li>

<li>Vacancies in&#x2014;</li>

<li>Uitenhage, 1.</li>

<li>Kempton Park, 1.</li>

<li>Boksburg, 1.</li>

<li>Humansdorp, 1.</li>

<li>Nelspruit, 1.</li>

<li>Fort Beaufort 2.</li>

<li>Opening Speech. 3.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Papwa,</b> Golf tournaments and, 213.</p>

<p><span class="col_I5" refersTo="page_0650"/><b>Parties,</b> Political, policies of, 44, 305, 1077, 1086, 1096, 1202.</p>

<p><b>Passports:</b> Guzana, 1183, 1191; Chief Buthelezi, 1191.</p>

<p><b>Pensioners&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Civil, war and social, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Pension Laws&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></li>

<li>Income per capita and national income, 1212.</li>

<li>Non-White, 1155.</li>

<li>Railway: Concession to, 521; special allowance to, 642, 681, 721; position of, 813; P.A.Y.E. and, 892, 901; concessions to widows, 962.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Petrol,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Rhodesia</b> <i>and</i> &#x201C;Pipeline&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Railways.</b></p>

<p><b>Police,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Justice.</b></p>

<p><b>Posts and Telegraphs&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Radio Bantu, losses on, 1219.</li>

<li>Savings bank system, reforms in, 72.</li>

<li>Telephone system, improvements in, 72.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Protectorates&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Basutoland: &#x201C;Conquered territories&#x201D; and, 59, 157, 164, 320; gift of grain to, 1214.</li>

<li>Development of. and Republic, 1073, 1096.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Public Holidays:</b> Republic Day as paid holiday, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Factories&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></p>

<p><b>Public Service:</b> Increase of salaries, cost of, 1116.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#Q">

<heading>Q</heading>

<p><b>Questions,</b> <i>see</i> separate index.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#R">

<heading>R</heading>

<p><b>Railways&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Accidents and compensation, 792, 847.</li>

<li>Airways: Operation of, during 1965/66, 519, 523; Additional Boeings purchased, 420; Pilots, retiring age of, 488; Helicopters for conveyance of passengers to and from airports, 901.</li>

<li>Cape Town Station deck, 487.</li>

<li>Centralized traffic control, efficacy of, 413, 415, 899.</li>

<li>Coal, see <b>Coal.</b></li>

<li>Coloureds, travelling facilities for, 785.</li>

<li>Commissioners, salaries of, 423, 425-436.</li>

<li>Estimates of expenditure, additional, <i>see</i> <b>Estimates;</b> part appropriation, <i>see</i>&#x201C;appropriation&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></li>

<li>Expropriation of land by, 685.</li>

<li>Goods traffic 1965/66, 518.</li>

<li>Harbours: Improvements to, 522; Richards Bay, 414; Table Bay. 485, 699.</li>

<li>Housing, 521.</li>

<li>Job reservation, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Staff&#x201D; <i>below.</i></li>

<li>Livestock: Compensation for loss of, 488; conveyance of. 802, 848.</li>

<li>Monorails, 875.</li>

<li>New Lines: Metsi-Kaapmuiden; Vryheid-Empangeni; and Stoffberg-Roosse-nekal, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Railway Construction&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></li>

<li>Overtime, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Staff&#x201D; <i>below.</i></li>

<li>Passenger services 1965/66. 519, 700, 875; to and from Bantu Townships, 1217.</li>

<li>Pensioners, <i>see</i> <b>Pensioners.</b></li>

<li>Pipeline, 419, 522.</li>

<li>Police, medals and decorations for, 488.</li>

<li>Refreshment rooms, 484.</li>

<li>Staff: Overtime payments, 417, 644, 796, 838, 899; concessions to, 520; shortage of, 519; validation of changes in working conditions of. 546; retiring age of, 621; wages, percentage increase, 650, 889; in Transkei, 819; job reservation and, 827; disciplinary code and. 834, 1206; resignations, 845; staff associations and, 896.</li>

<li>Tariff on wool. 800.</li>

<li>Trains: Main line, stopping times of, 724; toilet facilities on, 764.</li>

<li>Working results since 1948, 521.</li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<p><b>Republic Festival:</b> Audit of accounts of committee of, 15; funds for, 980.</p>

<p><b>Rhodesia:</b> 46, 49, 81, 121, 172, 311, 1076, 1086.</p>

<ul>

<li>Petrol, supply of, to, 54.</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I6" refersTo="page_0651"/><b>Richards Bay,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;Harbours&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Railways.</b></p>

<p><b>Roads,</b> Advertising on, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Advertising&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#S">

<heading>S</heading>

<p><b>Salaries,</b> Public and Railway servants, cost of increase to, 1116.</p>

<p><b>Small Holdings</b> at Pretoria, conditions at, 981.</p>

<p><b>Sobukwe,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;Communism&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></p>

<p><b>Soil Conservation,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Agriculture.</b></p>

<p><b>South-West Africa,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;South-West Africa&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></p>

<p><b>State Attorney,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;State Attorney&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></p>

<p><b>Steenkamp,</b> Prof. <b>W. F.</b> J., <i>ex gratia</i> payment to, i.r.o. accumulated leave, 1229.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#T">

<heading>T</heading>

<p><b>Taxis,</b> Apartheid on, 490, 491, 548.</p>

<p><b>Teachers,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Education.</b></p>

<p><b>Third Party Insurance,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;Motor Vehicle Insurance&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></p>

<p><b>Trade Unions,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Labour.</b></p>

<p><b>Transkei,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Bantu Homelands.</b></p>

<p><b>Tugela,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Water Affairs.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#U">

<heading>U</heading>

<p><b>Universities,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Education.</b></p>

<p><b>U.N.O.,</b> 46.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#V">

<heading>V</heading>

<p><b>Vocational Schools,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Education.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#W">

<heading>W</heading>

<p><b>Water Affairs&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Government water controlled areas, <i>see</i>&#x201C;Water&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></li>

<li>Phalaborwa, water supply for, 1219.</li>

<li>Tugela River, water of, 116.</li>

<li>Water courts, constitution of, 502.</li>

<li>Water projects, 73, 222, 278.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Witzieshoek,</b> 167.</p>

<p><b>Women,</b> Right to run a banking account, <i>see</i>&#x201C;Matrimonial&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bills.</b></p>

<p><b>Wool,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Agriculture.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#index_to_questions">

<heading><span class="col_I7" refersTo="page_0652"/>INDEX TO QUESTIONS<noteRef href="note01_p654" marker="*"/></heading>

<debateSection name="#A">

<heading>A</heading>

<p><b>Accidents:</b> Prosecutions in connection with <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 260; in marshalling yard, Bloemfontein, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Railways&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Transport.</b></p>

<p><b>Agriculture&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Butter and cheese imported <i>(Dr. Moolman),</i>241.</li>

<li>Cattle, sheep and pigs marketed <i>(Dr. Moolman),</i> 242.</li>

<li>Maize purchased abroad <i>(Dr. Moolman),</i>242.</li>

<li>Makatini Flats, experimental farm on <i>(Mr. Cadman),</i> 450.</li>

<li>Onderstepoort, admittance of students of Pretoria University to <i>(Mr. Warren),</i>1003.</li>

<li>Tobacco, advertising of <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 440.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Aircraft:</b> Building of <i>(Mr. Ross),</i> 235; use of, by Ministers <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i>456.</p>

<p><b>Air Pollution,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Health.</b></p>

<p><b>Airports:</b> Facilities for handling air freight at <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 461; Jan Smuts, complaints about freight facilities at <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan), 474,</i> Jan Smuts, new terminal building at <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 475 and 1007; Collondale <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1013.</p>

<p><b>Audit,</b> Curtailment of <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1018.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#B">

<heading>B</heading>

<p><b>Ballotees,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;Tgrainees&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Defence.</b></p>

<p><b>Bantu Affairs&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Alexandra Township, treatment of tuberculosis in <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 230.</li>

<li>Bantu beer, separators for, permits for importation of <i>(Mr. Gorshel),</i> 1020.</li>

<li>Bantu Chiefs, grants of land to <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 271.</li>

<li>Bantu drivers of railway buses, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Railways&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Transport.</b></li>

<li>Bantu Education&#x2014;</li>

<li>Pupils in secondary standards <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 453.</li>

<li>Schools in Bantu Townships <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i>990.</li>

<li>Teachers, qualifications, salaries and pensions of <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 468.</li>

<li>Technical and vocational training schools <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 1022.</li>

<li>Bantu Homelands: Constitutions for <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 267; Expenditure on five-year plan for <i>(Mr. Raw),</i> 999.</li>

<li>Bantu in Western Cape endorsed out to Transkei <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 746.</li>

<li>Bantu labour in Western Province, condition of entry into <i>(Mr. Timoney),</i> 1000.</li>

<li>Bantu persons, restriction on, in Umtata <i>(Mr. Hughes),</i> 448.</li>

<li>Birth control <i>(Mr. Gorshel),</i> 735.</li>

<li>Ciskei. consolidation of <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 743.</li>

<li>Department of Bantu Administration, reports of, for 1964-5 <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 248.</li>

<li>Health, <i>see</i> <b>Health.</b></li>

<li>Housing, <i>see</i> <b>Community Development.</b></li>

<li>Identity documents, arrest for non-possession of <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 437.</li>

<li>Influx of Bantu <i>(Mr. Taurog),</i> 753.</li>

<li>Labour bureaux, <i>see that heading.</i></li>

<li>Labour contracts, cancellation of <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 1007.</li>

<li>Mamuthla Reserve, visit to, by Bishop of Kimberley <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 243.</li>

<li>Reference book wallets <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i>1015.</li>

<li>Regional authorities: Mkomazi, grants to <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 456.</li>

<li><span class="col_I8" refersTo="page_0653"/>S.A. Native Trust, land purchased by <i>{Mr. Raw),</i> 1008; farms transferred to, <i>{Mr. Raw),</i> 1009.</li>

<li>South-West Africa, <i>see that heading.</i></li>

<li>Taxation (general tax) <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 248.</li>

<li>Transkei: Labour recruited in, for Western Province <i>{Mrs. Suzman),</i> 746; land-to be transferred to Government of <i>{Mr. Taurog), 991.</i></li>

<li>Urban Bantu: Cost of living of <i>{Mr. Wood),</i> 469; representatives of, in terms of Promotion of Bantu Self-Government Act <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i>1006.</li>

<li>Xhosa Development Corporation, members of <i>{Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 251.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Basutoland,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Protectorates</b></p>

<p><b>Beaches,</b> separate, extent of, for each race group <i>{Mrs. Suzman),</i> 992.</p>

<p><b>Bilharzia,</b> Trainees and, <i>see</i> <b>Defence;</b> research into, <b>see Health.</b></p>

<p><b>Boeings,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;Railways&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Transport.</b></p>

<p><b>Bridges,</b> Building of, <i>see</i> <b>Public Works.</b></p>

<p><b>Burglaries,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Justice.</b></p>

<p><b>Bursaries,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Education.</b></p>

<p><b>Butter,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Agriculture.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#C">

<heading>C</heading>

<p><b>Carter,</b> Dr. Gwendolen, issue of permit to <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 19.</p>

<p><b>Cheese,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Agriculture.</b></p>

<p><b>Ciskei,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Bantu Affairs.</b></p>

<p><b>Coal,</b> Conveyance of <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 460.</p>

<p><b>Coloured Affairs&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Birth Control <i>(Mr. Gorshel),</i> 735.</li>

<li>Bursaries to pupils in Natal <i>(Mr. Wood),</i>727.</li>

<li>Development Corporation and rock lobster quota <i>(Mr. Eden),</i> 732.</li>

<li>Passports, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Passports&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Interior.</b></li>

<li>Pupils enrolled <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 451.</li>

<li>Representative Council for <i>(Mr. Eden),</i> 731.</li>

<li>School attendance, compulsory <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 437; <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i> 726.</li>

<li>Schools, building of, in Cape Peninsula <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i> 457.</li>

<li>Teachers: Resignation of, since January, 1964 <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 259 and during 1963, 1964 and 1965 <i>(Mr. Eden),</i>731; deputation of, from Natal <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 726.</li>

<li>Unemployment in Western Cape <i>(Mr. Timoney),</i> 1001.</li>

<li>Voters, registration of <i>(Mr. Eden),</i> 749.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Communism Act,</b> Suppression of&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Prisoners in terms of, released <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 744.</li>

<li>Proclamation 400, <i>see</i> <b>Justice.</b></li>

<li>Prosecutions for failure of restricted persons to report to police station <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 1005.</li>

<li>Restrictions on persons in terms of <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 262; in Umtata <i>(Mr. Hughes),</i> 448.</li>

<li>Trial of persons under house arrest <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 1005.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Community Development&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Beaches, <i>see</i> <b>Beaches.</b></li>

<li>Houses: Shortage of (for all races) <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 477; sub-economic limits for Bantu <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 751.</li>

<li>Permits for mixed gatherings <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 18.</li>

<li>Sale of building stands, method of <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i>475.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Copyright,</b> Sound recordings and <i>(Mr. Gorshel).</i>443.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#D">

<heading>D</heading>

<p><b>Dagga:</b> Cost of helicopter patrols to control <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 272; value of confiscated <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 272.</p>

<p><b>Daylight</b> saving <i>(Mr. Oldfield),</i> 729.</p>

<p><b>Defence&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Flying School, Dunnottar, transfer of <i>(Mr. Taurog),</i> 737.</li>

<li>Naval vessels, food dumped by <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 23; by <i>S.A.S. Pretorius (Mr. Wood),</i> 732.</li>

<li><span class="col_I9" refersTo="page_0654"/>Staff, Permanent Force: Resignation and additions to, during 1965 <i>(Brig. Bronkhorst),</i> 471; death of and injuries to, as result of accidents <i>(Mr. Gay),</i> 741; medical aid to retired members of <i>(Mr. Timoney),</i> 1001.</li>

<li>Trainees: Protection against Bilharzia <i>(Mr. Gay),</i> 441; compensation in respect of injured <i>(Mr. Oldfield),</i> 445; drowned in Hennops River <i>(Mr. Gay),</i> 733; physical condition of <i>(Mr. Gay),</i> 740; death of and injuries to, as result of accidents <i>(Mr. Gay),</i> 741 and <i>(Mr. Oldfield),</i>742; rate of pay of <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i>990; allowances for dependants of <i>(Mr. Raw),</i> 1008.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Diamond,</b> Mining for, <i>see</i> <b>Mines.</b></p>

<p><b>Dunnottar</b> flying school, <i>see</i> <b>Defence</b> <i>above.</i></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#E">

<heading>E</heading>

<p><b>Economic Affairs&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Fishing: Licences i.r.o. Transkei <i>(Mr.</i></li>

<li><i>Hughes),</i> 448; harbour, Rietvlei <i>(Mr. Timoney),</i> 1018.</li>

<li>Imports, permits for <i>(Dr. Moolman),</i> 266; <i>(Mr. Gorshel),</i> 1020.</li>

<li>Lobster quota and Coloured Development Corp, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Development Corporation&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Coloured Affairs.</b></li>

<li>Power Station in S. E. Transvaal <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i>20.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Education&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bantu, <i>see</i> <b>Bantu Affairs.</b></li>

<li>Bursaries and study loans. National Fund for, donations to <i>(Mrs. Weiss),</i> 447.</li>

<li>Coloureds, <i>see</i> <b>Coloured Affairs.</b></li>

<li>John Orr Technical High School, qualifications of Committee of Enquiry <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i>250.</li>

<li>National education policy, legislation in connection with <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i> 439.</li>

<li>Non-Whites, permission to, for study overseas <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 440.</li>

<li>Technical high schools, control of <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i>748. <i>(See also</i> &#x201C;Bantu Education&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Bantu Affairs).</b></li>

<li>Universities: Number of students at <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 256; <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i>452; training of engineers <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1012.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Emigration,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Immigration.</b></p>

<p><b>Engineers,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;Universities&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Education.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#F">

<heading>F</heading>

<p><b>Films,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;Publications Control Board&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Interior.</b></p>

<p><b>Finance,</b> Unredeemed loan levies <i>(Mr. Gorshel),</i>1021.</p>

<p><b>Fishing,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Economic Affairs.</b></p>

<p><b>Fluoridation,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Health.</b></p>

<p><b>Foodstuffs,</b> Dumping of, by Naval vessels, <i>see</i> <b>Defence.</b></p>

<p><b>Foreign Affairs&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Gifts <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1018.</li>

<li>International organizations, membership of <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 19.</li>

<li>Protectorates, <i>see</i> <b>Protectorates.</b></li>

<li>Visits of <b>M.P.s</b> to <b>Ghana,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Ghana.</b></li>

</ul>

<p><b>Foreshore,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Lands.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#G">

<heading>G</heading>

<p><b>Gastro-Enteritis,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Health.</b></p>

<p><b>Ghana,</b> Visits to, by M.P.s <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i>261.</p>

<p><b>Guzana,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;Passports&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Interior.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#H">

<heading>H</heading>

<p><b>Health&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Air Pollution Act, application of <i>(Mrs. Weiss),</i> 447.</li>

<li>Beds (hospitals), shortage of <i>(Dr. Radford),</i>997.</li>

<li>Bilharzia: Research <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 461, 462 and 467; refund of expenses for treatment of <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 462; in dams <i>(Mr. Wood).</i> 470. <i>(See also</i>&#x201C;Trainees&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Defence).</b></li>

<li>Bantu medical personnel <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 440 and 748.</li>

<li>Fluoridation, commission of enquiry into <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan).</i> 1012.</li>

<li><span class="col_I10" refersTo="page_0655"/>Gastroenteritis. incidence of <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i>1006.</li>

<li>Hospitals for pulmonary tuberculosis <i>(Dr. Fisher),</i> 476; cost per T.B. patient <i>(Dr. Fisher).</i> 754. <i>(See also</i> &#x201C;Beds&#x201D; above).</li>

<li>Insecticides, <i>see</i> <b>Insecticides.</b></li>

<li>Ionizing radiation, commission of enquiry into <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1013.</li>

<li>Nurses: Salary scales of <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i> 232; shortage of <i>(Dr. Radford),</i> 997.</li>

<li>Pharmaceutical education <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 750.</li>

<li>Therapeutic substances, revised regulations <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 995.</li>

<li>Trachoma, incidence of <i>(Dr. Fisher),</i> 1022.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Hospitals,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Health</b> <i>above.</i></p>

<p><b>Hotel,</b> International class, in Johannesburg <i>(Mr. Gorshel),</i> 239.</p>

<p><b>Housing,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Community Development.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#I">

<heading>I</heading>

<p><b>Immigration&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Citizenship granted to immigrants since January, 1960 <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i> 258 and <i>(Mr. Wood), 458.</i></li>

<li>Emigration and. during 1964/65 <i>(Mrs. Suzman).</i> 247.</li>

<li>Immigrants: Size of families, restrictions on <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i> 257; State aid to <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i> 258; total number of, since 1949 <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 457; children of, and polio <i>(Hr. Hope-well),</i> 736; X-ray examinations of <i>(Dr. Radford), 1004.</i></li>

</ul>

<p><b>Immorality,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Justice.</b></p>

<p><b>Imports,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Economic Affairs.</b></p>

<p><b>Information,</b> Department of&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Information officers, number and duties of <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 473/4.</li>

<li>Journalists and publishers, American, visit of <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 440.</li>

<li>Rhodesia, <i>see</i> <b>Rhodesia.</b></li>

<li>Press releases, <i>see</i> <b>Press.</b></li>

</ul>

<p><b>Indians:</b> Analysis of population <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i>457; birth control and <i>(Mr. Gorshel),</i> 735; Department for, Whites and Indians employed by <i>(Mr. Wood).</i> 753.</p>

<p><b>Insecticides:</b> Use of parathion <i>(Mr. Gorshel),</i>238; investigation into use of <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 467.</p>

<p><b>Insurance&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Government buildings <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i> 726.</li>

<li>Third Party: Increase of premiums <i>(Mr. Taurog).</i> 240; issuing of discs during 1965 <i>(Mr. Taurog).</i> 265: consortium, basis of selection <i>(Mr. Taurog),</i> 266.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Interior&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Naturalization and registration of citizens <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan).</i> 20: of immigrants, <i>see</i> <b>Immigration.</b></li>

<li>Passports: Refusal of <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 247; to Mr. Guzana <i>(Mr. Hughes),</i> 734; to Coloureds <i>(Mr. Eden),</i> 749.</li>

<li>Publications Control Board, films passed by <i>(Mr. Gorshel),</i> 750.</li>

<li>Public servants abroad, loans to. for purchase of motor-cars, etc. <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1011:; non-Whites, pay increases for <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 1021.</li>

<li>Visas, issue of: to D". Gwendolen Carter <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 19; to Pastor Niemöller <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 229; number granted and refused during 1965 <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 262.</li>

<li>Voters&#x2019; lists, printing of <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i>20.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Ionizing Radiation,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Health.</b></p>

<p><b>Irrigation,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Water Affairs.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#J">

<heading>J</heading>

<p><b>John Orr Technical High School,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Education.</b></p>

<p><b>Josini Dam,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;Irrigation&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Water Affairs.</b></p>

<p><b>Journalists,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Information.</b></p>

<p><b>Justice&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Burglaries in Durban <i>(Mr. Wood).</i> 744.</li>

<li>Communism Act, <i>see that heading.</i></li>

<li>Criminal trials, delays in <i>(Mrs. Suzman).</i> 464.</li>

<li><span class="col_I11" refersTo="page_0656"/>Executions during July, 1964 to June, 1965 <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 1004.</li>

<li>Immorality Act, convictions under <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 991.</li>

<li>Judges, retired <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i> 234.</li>

<li>Liquor, off-sales of, in Durban North <i>(Mr. M. L. Mitchell).</i> 738.</li>

<li>Police, allocation of houses to <i>(Mr. Hope-well),</i> 235.</li>

<li>Portraits of Minister of, display at police stations <i>(Mr. M. L. Mitchell),</i> 998.</li>

<li>Prisons: Treatment of stiff muscles of prisoners in <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 233; daily average number of prisoners in <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 261; Gamkaspoort, treatment of prisoners in <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 465; prisoners escaped from, in Durban <i>(Mr. Wood).</i> 744; prisoners under public safety laws released <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 744; Nigel, charges against head warder of <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 745.</li>

<li>Proclamation 400, prosecutions under <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 1005.</li>

<li>Trials, arrests and imprisonment under Acts relating to safety of the State <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 462, 463, 465.</li>

<li>"Wit Hand&#x201D; secret organization <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 990.</li>

<li>Witnesses, persons detained as <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 243.</li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#L">

<heading>L</heading>

<p><b>Labour&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Industrial council agreements and wage increases <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 746.</li>

<li>Labour force: Increase of <i>(Mr. Taurog),</i>470; maximum use of <i>(Mr. Wood).</i>995; Percentage of manual, unskilled, etc., employed <i>(Mrs. Taylor).</i>258.</li>

<li>Mines, <i>see</i> <b>Mines.</b></li>

<li>Unemployment, <i>see</i> <b>Coloured Affairs.</b></li>

<li>Women employees in State-aided institutions <i>(Mrs. Taylor).</i> 259.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Labour Bureaux,</b> Aid centres for <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 742.</p>

<p><b>Labour Party,</b> Security Police and <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 742.</p>

<p><b>Lands,</b> Cape Town Foreshore <i>(Mr. Gorshel),</i>446.</p>

<p><b>Liquor,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Justice</b> <i>and</i> &#x201C;Railways&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Transport.</b></p>

<p><b>Livestock,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Agriculture.</b></p>

<p><b>Loan Levies,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Finance.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#M">

<heading>M</heading>

<p><b>Maize,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Agriculture.</b></p>

<p><b>Makatini Flats,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Agriculture.</b></p>

<p><b>Mines&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Diamond, mining for <i>(Mr. Eden).</i> 749.</li>

<li>Labour experiment on <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i> 232.</li>

<li>Mineworkers, shortage of <i>(Mr. Taurog).</i> 444.</li>

<li>Pneumoconiosis: pensions and grants,</li>

<li>widows in receipt of <i>(Mr. Taurog),</i>444; being paid to mineworkers in various age groups <i>(Mr. Taurog),</i>727; non-mining, notification of <i>(Dr. Radford),</i> 996.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Mixed Gatherings,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Community Development.</b></p>

<p><b>Motor Vehicles,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Transport</b> <i>and</i> <b>Accidents.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#N">

<heading>N</heading>

<p><b>Naturalization,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Interior.</b></p>

<p><b>Niemöller,</b> Pastor, issue of visa to <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 229.</p>

<p><b>Nurses,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Health.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#O">

<heading>O</heading>

<p><b>Onderstepoort,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Agriculture.</b></p>

<p><b>Orange River Scheme,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Water Affairs.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#P">

<heading>P</heading>

<p><b>Parathion,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Insecticides.</b></p>

<p><b>Passports,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Interior.</b></p>

<p><b>Pensioners&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Civil <i>(Mr. Oldfield).</i> 994.</li>

<li>Hospitalisation and <i>(Mr. Raw).</i> 999.</li>

<li>Income Tax and <i>(Mr. Taurog).</i> 748.</li>

<li>Old Age. refunds of overpayments to <i>(Mr. Taurog),</i> 727.</li>

<li><span class="col_I12" refersTo="page_0657"/>Pneumoconiosis, <i>see</i> <b>Mines.</b></li>

<li>Railway servants, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Railways&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Transport.</b></li>

<li>Social: Total number of <i>(Mr. Oldfield),</i> 267; number of Coloureds, Indians and Bantu <i>(Mr. Oldfield),</i> 268; number of Whites <i>(Mr. Taurog),</i> 747.</li>

<li>War Veterans, classification of <i>(Mr. Gay),</i>996.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Permits:</b> Imports, <i>see</i> <b>Economic Affairs;</b> mixed gatherings, <i>see</i> <b>Community Development.</b></p>

<p><b>Planning:</b> Controlled area Pretoria, Witwatersrand and Vereeniging <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1009.</p>

<p><b>Petrol</b> for Rhodesia, <i>see</i> <b>Rhodesia.</b></p>

<p><b>Pneumoconiosis,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Mines.</b></p>

<p><b>Polio,</b> Immigrant Children and, <i>see</i> <b>Immigration.</b></p>

<p><b>Pongola,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;Irrigation&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Water Affairs.</b></p>

<p><b>Posts and Telegraphs&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Accounts, foreign, in arrear <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan).</i> 1011.</li>

<li>Post Bags, conveyance of, from Heilbron station <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 250.</li>

<li>Post Office: Rissik Street, exchange of site <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 249; Addington area <i>(Mr. Raw),</i> 1000.</li>

<li>Radio licences issued during 1964 and 1965 <i>(Mr. Oldfield),</i> 998.</li>

<li>S.A.B.C., licence fees paid by <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan).</i> 21.</li>

<li>Satellite Communications System, Agreement <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 21.</li>

<li>Telephones: Trunk calls, Durban, delays to <i>(Mr. Oldfield),</i> 449; applications for. in Durban <i>(Mr. Oldfield).</i> 993; overseas calls (A/r. <i>E. G. Malan),</i>1002.</li>

<li>Television: Demonstration of. at exhibition <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 18; communication satellites and <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 231; purchase of apparatus for <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1010 and 1014.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Police,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Justice.</b></p>

<p><b>Power Stations,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Economic Affairs.</b></p>

<p><b>Press,</b> Language medium of releases to <i>(Mr. Wood), 213.</i></p>

<p><b>Printing,</b> Tenders from firms in Transvaal <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan).</i> 1015.</p>

<p><b>Prisons,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Justice.</b></p>

<p><b>Proclamation 400,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Justice.</b></p>

<p><b>Protectorates:</b> Diplomatic representation in <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 235; Gift of grain to Basutoland <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan).</i>240.</p>

<p><b>Publications Control Board,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Interior.</b></p>

<p><b>Public Service,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Interior.</b></p>

<p><b>Public Works,</b> Bridge at Bloemhof <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 729.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#R">

<heading>R</heading>

<p><b>Rabies,</b> Inoculation against <i>(Dr. Radford),</i> 735.</p>

<p><b>Radio Licences,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Posts and Telegraphs.</b></p>

<p><b>Railways,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Transport.</b></p>

<p><b>Rhodesia:</b> Applications for permits for export of petrol to <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 263; inter-departmental committee in connection with petrol supplies to <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 476; information officers in <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1003.</p>

<p><b>Roads,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Transport.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#S">

<heading>S</heading>

<p><b>S.A.B.C.,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Posts and Telegraphs.</b></p>

<p><b>Satellite Communication System,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Posts and Telegraphs.</b></p>

<p><b>Sinkholes</b> in Western Transvaal: Loss of life <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 252; Railways and, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Railways&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Transport.</b></p>

<p><b>Small Holdings</b> at Pretoria, position of families on <i>(Mr. Gorshel),</i> 236.</p>

<p><b>Social Welfare&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>National Welfare Board, composition of <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i> 439.</li>

<li>Pensions, <i>see</i> <b>Pensioners.</b></li>

</ul>

<p><b>South-West Africa:</b> Purchase of land for tribal reserves in <i>(Mrs. Suzman),</i> 269; cost of visit of Bantu leaders from, to Republic <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 271.</p>

<p><span class="col_I13" refersTo="page_0658"/><b>State-aided Institutions,</b> Women employees in, <i>see</i> <b>Labour.</b></p>

<p><b>Suppression of Communism Act,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Communism Act.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#T">

<heading>T</heading>

<p><b>Taxation</b> of Bantu, <i>see</i> <b>Bantu Affairs.</b></p>

<p><b>Teachers,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Education.</b></p>

<p><b>Television,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Posts and Telegraphs.</b></p>

<p><b>Tenders:</b> For Orange River Scheme, <i>see</i>&#x201C;Orange River Scheme&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Water Affairs;</b> departure from normal procedure relating to <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1013 and 1014.</p>

<p><b>Tobacco,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Agriculture.</b></p>

<p><b>Trachoma,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Health.</b></p>

<p><b>Trainees,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Defence.</b></p>

<p><b>Transport&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Airports, <i>see</i> <b>Airports.</b></li>

<li>Motor vehicles: Speedometers of new <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 233; Insurance of (Third Party), see <b>Insurance.</b></li>

<li>Railways: Accidents: Railwaymen killed and injured since 1961 <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan).</i> 752; Marshalling Yard, Bloemfontein <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan).</i>455.</li>

<li>Boeings <i>Hl,</i> defects in <i>(Mr. Taurog),</i> 739.</li>

<li>Buses, Bantu as drivers of <i>(Mr. Hughes),</i> 448.</li>

<li>Cape Town sale of liquor in restaurant at <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 248.</li>

<li>Carletonville, sinkholes at <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 230.</li>

<li>Coaches 43 and 44, cost and use of <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 270; officials&#x2019; <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 458.</li>

<li>Coal, conveyance of, <i>see</i> <b>Coal.</b></li>

<li>Compensation in respect of railwaymen killed and injured <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 752.</li>

<li>Delegation to Japan, cost of <i>(Mr. Wood),</i>233.</li>

<li>Durban, new railway station at <i>(Mr. Oldfield).</i> 729.</li>

<li>Female employees, conditions of employment of <i>(Mrs. Taylor),</i> 438.</li>

<li>Harbours, <i>see</i> &#x201C;Fishing&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Economic Affairs.</b></li>

<li>Johannesburg station; Parking at <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 251; gallery tearoom at <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i>269.</li>

<li>Labourers and porters, wages and rentals of <i>(Mr. Taurog),</i> 239.</li>

<li>Mileages and deviations <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 471.</li>

<li>Non-Whites, employment of <i>(Mr. Wood).</i>460; salaries of <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 469.</li>

<li>Passengers on long distance trains <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 459.</li>

<li>Pensioners: Allowance to <i>(Mr. Eaton).</i>264; concessions to <i>(Mr. Oldfield).</i>728.</li>

<li>Public Relations Officer, Johannesburg <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 252.</li>

<li>Territorial Allowance in S.W.A. <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 454.</li>

<li>Trans-Natal Express, running time of <i>(Mr. Wood),</i> 471.</li>

<li>Roads, building of, slowed down <i>(Mr. Wood).</i> 459.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Tuberculosis,</b> <i>see</i> &#x201C;Hospitals&#x201D; <i>under</i> <b>Health.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#U">

<heading>U</heading>

<p><b>Universities,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Education.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#V">

<heading>V</heading>

<p><b>Vaal River,</b> Investigation of basin of <i>(Mr. Ross),</i> 235.</p>

<p><b>Visas,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Interior.</b></p>

<p><b>Voters&#x2019; Lists,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Interior.</b></p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#W">

<heading>W</heading>

<p><b>Water Affairs&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Henley Dam, silting up of <i>(Capt. Henwood).</i>730.</li>

<li>Irrigation: Pongola Scheme <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i>256; <i>(Mr. Cadman),</i> 449; allocation of land <i>(Mr. Cadman),</i>450.</li>

<li>Orange River Scheme; Complaints about tenders for <i>(Mr. Gorshel),</i> 446 and 1001; special committee of Tender Board and tenders approved <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 1010; tenders for foodstuffs, etc. <i>(Mr. Gorshel),</i> 1019; for sand <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i>1021.</li>

<li>Supply of Water to Pretoria industrial area and Rosslyn <i>(Mr. Ross),</i> 236.</li>

<li>Water consumption in Transvaal, restriction on <i>(Mr. E. G. Malan),</i> 245.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>Welfare Board,</b> National, <i>see</i> <b>Social Welfare.</b></p>

<p><b>&#x201C;Wit Hand&#x201D;</b> secret organization, <i>see</i> <b>Justice.</b></p>

<p><b>Witnesses,</b> <i>see</i> <b>Justice.</b></p>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#index_to_speeches">

<heading><span class="col_I14" refersTo="page_0659"/>INDEX TO SPEECHES</heading>

<p>(&#x201C;R&#x201D; denotes &#x201C;Reading&#x201D;)</p>

<p><b>AGRICULTURAL CREDIT AND LAND TENURE, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Uys the Hon. D. C. H.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS AND MARKETING, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Uys the Hon. D. C. H.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>AGRICULTURAL TECHNICAL SERVICES, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Le Roux, the Hon. P. M. K.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT, DEPUTY MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Botha, the Hon. M. C.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BANTU ADMINISTRATION AND DEVELOPMENT, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>[<i>See</i> Nel. the Hon. M. D. C. de W.)</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BANTU EDUCATION, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Maree. the Hon. W. A.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BARNETT, Mr. C. (Boland)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Motor Carrier Transportation (amendment) (2R.). 491.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1058.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.). 808.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment) (Committee), 1236.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 213.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Mr. Speaker: Motion of Appreciation, 1251.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BASSON, Mr. J. D. du P. (Bezuidenhout)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>South-West Africa Constitution (2R.). 481.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 123.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BEKKER, Mr. G. F. H. (Cradock)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1038.</li>

<li>Water (amendment) (2R.). 510.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BEZUIDENHOUT, Mr. G. P. C. (Brakpan)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (3R.), 869.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BLOOMBERG, Mr. A. (Peninsula)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment) (2R.), 357.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Condolences&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Badenhorst, Late Mr. F. H. (motion), 13.</li>

<li>Jonker. Late Dr. A. H. (motion). 14.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, the Hon. M. C. (Roodepoort)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Deputy Minister of Bantu Administration and Development.]</i></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 161, 163.</li>

</ul></li></ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, the Hon. P. W. (George)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Coloured Affairs, of Community Development and of Public Works.]</i></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 131.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I15" refersTo="page_0660"/><b>BOTHA. Mr. S. P. (Soutpansberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 927.</li>

<li>Water (amendment) (2R.), 506; (Committee). 554.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>BRONKHORST, Brig. H. J. (North East Rand)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 956.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 1222, 1225, 1226.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>CADMAN, Mr. R. M. (Zululand)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railway Construction (2R.), 409.</li>

<li>Water (amendment) (2R.), 505; (Committee). 553.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>CHAIRMAN AND DEPUTY CHAIRMAN,</b> <i>see</i> p. 24.</p>

<p><b>COETZEE, Mr. B. (Vereeniging)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence. 84, 87.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>COETZEE, Dr. J. A. (Kempton Park)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 972.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>COETZEE, Mr. P. J. (Langlaagte)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part ApproDriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.). 777.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>COLOURED AFFAIRS, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Botha, the Hon. P. W.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>CRONJE, Dr. F. J. C. (Jeppes)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1028.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>CRUYWAGEN, Mr. W. A. (Germiston)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 794.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>DEFENCE, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Fouche, the Hon. J. J.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE KLERK, the Hon. Senator J.&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of the Interior and of Education, Arts and Science.]</i></li>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>South-West Africa Constitution (2R.). 479, 482; (Committee), 524.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence. 180.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee). 1218, 1231.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>DEPUTY MINISTERS&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> under names of.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DIEDERICHS, Dr. the Hon. N. (Losberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Economic Affairs.]</i></li>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.). 1169.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>DÖNGES, Dr. the Hon. T. E., S.A. (Worcester)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Finance.]</i></li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Finance (2R.), 1125.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 594, 1113; (3R.), 1161, 1207.</li>

<li>S.A. Mint and Coinage (amendment) (2R.). 590, 592.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Republic Festival Committee. Audit of accounts (motion), 15.</li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:</li>

<li>Additional (Committee), 1216, 1217.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I16" refersTo="page_0661"/><b>DURRANT, Mr. R. B. (Turffontein)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence. 200.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 1219, 1220, 1225.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Railways and Harbours:

<ul>

<li>Additional (motion), 421. (Committee). 426, 432, 436.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>EATON, Mr. N. G. (Umhlatuzana)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Factories, Machinery and Building Work (amendment) (2R.), 498; (Committee). 549, 552; (3R.), 624.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 823; (3R.), 889.</li>

<li>Railway Construction (2R.), 413.</li>

<li>Railway and Harbours Acts (amendment) (Committee), 546.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 428.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>ECONOMIC AFFAIRS, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Diederichs, the Hon. N.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>EDUCATION, ARTS AND SCIENCE, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> De Klerk, the Hon. Senator J.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>EDEN, Mr. G. S. (Karoo)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Kimberley Leasehold Conversion to Freehold (amendment) 593.</li>

<li>Motor Carrier Transportation (amendment) (Committee), 548.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1067.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 782; (3R.), 884.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1136.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>EMDIN, Mr. S. (Parktown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment) (2R.), 368; (Committee), 525.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 932.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>FIELD, Mr. A. N. (East London-North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 680.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>FINANCE, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Dönges, the Hon. Dr. T. E.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>FISHER, Dr. E. L. (Rosettenville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Base Minerals (amendment) (2R.). 1159.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>FOREIGN AFFAIRS, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Muller. Dr. the Hon H.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>FORESTRY, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Maree, the Hon. W. A.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>FOUCHÉ, the Hon. J. J. (Bloemfontein-West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Defence.]</i></li>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.). 952.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Defence Act, 1957, Amendment of First Schedule of the (motion). 758.</li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 1222, 1226, 1229.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>FRONEMAN, Mr. G. H. van L. (Heilbron)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 716.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1138.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 146.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I17" refersTo="page_0662"/><b>GAY, Mr. L. C. (Simonstown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 947.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 695.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Defence Act, 1957, Amendment of the First Schedule of the (motion), 759.</li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 1227.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Railways and Harbours:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 485.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>GORSHEL, Mr. A. (Hospital)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment) (2R.), 374; (3R.), 606.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 975.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours (2R.), 759.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>GRAAFF, Sir de Villiers (Rondebosch)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1086.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Condolences&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Badenhorst, Late Mr. F. H. (motion), 12.</li>

<li>lonker, Late Dr. A. H. (motion), 14.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 24, 310.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Mr. Speaker: Motion of Appreciation, 1251.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HAAK, the Hon. J. F. W. (Bellville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Planning and of Mines.]</i></li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Base Minerals (amendment) (2R.), 1157, 1245.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1184.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HEALTH, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Hertzog, the Hon. Dr. A.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HERTZOG, the Hon. Dr. A. (Ermelo)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Posts and Telegraphs and of Health.]</i></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 1219.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HICKMAN, Mr. T. (Maitland)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment) (Committee), 536, 541; (3R.), 604.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 667.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 139.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HOLLAND, Mr. M. W. (Outeniqua)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1146.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HOPEWELL, Mr. A. (Pinetown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R), 920.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (3R.), 873.</li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 1217.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HOURQUEBIE, Mr. R. G. L. (Durban-Musgrave)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment) (2R.), 362.</li>

<li>Reciprocal Enforcement of Civil Judgements (2R.), 590.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>HUGHES, Mr. T. G. (Transkeian Territories)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment) (Committee), 538, 542.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1175.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 818.</li>

<li><span class="col_I18" refersTo="page_0663"/>Reciprocal enforcement of Civil Judgments (Committee), 633.</li>

<li>Suppression of Communism (amendment) (2R.), 568; (Committee), 626; (3R.), 754.</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 94.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>IMMIGRATION, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Trollip. the Hon Senator A. E.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>INDIAN AFFAIRS, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Maree, the Hon. W. A.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>INFORMATION, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Waring, the Hon. F. W.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>INTERIOR, MINISTER OF THE&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> De Klerk, the Hon. Senator J.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>JUSTICE, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Voster, the Hon. B. J.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KNOBEL, Mr. D. J. (Bethlehem)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 662.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>KOORNHOF, Dr. P. G. J. (Edenvale)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 984, 1028.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>KOTZÉ, Mr. S. F. (Parow)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 702.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>LABOUR, DEPUTY MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Viljoen, the Hon. M.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LABOUR, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Trollip, the Hon. Senator A. E.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LE ROUX, the Hon. P. M. K. (Oudtshoorn)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Agricultural Technical Services and of Water Affairs.]</i></li>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Water (amendment) (2R.). 502, 513; (Committee), 557, 561, 564; (3R.), 626.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 228, 273.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>LEWIS, Mr. H. (Durban-Umlazi)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>South-West Africa Constitution (2R.), 480.</li>

<li>Water (amendment) (2R.). 508; (Committee), 555, 560; (amendment by Senate), 1027.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>LOOTS, Mr. J. J. (Queenstown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.). 940.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MALAN, Mr. E. G. (Orange Grove)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 786.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 153.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee). 1219.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MARAIS, Mr. J. A. (Innesdale)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 301.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MAREE, Mr. G. de K. (Namaqualand)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Base Minerals (amendment) (2R.), 1160, 1241.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MAREE, the Hon. W. A. (Newcastle)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Forestry, of Bantu Education and of Indian Affairs.]</i></li>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1096.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MARTINS, the Hon. H. E. (Wakkerstroom)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Deputy Minister of Agricultural Education and of Indian Affairs.] of Agricultural Economics and Marketing and of Agricultural Credit and Land Tenure]</i></li>

<li><span class="col_I19" refersTo="page_0664"/>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1050.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 1220, 1221.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MILLER, Mr. H. (Florida)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (3R.), 863.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1149.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MINES, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Haak, the Hon. J. F. W.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MINISTERS&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See under names of.}</i></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MITCHELL, Mr. D. E. (Natal-South Coast)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Water (amendment) (2R.), 511.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 113.</li>

</ul></li></ul>

<p><b>MITCHELL, Mr. M. L. (Durban-North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment) (2R). 386; (Committee), 526, 536, 545; (3R.), 609.</li>

<li>Reciprocal enforcement of Civil Judgments (Committee), 632, 634.</li>

<li>State Attorney (amendment) (2R.), 565.</li>

<li>Suppression of Communism (amendment) (Committee), 629.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 486.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MOOLMAN, Dr. J. H. (East London-City)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1105.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railwavs and Harbours&#x2019; (2R.), 798.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MOORE, Mr. P. A. (Kensington)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment) (2R), 384; (Committee), 528.</li>

<li>S.A. Mint and Coinage (amendment) (2R), 591.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 186.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MULDER, Dr. C. P. (Randfontein)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1142.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MULLER, the Hon. H. (Beaufort West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of External Affairs.]</i></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 1231.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>MULLER, Mr. S. L. (Ceres)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Water (amendment) (Committee), 561.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>NEL, Mr. J. A. F. (Port Elizabeth-North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Suppression of Communism (amendment) (2R.), 573.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>NEL, the Hon. M. D. C. de W. (Wonderboom)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Bantu Administration and Development.}</i></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 104.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>NIEMAND, Mr. F. J. (Pietersburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 820.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>ODELL, Mr. H. G. O. (Pietermaritzburg-City)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1063.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I20" refersTo="page_0665"/><b>OLDFIELD, Mr. G. N. (Durban-Umbilo)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 810.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1127; (Committee), 1232, 1234, 1237: (3R.), 1238.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>OTTO, Dr. J. C. (Pretoria-East)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 674.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Hertzog, the Hon. Dr. A.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PRIME MINISTER&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Verwoerd, the Hon. Dr. H. F.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PUBLIC WORKS, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Botha, the Hon. P. W.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>RADFORD, Dr. A., M.C. (Durban-Central)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Acts (amendment) (3R.), 620.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>RALL, Mr. J. W. (Bethal-Middelburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment) (2R.), 366.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 803; (3R.), 887.</li>

<li>Railway Construction (2R.), 412.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>RAW, Mr. W. V. (Durban-Point)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 710.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1139.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 294.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SADIE, Mr. N. C. van R. (Winburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 207.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHLEBUSCH, Mr. A. L. (Kroonstad)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 683.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHLEBUSCH, Mr. J. A. (Bloemfontein-District)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 769.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1152.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHOEMAN, the Hon. B. J. (Maraisburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Transport.]</i></li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Advertising on roads and ribbon development (amendment) (2R.), 486.</li>

<li>Motor Carrier Transportation (amendment) (2R.), 489, 493; (Committee), 549.</li>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment) (2R.), 331, 392; (Committee), 532, 539, 542; (3R.). 613.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 517, 831; (3R.), 895.</li>

<li>Railway Construction (2R.), 403, 414.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Acts (amendment) (2R.), 487; (Committee), 547; (3R.). 622.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Business of the House&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Sitting hours (motion), 16.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 120.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours:

<ul>

<li>Additional (motion), 416, 424; (Committee), 434, 484.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHOEMAN, Mr. J. C. B. (North West Rand)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 778.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I21" refersTo="page_0666"/><b>SERFONTEIN, the Hon. J. J. (Fauresmith-Boshof)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Social Welfare and Pensions.]</i></li>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1126, 1152; (Committee), 1233, 1235, 1237; (3R.), 1239.</li>

</ul>

</li></ul>

<p><b>SOCIAL WELFARE AND PENSIONS, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Serfontein, the Hon. J. J.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SOUTH WEST AFRICA AFFAIRS, DEPUTY MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Van der Wath, the Hon. J. G. H.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SPEAKER AND DEPUTY-SPEAKER,</b> <i>see</i> p. 24.</p>

<p><b>STEENKAMP, Dr. L. S. (Hillbrow)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>University of Stellenbosch (amendment) (2R.), 501.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>STEYN, Mr. S. J. M. (Yeoville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Motor Carrier Transportation (amendment) (2R.), 491.</li>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment) (2R.), 336; (Committee), 483, 528, 533, 540, 545; (3R), 602.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1200.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 524, 636.</li>

<li>Railway Construction (2R.), 408.</li>

<li>Railwavs and Harbours Acts (amendment) (2R.). 489.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 78.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours:</li>

<li>Additional (Committee), 483, 485.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>STREICHER, Mr. D. M. (Port Elizabeth-West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1162.</li>

<li>Water (amendment) (3R.), 625.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 280.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SUZMAN, Mrs. H. (Houghton)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Matrimonial Affairs (amendment) (2R.), 585.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 965; (3R.), 119L</li>

<li>Suppression of Communism (amendment) (2R.), 570.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 172.</li>

<li>Mr. Speaker: Motion of Appreciation, 1251.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>SWIEGERS, Mr. J. G. (Uitenhage)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 961.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>TAUROG, Mr. L. B. (Springs)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Base Minerals (amendment) (2R.), 1242.</li>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment) (2R.), 349; (Committee), 529.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1042.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>TAYLOR, Mrs. C. D. (Wynberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Matrimonial Affairs (amendment) (2R.), 578.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>THOMPSON, Mr. J. O. N. (Pinelands)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Matrimonial Affairs (amendment) (2R.), 586.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.). 685.</li>

<li>Reciprocal enforcement of Civil Judgments (Committee), 631.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>TIMONEY, Mr. H. M. (Salt River)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Motor rVehicle Insurance (amendment) (2R.), 372.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 773.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I22" refersTo="page_0667"/><b>TOURISM, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Waring, the Hon. F. W.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>TRANSPORT, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Schoeman, the Hon. B. J.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>TROLLIP, the Hon. Senator A. E.&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Labour and of Immigration.]</i></li>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Factories Machinery and Building Work (amendment) (2R.), 497; 500; (Committee), 551; (3R.), 624.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 1229.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>TUCKER, Mr. H. (Germiston District)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Judges&#x2019; Remuneration and Pensions (amendment) (2R.),. 495.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>UYS, the Hon. D. C. H. (False Bay)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Agricultural Economics and Marketing and of Agricultural Credit and Land Tenure.]</i></li>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Kimberley Leasehold Conversion to Freehold (amendment) (2R.), 592.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 288.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DEN HEEVER, Mr. D. J. G. (Pretoria-Central)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 914.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER BYL, the Hon. P., M.C. (Green Point)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Mr. Speaker: Motion of Appreciation. 1251.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER WALT, Mr. B. J. (Pretoria-West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Factories, Machinery and Building Work (amendment) (2R.), 500.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER WATH, the Hon. J. G. H. (Windhoek)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Deputy Minister of South West Africa Affairs.]</i></li>

<li>South-West Africa Constitution (2R.), 481.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN NIEKERK, Mr. M. C. (Lichtenburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 815.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN NIEKERK, Mrs. S. M. (Drakensberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 654; (3R.), 851.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence. 221.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN RENSBURG, Mr. M. C. G. J. (Bloemfontein-East)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 646; (3R.). 857.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours:</li>

<li>Additional (Committee), 430.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN WYK, Mr. H. J. (Welkom)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 217.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN ZYL, Mr. J. J. B. (Pretoria-Sunnyside)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Motor Vehicle Insurance (amendment) (2R.), 345; (Committee), 534, 536.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VENTER, Mr. M. J. de la R. (De Aar-Coles-berg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 688; (3R.), 878.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VENTER, Dr. W. L. D. M. (Kimberley-South)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Pension Laws (amendment) (2R.), 1133.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I23" refersTo="page_0668"/><b>VERWOERD, the Hon. Dr. H. F. (Heidelberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Prime Minister.]</i></li>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1073.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Condolences&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Badenhorst, Late Mr. F. H. (motion), 12.</li>

<li>Jonker. Late Dr. A. H. (motion), 13.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 44.</li>

<li>Mr. Speaker: Motion of appreciation, 1250.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 1215.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VILJOEN, the Hon. M. (Alberton)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Deputy Minister of Labour, of Immigration, of the Interior and of Education, Arts and Science.]</i></li>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>University of Stellenbosch (amendment) (2R.), 501.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 192.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VISSE, Mr. J. H. (Prinshof)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Judges&#x2019; Remuneration and Pensions (amendment) (2R.), 496.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>VON MOLTKE, Mr. J. von S. (Karas)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>South-West Africa Constitution (2R.), 481.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VORSTER, the Hon. B. J. (Nigel)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[Minister of Justice.]</i></li>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Judges&#x2019; Remuneration and Pensions (amendment) (2R.), 493; (Committee), 496.</li>

<li>Matrimonial Affairs (amendment) (2R.), 577, 586.</li>

<li>Reciprocal Enforcement of Civil Judgments (2R.), 588; (Committee), 633, 634, 635.</li>

<li>State Attorney (amendment) (2R.), 564.</li>

<li>Suppression of Communism (amendment) (2R.), 565, 574; (Committee), 628, 630; (3R.). 756.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 1230.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>WATER AFFAIRS, MINISTER OF&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li><i>[See</i> Le Roux, the Hon. P. M. K.]</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WATERSON, the Hon. S. F. (Constantia)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 602, 903.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Supply&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Central Government:

<ul>

<li>Additional (Committee), 1214.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>WENTZEL, Mr. J. J. (Christiana)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1193.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p><b>WOOD, Mr. L. F. (Durban-Berea)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bill&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (Railways and Harbours) (2R.), 725.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#rulings_and_observations_by_presiding_officers">

<heading><span class="col_I24" refersTo="page_0669"/>RULINGS AND OBSERVATIONS BY PRESIDING OFFICERS</heading>

<p>Additional Estimates, Committee on, discussion confined to details of votes or reasons for increases, 485, 1218, 1219.</p>

<p>Amendments&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li><i>See under</i> &#x201C;Bills&#x201D;.</li>

<li>Timeous notice, specially of involved amendments, should be given whenever possible, 554.</li>

</ul>

<p>Appreciation, motion of (Speaker), 1252.</p>

<p>Bills&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Amending, member may not attack principle of principal Act, while debating, 492.</li>

<li>Committee of the Whole House:

<ul>

<li>Amendments out of order:

<ul>

<li><i>See</i> &#x201C;Amendments&#x201D;.</li>

<li>Destructive of principle of Bill as read a Second Time, 525, 526.</li>

<li>Extending scope of Bill, 525.</li>

<li>Involving expenditure, 551, 1235.</li>

<li>Member may not speak to, 551.</li>

</ul></li>

<li>Clauses:

<ul>

<li>Member may not attack principle of, 525, 527, 530, etc.</li>

<li>Member must confine himself to particulars of, 527, 529, 530, etc.</li>

<li>Member may not speak more than three times on, 541.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

<p>Chair&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Member must abide by rulings of. 527, 530.</li>

<li>Member must not argue with, 608, 626.</li>

<li>Member must address. 1148.</li>

</ul>

<p>Members&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Must not converse aloud, 1112.</li>

</ul>

<p>Relevancy, 349, 543, 700, etc.</p>

<p>Repetition, 365-6, 540, 607, etc.</p>

<p>Unparliamentary language&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Expressions ruled out of order:

<ul>

<li>(deliberate) lie, 114, 158, 326.</li>

<li>the Minister would know that it is not true, 613.</li>

<li>He will tell stories which are untrue, even though he may not say so now, 959.</li>

<li>the State &#x2026; is robbing the public and giving to the Government&#x2019;s friends a present of R4,000,000, 391.</li>

<li>the Government is robbing the motorists to pay some companies, which must be the Government&#x2019;s friends, a guaranteed R4,000,000 per annum. 391.</li>

<li>the arguments raised by the Minister yesterday were some of the dirtiest arguments too, 626.</li>

<li>But even he has changed from the time when he used to say &#x201C;Heil Hitler&#x201D;, 1063.</li>

<li>At that time he wore a badge similar to those they wore in Germany, 1063.</li>

<li>he would instruct the canvassers not to tell pensioners that if they do not vote Nat they would lose their pensions, 1140.</li>

</ul></li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

</debateBody>

</debate>

</akomaNtoso>
