---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol16 - MONDAY 24 JANUARY 1966'
layout: debate
year: 1966
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>MONDAY, 24 JANUARY 1966</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Prayers&#x2014;<recordedTime time="1966-01-24T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#first_reading_of_bills">

<heading>FIRST READING OF BILLS</heading>

<p>The following Bills were read a first time:</p>

<p>Motor Vehicle Insurance Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Advertising on Roads and Ribbon Development Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Motor Carrier Transportation Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Railways and Harbours Acts Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Railway Construction Bill.</p>

<p>South West Africa Constitution Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>University of Stellenbosch Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Roodepoort and Weltevreden Agricultural Settlements Adjustment Bill.</p>

<p>Water Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Factories, Machinery and Building Work Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>State Attorney Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Suppression of Communism Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Matrimonial Affairs Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Reservation of Separate Amenities Amendment Bill.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#audit_of_republic_festival_committee_accounts">

<heading>AUDIT OF REPUBLIC FESTIVAL COMMITTEE ACCOUNTS</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<p>That, as it is in the public interest that the accounts of the Committee appointed to organize the Republic Festival, 1966, in Pretoria, a body which is not a statutory body, should be audited by the Controller and Auditor-General, this House in terms of Section 58 (2) of the Exchequer and Audit Act. 1956, hereby requires the Controller and Auditor-General to undertake the audit of such accounts.</p>

<p>This is merely the customary motion which is introduced in circumstances such as these, as was done in 1959 in connection with the Union Festival, and also in 1957 in connection with the Hungarian Refugees&#x2019; Fund. The fund in question here is not a Government one, but it does receive a contribution from the State. This motion is being introduced at the desire and request of the Republic Festival Committee.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_of_the_house">

<heading>BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_transport">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF TRANSPORT</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(a)That notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order No. 22 the hours of sitting of the House on and after Monday, 31 January, for the remainder of the Session shall be&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(i) Mondays to Thursdays: <br/>10 a.m. to 12.45 p.m.,<br/>2.15 p.m. to 6.30 p.m.,<br/>and 8 p.m. to 10.30 p.m.;</li>

<li>(ii) Fridays:<br/>10 am. to 12.45 p.m., and<br/>2.15 p.m. to 6.30 p.m.;</li>

</ol></li>

<li>(b)that notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order No. 30 (2) Government business shall have precedence for the remainder of the Session after notices of questions have been disposed of on Tuesdays, after Tuesday, 25 January, and on Fridays; and</li>

<li>(c)that notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order No. 187 leave be granted to Select Committees to sit during the sittings of the House.</li>

</ol>

<p>This is the customary pre-election motion. It has been agreed to by both sides of the House. I am sure hon. members are very anxious to get back to their constituencies&#x2014;some more so than others!</p>

<p>The time-table looks formidable, but I assure hon. members I will give them an occasional evening off.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mitchell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. E. MITCHELL</person>:</from>

<p>It is very kind of you.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_transport">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF TRANSPORT</person>:</from>

<p>The purpose of that is to allow hon. members to prepare themselves for the work of the House. If they are kept here from 10 in the morning until 10.30 at night, T do not think there will be much substance in the debates that will follow! We want at least an Opposition that are worthwhile listening to when they do take part in a debate.</p>

<p>It is the intention to adjourn the House not later than 18 February. Quite possibly we may <span class="col_17-18" refersTo="page_0019"/>even adjourn a day or two earlier. A number of Bills will be introduced and have been introduced, and I will now give hon. members a list of Bills which the Government feels must be passed this Session: the Part Appropriation Bill, the Additional Appropriation Bill, Railways and Harbours Part Appropriation Bill, Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation Bill. Unauthorized Expenditure Bills will probably have to stand over, because the Auditor-General&#x2019;s reports will not be available in time. Then there is the usual Finance Bill, the Railways and Harbours Acts Amendment Bill, the Railway Construction Bill, Suppression of Communism Amendment Bill, Judges&#x2019; Salaries and Pensions Amendment Bill, Factories, Machinery and Building Amendment Bill, Pension Laws Amendment Bill, Motor Vehicle Insurance Amendment Bill, Base Minerals Amendment Bill, and the South West Africa Constitution Amendment Bill. These Bills must go through before the House adjourns.</p>

<p>We will, of course, introduce, and the House probably will deal with, other Bills too. But the Session will not be prolonged because the Government is not very anxious to get other Bills, apart from these I have mentioned, through the House before 18 February.</p>

<p>On Monday next week we will start off with the Motor Vehicle Insurance Bill. After that the Railway Bills will follow. On Thursday my colleague the Minister of Finance will deliver his speech on the Part Appropriation Bill, but the debate will be adjourned until Monday, 7 February. That will be the work for next week. I am sure, Sir, that we will have the usual cooperation that we have always enjoyed in the past. As I say, if possible we will adjourn the House even before 18 February.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#higgerty">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HIGGERTY</person>:</from>

<p>May I ask the hon. the Minister: When the list of legislation which he has just given us is finished, am I correct in assuming that we will not deal with any other legislation?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_transport">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF TRANSPORT</person>:</from>

<p>We will deal with other legislation in between. As the hon. member knows, there are always gaps between one stage of a Bill and another. If there is time between the stages of a Bill, or before the bringing on of another Bill, then we will deal with other Bills. But we will adjourn as soon as the Bills of which I have given a list have been completed.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1966-01-24T14:32:00">2.32 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

