---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol16 - FRIDAY 21 JANUARY 1966'
layout: debate
year: 1966
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 21 JANUARY 1966</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Pursuant to Proclamation No. 142 of the State President, dated 18 June 1965, summoning Parliament to meet on this day for the dispatch of business, members met in the Assembly Chamber of the House of Assembly, Parliament Houses, Cape Town, at 11.30 a.m.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacancies">

<heading>VACANCIES</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that during the recess vacancies had occurred in the representation in this House of the following electoral divisions:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Uitenhage, owing to the death of Mr. F.H. Badenhorst on 22 July 1965;</li>

<li>(2) Kempton Park, owing to the resignation of Mr. F. S. Steyn on 30 August 1965;</li>

<li>(3) Boksburg, owing to the election of Mr. G.L. H. van Niekerk as a member of the Senate on 26 November 1965;</li>

<li>(4) Humansdorp, owing to the election of the Hon. P. O. Sauer as a member of the Senate on 26 November 1965;</li>

<li>(5) Nelspruit, owing to the election of Mr. W. H. Faurie as a member of the Senate on 26 November 1965; and</li>

<li>(6) Fort Beaufort, owing to the death of Dr. A. H. Jonker on 10 January 1966.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_members">

<heading>NEW MEMBERS</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced further that the following vacancies had been filled during the recess:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Kempton Park, on 28 September 1965, by the election of Dr. Jan Albert Coetzee; and</li>

<li>(2) Uitenhage, on 27 October 1965, by the election of Mr. Jan Gideon Swiegers.</li>

</ol>

<p>Dr. J. A. Coetzee, introduced by Mr. J. E. Potgieter and Mr. Van der Merwe, made and subscribed to the oath and took his seat.</p>

<p>Mr. J. G. Swiegers, introduced by Mr. M. J. de la R. Venter and Mr. Swanepoel, made and subscribed to the oath and took his seat.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING</heading>

<p>Mr. Speaker and members proceeded to the Senate House to attend the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and on their return,</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair and read prayers.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening_speech">

<heading>OPENING SPEECH</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that at the opening ceremony he had received a copy of the State President&#x2019;s Address to members of the Senate and of the House of Assembly, which was in the following terms:</p>

<p><span class="col_03-04" refersTo="page_0012"/>Mr. President and Members of the Senate:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<p>I am glad to welcome you to this the Fifth Session of the Second Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</p>

<p>The international scene continues to give cause for major concern. Many parts of the world are in turmoil; in Asia, the struggle in Vietnam, the Kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan, the near civil war in Indonesia and the foundering of the Federation of Malaysia. Unrest continues in Cuba and in the Dominican Republic. The problem of Cyprus remains unsolved and the situation in the Middle East is as unpredictable and uncertain as ever.</p>

<p>Africa is no less unsettled. Civil strife continues in the Southern Sudan. The rebellion in the Congo has not been brought completely under control. There has been a growing tendency towards the institution of military dictatorships as exemplified in the <i>coups d&#x2019;état</i> in Algeria, the Congo, Dahomey, Upper Volta, the Central African Republic and now also Nigeria.</p>

<p>The communists, both Russian and Chinese, have continued to probe potential chinks in the Western armour. At the same time their own ideological divisions have become manifest. Both Russia and China are still wooing the African Nations, and despite some recent setbacks, the communist threat to the African continent remains a very real one.</p>

<p>It is in the light of all this that Parliament and the people of South Africa do appreciate the peace and order brought to the Republic by stable government.</p>

<p>The Republic cannot, however, wholly escape the effects of what happens elsewhere and its foreign policy must safeguard South Africa&#x2019;s interests. This is not always easy as the situation created by the declaration of independence in Rhodesia exemplifies. South Africa maintains the attitude of non-intervention in the affairs of other states and of non-participation in any form of boycott or sanctions in accordance with its firm stand thoughout the years on matters affecting itself. It also seeks to maintain the traditional friendly ties with both Rhodesia and the United Kingdom. This too is in accordance with its fundamental policy of seeking and offering friendly co-operation to all nations. Efforts are continuing, <i>inter alia,</i> by certain African States, to involve the Republic in conflict at the United Nations and elsewhere, but this does not diminish the determination of the South African Government to adhere to these basic principles of its foreign policy while preserving the dignity and integrity of the State.</p>

<p>South Africa may therefore in 1966 even more than in 1965 be the target of political and economic attempts to undermine its stability and prosperity in the interests not of justice but of those who would directly profit from disorder and unrest. The Government of the Republic has nevertheless every confidence in South Africa&#x2019;s ability effectively to contain attempts at international coercion, and the Government will also maintain its basic policy of non-intervention in the internal affairs of other countries, at the same time extending the hand of friendship and co-operation to all African and other states willing to respect this fundamental principle of international conduct in their external relations.</p>

<p>In the face of continued outside threats against the peace and security of the country, its Defence Force is required to meet two main tasks:</p>

<block name="quote">to defend the Republic, if ever called upon, against external aggresion by either conventional or unconventional forces; and to maintain internal security against guerilla-type operations should these eventuate.</block>

<p>The task of equipping, organizing and training the Republic&#x2019;s Armed Forces to meet these requirements has been pursued with vigour and with an encouraging measure of success. Further aims envisaged for the future are the achievement of greater mobility for the army and the gradual replacement of obsolete or obsolescent equipment. With judicious planning it should now be possible to phase in new projects with existing commitments in such a manner that defence expenditure should not rise appreciably beyond its present level.</p>

<p>It is the intention to aim at greater efficiency of, and economy in, manpower by a review of staff structures, as well as at greater rationalization of functions.</p>

<p>Defence research and development and the expansion of the South African munitions industry have assumed important proportions resulting in an ever-increasing measure of self-sufficiency. Taken as a whole, the Defence Force has developed to such an extent that the country can face the future with greater confidence.</p>

<p>The Republic does not, however, only rely on its strength to resist aggression to achieve a peaceful future. It attempts to put its case to all who are prepared to judge fairly and without prejudice. Unremitting efforts are continually being made in many countries in providing objective and positive information about South Africa. In the current cold war against this country, patriotic individuals and well-disposed organizations also constantly offer their services to augment and reinforce the efforts of the official information service.</p>

<p>It is proper to pay tribute here to the growing number of citizens who are voluntarily making their contribution, both within and beyond South Africa&#x2019;s borders, towards the projection of a constructive and true image of the Republic, its people and its policies.</p>

<p><span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0013"/>Perhaps one of the best means of creating goodwill is through first-hand knowledge of conditions in South Africa. The Government therefore sets great store by the promotion of tourism and all that encourage? its growth.</p>

<p>Friendship through knowledge and understanding must ultimately also reach out to those who guide the destinies of the world.</p>

<p>In this connection the influence of the more permanent arrival, the immigrant, should not be underestimated. Apart from their economic value to the country, the contact of the new South Africans with relatives and friends in many countries, also helps to paint the true picture of South Africa abroad.</p>

<p>During the past year the number of White immigrants from African States decreased. Due to the continuing need for trained and skilled workers, intensified publicity and recruiting efforts have been and are still being made to increase the flow of immigrants from other countries. Success is being achieved with these efforts.</p>

<p>As a result of the acute shortage of suitable hotel accommodation in the Republic, especially in so far as the needs and requirements of visitors from beyond its borders are concerned, it was decided to appoint a Commission of Inquiry into the Hotel Industry during 1963. This Commission was charged with the task of, amongst others, establishing to what extent the hotel industry was serving its purpose, what factors were impeding the healthy development of the industry and what measures were necessary to overcome existing problems.</p>

<p>In the report of this Commission of Inquiry which was submitted during 1964, it was recommended, <i>inter alia,</i> that a statutory body be established and that this body regiser hotels, grade them and foster the development of the industry generally.</p>

<p>Acting on this recommendation, legislation was passed during the 1965 session of Parliament to provide for the establishment of a statutory body known as the Hotel Board. This Board has been established with effect from 1 September 1965, and very good progress has been made with its preliminary work. It is sincerely trusted that the establishment of this Board will contribute a great deal to the development of a sound and effective hotel industry which will add to the attractions for visitors from elsewhere.</p>

<p>Many of the attacks aimed at the Republic seek to undermine the high reputation of South Africa&#x2019;s administration of justice. Its courts are above reproach. New attempts are being made to denigrate South Africa by misrepresenting legislation to aid it in combating subversion and treason and in preserving peace and order in these troublous times of unscrupulous ideologies and, more recently, in spreading untruths about the Prison system which is second to none in the world in its introduction of reform, rehabilitation and humane measures. The Government will, however, by legislative means and strict administration, continue to serve the country and all its law-abiding inhabitants by combating the forces of disorder with all possible means. It will also continue to follow the high ideals it has set itself for the proper care of those who have fallen foul of the law. Bills to be introduced include a Suppression of Communism Amendment Bill and an Emergency Planning Bill.</p>

<p>Policies affecting the non-White groups continue to attract interference from outside. The experience of Coloureds, Indians and Bantu of the advantages they gain from the new opportunities for development and self-government, and the high level they attain in economic, educational and other spheres of life in South Africa when compared with their counterparts in any other State of Africa, are ignored or belittled.</p>

<p>The past year was, however, characterized by a spirit of confidence, co-operation and self-activity amongst each of these groups. Apart from a developing sense of responsibility coupled with a growing spirit of enterprise, encouraging progress was made with the development of the Bantu in general and of the Bantu Homelands in particular.</p>

<p>Where the emphasis in the past had of necessity to fall on the readjustment of conditions and the allaying of suspicion and prejudice, the accent can now be centred on the full-fledged spiritual, community and material development of the Bantu and other non-White peoples.</p>

<p>The serious drought conditions in the Bantu Areas have been countered by measures to relieve distress, undertaken by the Bantu for the Bantu. Nowhere has this been neglected, despite propaganda to imply the contrary.</p>

<p>The Transkeian constitution is working well and much can be expected of the Coloured and Indian Council systems as they become fully developed.</p>

<p>Those who feel themselves called upon to criticize could well learn from the success of South Africa in achieving harmony between races&#x2014;in a land of many races&#x2014;through the mutual recognition and appreciation of each other&#x2019;s national characteristics, culture and qualities.</p>

<p>Dit is dan een groep van die openbare sake waarmee die Parlement te doen sal kry, naamlik alles wat buitelandse betrekkinge raak, hoe huishoudelik van aard sommige van die aangeleenthede ook mag wees.</p>

<p>Die ander groep vraagstukke hang almal saam met die bevordering van landsvoorspoed.</p>

<p>Gedurende die eerste helfte van 1965 het die inflasion&#x00EA;re druk, wat in 1964&#x2019;n aanvang geneem het, sterker geword, met die gevolg dat invoere vinnig gestyg het terwyl uitvoere <span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0014"/>om verskeie redes slegs &#x2019;n geringe toename getoon het. Die gevolg was dat Suid-Afrika se reserwes aan buitelandse betaalmiddele taamlik vinnig afgeneem het.</p>

<p>Die Regering het gevoel dat dit nodig was om die basiese oorsake van die onewewigtigheid in die betalingsbalans, naamlik die oor-besteding in die ekonomie, reg te stel eerder as om net die simptome te behandel. Aan die kant van die owerhede is besluit om staatsbesteding, veral op minder dringende kapitaalwerke, waar moontlik te besnoei of uit te stel. Die Provinsiale Administrasies en die plaaslike owerhede is versoek om soort-gelyke stappe te doen. Terselfdertyd is &#x2019;n beroep op finansiele instellings gedoen om uitgifte van Staatseffekte te steun ten einde die Regering in Staat te stel om sy uitgawe op noodsaaklike kapitaalwerke op &#x2019;n nie-inflasionere wyse te finansier.</p>

<p>Wat private besteding betref, het die Reserwebank in oorleg met die Tesourie die verhouding van likwiede bates wat handelsbanke teenoor hui verpligtings moet hou tot die maksimum verhoog, en het hy alle monet&#x00EA;re bankinstellings versoek om toe te sien dat hulle lenings aan die private Sektor op 31 Maart 1966 nie die ooreenstemmende syfer vir 31 Maart 1965 oorskry nie.</p>

<p>Hierdie en ander maatreels, wat onvermydelik geneem moes word, het reeds &#x2019;n heilsame uitwerking op die ekonomie gehad.</p>

<p>Dit is die Regering se hoop dat hulle binne &#x2019;n redelike tydperk verslap sal kan word.</p>

<p>Die sleutel tot die herstel van ewewig in die betalingsbalans en in die ekonomie as geheel le in &#x2019;n matiger tempo van besteding en &#x2019;n hoer peil van besparing.</p>

<p>Die grootste enkele nadelige faktor in die Suid-Afrikaanse ekonomie is die emstige droogtetoestande wat in wydverspreide gebiede van die Republiek reeds &#x2019;n paar jaar lank heers, en die uitwerking daarvan, eers op die landbou, en dan op ander sektore. Hoewel droogtes &#x2019;n normale verskynsel in Suid-Afrika is, is die omvang en intensiteit wat di van die afgelope paar seisoene, volgens Suid-Afrikaanse standaarde, van buitengewone aard.</p>

<p>Die Staat het voortgegaan met grootskaalse hulp aan saai- en veeboere ten einde hulle in Staat te stel om veestapels te behou of weer oeste te verbou. As gevolg van die droogtes het die finansiele posisie van baie boere egter geweldig verswak. Dit het ook meegebring dat leemtes in die boerderystruktuur duideliker uitgewys is.</p>

<p>Die uitwerking van die droogtes sal nog lank in die landbou gevoel word. Die Regering besef wel deeglik dat sy taak nie met die bestaande noodhulp afgehandel is nie. Opbouende hulp sal verleen moet word om boere en boerdery in die geteisterde streke weer op die been te bring. Besondere aan-dag sal gegee word aan maatre&#x00EB;ls om boerderyeenhede op &#x2019;n ekonomiese grondslag te plaas. In hierdie verband kan verwys word na &#x2019;n wetsontwerp wat ingedien sal word waardeur sekere funksies verleen sal word aan die Departement van Landboukrediet en Grondbesit wat intussen in die lewe geroep sal word om die funksies van die Departement van Lande, die Kantoor tot In vordering van Staatsvoorskotte en die Boerebystandsraad oor te neem en wat hoofsaak lik as doel sal h&#x00EA; om geko&#x00F6;rdineerde kre dietverlening&#x2014;ook in normale tye&#x2014;aan verdienstelike boere wat nie deur ander kanale gehelp kan word nie, te verskaf.</p>

<p>Die uitbreek van bek-en-klouseer in Swaziland aan die begin van 1965 het groot besorgdheid in die Republiek veroorsaak. Strenge beperkinge en beheer op die beweging van vee moes in die aangrensende distrikte ingestel word. Dit het heelwat ongerief vir die betrokke boere meegebring. Deur die hulp wat die Regering aan die Swazilandse Owerheid verleen het en deur die goeie samewerking van die veeartsenykundige dienste van die twee lande, kon die verspreiding van die siekte egter binne &#x2019;n betreklike kort periode aan bande gel&#x00EA; word en is die bedreiging wat dit vir die Republiek ingehou het, afgeweer.</p>

<p>Met die medewerking van die betrokke Departement en die veeteeltbedryf word &#x2019;n omvattende en &#x2019;n gekpo&#x00F6;rdineerde vleisproduksieplan opgestel. &#x2019;n Landswye veldtog sal in die verband geloods word ten einde vleis- en suiwelproduksie doeltreffend te verhoog.</p>

<p>Wysigingswetsontwerpe sal ingedien word ten opsigte van die Wet op Wyn, Spiritualie&#x00EB; en Asyn, die Grondbewaringswet, die Wet op Landbouplae, die Bemarkingswet, die Wet op die Verkoping van Lewende Hawe en Produkte, en van die Wet op die Verkoop van Bederfbare Landbouprodukte.</p>

<p>Die Regering skenk spesiale aandag aan die beplanning en beskerming van die opvanggebiede van die Oranjerivier ten einde die ontwikkeling van hierdie gebiede op be-stendige voet te plaas en om die toeslikking van die beplande damme in die Oranjerivierprojek te voorkom. Voortgesette spesiale aandag word geskenk aan die doelmatige bewaring, benutting, heraanwending en voorsiening van water.</p>

<p>&#x2019;n Waterwysigingswetsontwerp en &#x2019;n reelingswetsontwerp ten opsigte van verskeie besproeiingsnedersettings is gereed vir u aandag.</p>

<p>Op die terreine van mynbou en van handel en nywerheid kan stewige groei gekonstateer word. Dit het die bestryding van die gevolge van die droogte, asook behoorlike landsbeveiliging, moontlik gemaak en tegelykertyd gesorg vir &#x2019;n algemene hoë peil van landsvoorspoed. Daardeur het dit ook moontlik geword om, nieteenstaande die terugslag in die landboubedryf, en nieteenstaande die inflasiegevare, aansienlike verbeterings in die salarisstrukture van Staatsamptenare, Spoorwegamptenare, lede van <span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0015"/>die verskillende Dienste, en andere te weeg te bring.</p>

<p>Die mineraalbedryf bly veerkragtig. Daar is nog steeds &#x2019;n styging in goudproduksie, en die gesamentlike opbrengs van ander minerale en edelgesteentes het gedurende die afgelope jaar weer eens toegeneem.</p>

<p>In toenemende mate word gekonsentreer op wetenskaplike navorsing op gebiede soos uraanveredeling en die plaaslike verwerking van ertse ten einde die voordeligste benutting van die Republiek se mineraalpotensiaal te verseker.</p>

<p>Na jare van beplanning en ander voorbereidingswerk het die Republiek die afgelope jaar, met die ingebruikneming van sy eerste navorsingsreaktor, tot volskaalse kernenergienavorsing toegetree. Besondere aandag word gegee aan die ekonomiese uitvoerbaarheid van die gebruik van kernkrag vir vreedsame doeleindes in Suid-Afrika, met spesiale nadruk op die moontlike daarstelling van kernkragsentrales in gebiede wat ver van konvensionele kragbronne gelee is.</p>

<p>Goeie vordering word gemaak met die oliesoektog in die Republiek. Verskeie boor-programme is alreeds van stapel gestuur.</p>

<p>Die nuwe Wet op Edelgesteentes is in die afgelope jaar van toepassing gemaak en funksioneer goed. &#x2019;n Gekonsolideerde en moderne Wetsontwerp op Mynregte word deur &#x2019;n Kommissie ondersoek en sal hopelik vanjaar ingedien word. Die Republiek sal dan oor die modernste mineraalwetgewing ter wereld beskik.</p>

<p>Die binnelandse handelsektor het vryelik in die voordele van die ekonomiese oplewing in die afgelope vier jaar gedeel hoewel daar, vanwee die beperkende owerheidsmaatr&#x00EB;ls wat getref is, sedert die tweede helfte van 1965 &#x2019;n merkbare verlangsaming in die tempo van toename in handelsomsette, veral ten opsigte van duursame verbruiksgoedere, voorgekom het.</p>

<p>Hierdie buitengewone hoe tempo van ontwikkeling, gepaard met die nadelige uitwerking wat ongunstige klimaatstoestande gedurende die afgelope twee seisoene op die landbou gehad het, was hoofsaaklik daar-voor verantwoordelik dat Suid-Afrika se invoere gedurende 1964 en die eerste nege maande van 1965 so skerp gestyg het dat daar &#x2019;n aansienlike afname in die land se goud- en buitelandse valutareserwes ingetree het. &#x2019;n Verdere bydraende faktor tot hierdie daling in die land se buitelandse valutareserwes was die feit dat die binnelandse vraag na goedere wat normaalweg vir uitvoer bestem is &#x2019;n skerp styging getoon het.</p>

<p>Ter onderskraging van die monet&#x00EB;re maatre&#x00EB;ls wat die Regering reeds vroe&#x00EB;r in 1965 ingestel het ten einde hierdie toestand die hoof te bied, is verskerpte invoerbeheer gedurende die tweede helfte van die jaar ingestel met die vooropgesette doel om te poog om Valuta te bespaar ten opsigte van die kommoditeite waarvan daar groot voorrade in die land is. Invoerbeheermaatre&#x00EB;ls word egter in die lig van veranderende omstandighede deurlopend in o&#x00EB;nskou geneem ten einde nadelige invloede op die landsekonomie te vermy. Gepaard hiermee word daadwerklike pogings aangewend om die uitvoer van fabrieksgoedere te bevorder deur bestaande markte uit te brei en nuwes te vind.</p>

<p>Ook op die gebied van grensnywerheidsontwikkeling was die jaar 1965 bekroon met &#x2019;n aansienlike mate van sukses. Die konsentrasietendens by nywerheidsont-wikkeling, veral in Suid-Transvaal, neem egter nog steeds toe. Terwyl die Regering volgehoue prioriteit verleen aan die ontwikkeling van Grensgebiede, met die oog op voldoende werkgeleentheid vir die Bantoe naby hui tuislande, is &#x2019;n aanvang reeds gemaak om die betrokke aansporingsmaatre&#x00EB;ls uit te brei na ander uitgesoekte streke in die land, naamlik waar aansienlike arbeid-surplusse onder ander rasse as die Bantoe bestaan.</p>

<p>Dit is die voorneme om die Wet op Fabrieke, Masjinerie en Bouwerk gedurende hierdie sessie te wysig ten einde te bepaal dat Republiekdag hierdie jaar en elke vyf jaar daarna as &#x2019;n bykomstige betaalde openbare vakansiedag ingevolge die Wet nagekom moet word.</p>

<p>Al die ontwikkelinge vereis egter diepgaande beplanning en koördinasie.</p>

<p>Die ekonomiese ontwikkelingsprogram begin &#x2019;n besondere piek inneem om nywerheidsuitbreiding te stimuleer.</p>

<p>Die aanbevelings van die Wetenskaplike Adviesraad in verband met &#x2019;n raamwerk vir die reorganisasie van wetenskaplike werk, onderrig en navorsing word bestudeer. Vroeg in hierdie jaar sal ook begin word met &#x2019;n opname van die navorsingsprogramme van alle instansies in die land.</p>

<p>Op die terrein van fisiese beplanning is &#x2019;n Hulpbronne- en Beplanningsadviesraad ingestel, en &#x2019;n voorstel sal ingedien word om die Wet op die Ontwikkeling van Natuurlike Hulpbronne, 1947, in sy geheel te vervang deur &#x2019;n nuwe wet.</p>

<p>Voorstelle sal ook gedoen word om die Wet op Aanwysing van Aparte Geriewe te wysig.</p>

<p>Die Regering bou parallel met die algemene ekonomiese ontwikkelinge, steeds doelbewus en stelselmatig aan &#x2019;n welsynsbeleid wat tred hou met die behoeftes van jonk en oud.</p>

<p>Gedurende die afgelope jaar is goeie vordering gemaak met agterbuurtopruiming en die behoorlike behuising, vestiging en ontwikkeling van gemeenskappe. Blanke behuising veral vereis teenswoordig besondere aandag. Dit bring groot uitgawes mee. Die snelle invloei van immigrante stel ook volgehoue hoe eise om in die daarmee gepaard gaande behuisingsaanvraag te voorsien.</p>

<p><span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0016"/>Naas die maatre&#x00EB;ls waarna reeds verwys is, is konsepwetgewing voorberei ten opsigte van motorvoertuigassuransie, en om die Motortransportwet en die Wet op Adverteer Langs en die Toebou van Paaie te wysig. &#x2019;n Spoorwegaanlegwetsontwerp en &#x2019;n Wysigingswetsontwerp op Spoorwegen Hawewette sal ingedien word. Wetsontwerpe sal voorgele word om te handel met staatson-dersteunde inrigtings, met monumente, oorlogsgrafte, gevorderde tegniese opleiding, en huweliksaangeleenthede. Verdere wetsontwerpe wat onder meer u aandag sal moet geniet is die Wetsontwerpe op die Beskerming van Voordraers van Letterkundige en Kunswerke, op Modelle, op Standaarde, op Beheer oor Straling, en op die Pensioenwet.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">Additional estimates of expenditure for the current financial year will be laid before you, and a Part Appropriation Bill for the provision of the necessary funds in anticipation of the passing of the main Appropriation Bill for the ensuing financial year will be introduced.</block>

<p>Mr. President and Members of the Senate:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.</block>

<block name="quote">I now declare this the Fifth Session of the Second Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#committee_on_standing_rules_and_orders">

<heading>COMMITTEE ON STANDING RULES AND ORDERS</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER appointed the following members to constitute with Mr. Speaker the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders: The Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Transport, the Minister of Social Welfare and Pensions, the Minister of Agricultural Technical Services, Sir De Villiers Graaff, Dr. A. I. Malan, Mr. J. E. Potgieter, Mr. Higgerty, Mr. Waterson, Mr. D. E. Mitchell and Mr. Bloomberg.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#private_members_motions">

<heading>PRIVATE MEMBERS&#x2019; MOTIONS</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that in terms of a resolution adopted by the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders on 25 May 1965 he had to advise hon. members that he had decided to accept notice of only one private member&#x2019;s motion to-day, namely that of the Leader of the Opposition. Other private members would be allowed to give notice of their motions on the day on which the debate on the motion of the Leader of the Opposition was to be concluded.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#condolence">

<heading>CONDOLENCE</heading>

<p><i>Late Mr. F. H. Badenhorst</i></p>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 22 July 1965 of Mr. Frans Hendrik Badenhorst, who represented the electoral division of Uitenhage, and desires to place on record its appreciation of his Parliamentary service which extended over a period of more than 7 years.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that its sincere sympathy be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased in their bereavement.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker, it is always a tragic day when one has to commemorate the passing away of a person who died in the prime of his life. In this particular case we are speaking about a relatively young man, 48 years of age, who passed away after a period of seven years&#x2019; service in this House, and approximately two years in the Provincial Council. He also rendered service to us on this side of the House in other capacities. We are aware of the hard work he did when he was a party organizer for about eleven years. Although he did not speak much and did not often make public appearances, he was none the less a hard worker behind the scenes. In his constituency he was a well-liked person, always ready to help those who needed his services. On the Select Committees of this House, too, he always carried out his duties meticulously. A person who was on friendly terms with everybody has passed away from us.</p>

<p>He is survived by his wife and two young sons, and a time of grief lies ahead for them. On behalf of all of us, I should like to convey our sincere sympathy to his wife and all of those he left behind when he passed away.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>*Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>On behalf of this side of the House I should like to associate myself with the words which have fallen from the lips of the hon. the Prime Minister in regard to the late Frans Badenhorst.</p>

<p>We on this side of the House became acquainted with him as an organizer, as a member of the Provincial Council, and later as a member of the House of Assembly. He was a quiet, friendly and charming person. That is how we got to know him over the years, also in his capacity as national organizer of the Federation of White Workers in South Africa. I should like to emphasize particularly that he always took an interest in the problems of the man in the street, and in particular in those of the railway workers.</p>

<p>He did not always enjoy good health, but nevertheless he retained his sense of humour and his sense of his mission in life. As I have already said, he was a friendly person at all times, courteous and kind towards everybody. He will be missed by both sides of this House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bloomberg">

<from><span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0017"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLOOMBERG</person>:</from>

<p>My colleagues and I should like to identify ourselves with the motion before the House and with the tributes paid to the memory of our late friend.</p>

<p>Motion agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

<p><i>Late Dr. A. H. Jonker</i></p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 10 January 1966, of Dr. Abraham Hendrik Jonker, who represented the electoral division of Fort Beaufort, and desires to place on record its appreciation of his Parliamentary service which extended over a period of nearly 18 years.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that its sincere sympathy be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased in their bereavement.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker, here we are dealing with a different type of case. We are dealing with somebody who, over a long period, rendered service to the nation in various ways. Dr. Jonker was a person who had won his spurs as a man of culture. As an author and a lover of his language he was of real importance to South Africa. His name was held in high esteem in literary circles, and it was in this field that he intended to render even greater services. We looked forward to receiving writings from his pen which would be of great value to history as well as to art. But when he was on the point of fulfilling his wish to devote his energies specially to that task, he passed away.</p>

<p>The deceased played a part in public life for a long period. One might say that his political views varied from time to time. He was a member of different sides of this House. While people are sometimes blamed for changing their political views and giving their support to another party, one has to consider, however, whether it was done through mere opportunism or whether it sprang from real convictions.</p>

<p>We are convinced that in his political career Dr. Jonker stood for ideals in which he believed. We believe that he was sincere in his attitude when, as a member of the Opposition, he opposed this side and that he applied all his powers of persuasion when advocating those ideals.</p>

<p>However, when his mind became too much troubled by the new world and he developed a different outlook on matters, he had the courage of his convictions to advocate his new attitude, first by endeavouring to bring about a change of outlook on the part of his colleagues on his side of the House, and subsequently by trying to adopt a middle course. Eventually he took the more difficult step&#x2014; and it is always a difficult step&#x2014;of crossing to this side of the House. He could see no personal advantage in doing so; his attitude did not reflect any selfish aims. He acted solely in accordance with his innermost convictions. He always exerted himself, almost passionately, for what he believed would be right and good for his country and his people. All of us must honour him for that, irrespective of on which side of the House we find ourselves, and that is what we are doing now.</p>

<p>I want to pay tribute to the memory of Dr. Jonker for the services he rendered to his country and his people in these various fields, and I want to convey our sincere sympathy to his wife and to all those who will miss him. He was called upon to face tragedies in his own life, which he did with great courage. While his next of kin now have to mourn his passing, we pray that they may be granted the same courage and faith to bear this grievous loss.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>On behalf of this side of the House I should like to associate myself with the words that have fallen from the lips of the hon. the Prime Minister and with the motion which he has moved.</p>

<p>The late Abraham Jonker was a man of many parts. I suppose there are not many who know that he originally took his preliminary qualifications in theology. But he distinguished himself in many spheres. I think, perhaps, that his greatest distinction was as a writer, a sensitive writer, a most accomplished writer in the Afrikaans language. He was also, I believe, cofounder of the publication &#x201C;Ons Eie Boek&#x201D;, which did much to help form opinion on the quality of our own Afrikaans literature.</p>

<p>He was also a distinguished journalist. He served on four or five publications&#x2014;the <i>Burger,</i> the <i>Jongspan,</i> the <i>Huisgenoot,</i> and later the <i>Suiderstem.</i> I think, Sir, we remember him perhaps best as a brilliant polemic journalist, a polemic journalist who was, perhaps, at his height during the war years, when his articles did much to maintain the morale of his own people and confound the enemies at that time.</p>

<p>As a member of Parliament he was a picturesque figure because of his background. His speeches were always interesting and studded with literary allusions. He was, I think, a most accomplished debater and a fierce fighter for anything he believed in. I think there are many in this House who recall his fights concerning the retention of the conscience clause when he had not been a member very long, when he differed both with his own leaders and hon. members on the other side of the House.</p>

<p>He was, I say, a man of many parts. He was also a keen fisherman and a very pleasant companion, someone who has made his mark, I think in three or four fields and who will be remembered for a long time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bloomberg">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLOOMBERG</person>:</from>

<p>In this instance, too, my colleagues and I should like to associate ourselves with the motion before the House <span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0018"/>and with the well-deserved tributes paid to the memory of our late colleague and friend.</p>

<p>Motion agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1966-01-21T13:04:00">1.4 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

