---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol79 - FRIDAY 2 FEBRUARY 1979'
layout: debate
year: 1979
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 2 FEBRUARY 1979</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Members assembled in the Assembly Chamber at 09h35.</p>

<p>The Secretary read the following Proclamation of the State President, dated 9 December 1978, summoning Parliament to meet today:</p>

<p>No. 328, 1978]</p>

<debateSection name="#prorogation_and_summoning_of_parliament">

<heading>PROROGATION AND SUMMONING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Under and by virtue of the power and authority vested in me by section 25 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, I hereby prorogue Parliament until Friday, the Second day of February 1979, and I declare that the Parliament of the Republic of South Africa will commence at Cape Town on that day for the dispatch of business.</p>

<p>Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Republic of South Africa at Cape Town, on this Ninth day of December, One thousand Nine hundred and Seventy-eight.</p>

<p>B. J. VORSTER,</p>

<p>State President.</p>

<p>By Order of the State President-in-Council,</p>

<p>P. W. BOTHA.</p>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacancy">

<heading>VACANCY</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that during the recess a vacancy had occurred in the representation in this House of the electoral division of Randfontein, owing to the resignation with effect from 1 February 1979 of Dr. the Hon. C. P. Mulder.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading><span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0023"/>OFFICIAL OPENING</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that a letter had been received from the Secretary to the Prime Minister, stating that the State President would open Parliament at 11h00 today in the Assembly Chamber.</p>

<p>Proceedings Suspended at 09h37 and Resumed at 11h55.</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#state_president's_address">

<heading>STATE PRESIDENT&#x2019;S ADDRESS</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that at the opening ceremony he had received a copy of the State President&#x2019;s Address to members of the Senate and of the House of Assembly, which was in the following terms:</p>

<p>MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<p>I am glad to welcome you to this the Third Session of the Sixth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</p>

<p>The current international situation is causing almost every country of the world anxiety and great uncertainty. Thus, while the United States is endeavouring to reach an agreement with the Soviet Union for the mutual limitation of the production of strategic arms, Moscow is continuing and even speeding up its provocative policy of extending its spheres of influence and fomenting upheavals in areas of vital importance to the Western world. Developments in Iran, which have led to the interruption of its oil production, are adding to the uncertainties in the Middle East. There is growing fear that similar developments might be engineered in other oil-producing countries of that strategic area.</p>

<p>In contrast, South Africa, despite the diversity of its population and its complex problems, remains one of the world&#x2019;s most peaceful countries. This fact speaks well for the sense of responsibility of all our peoples. We believe in the peaceful settlement of internal as well as external issues. It is therefore a matter for regret and concern that there are people who believe in violence as a means of resolving the sub-continent&#x2019;s problems.</p>

<p>The Government considers it of extreme importance that the question of South West Africa should now be finally resolved. In the recent series of discussions with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, South Africa has again illustrated its sincerity in its search for a solution which will take into account the wishes of the peoples of South West Africa. Bearing in mind these wishes, the Government has gone to great lengths to find a solution, but anxious as it is to do so, this cannot be at the price of sacrificing stability, order and peace.</p>

<p>Similarly, it is hoped that the leaders of Rhodesia will succeed in achieving a political settlement and stability as soon as possible.</p>

<p>The expansion of Russian influence has changed the strategic map of Southern Africa. Stemming the tide of Communist influence, maintaining stability, and promoting the development of a Southern African community of nations, based on peaceful economic interdependence, are important elements in the Government&#x2019;s continuing attempts to strengthen and expand its relations with other African states.</p>

<p>It is gratifying to know that an interdepartmental committee has investigated a possible basis for the apportionment of communal water resources between Black states and the Republic of South Africa. Negotiations with the Government of Lesotho in connection with the Lesotho Highlands water project resulted in the appointment of a joint technical committee to draw up a preliminary feasibility report on the export of water from the highlands of Lesotho to the Vaal River catchment area.</p>

<p>The South African Railways likewise cooperates with railway organizations in neighbouring countries and assists them wherever possible. An agreement with Rhodesia Railways has been in existence for many years. The 1965 operating agreement with Mozambique is still valid, but it has recently been mutually agreed to review the agreement and to base it strictly <span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0024"/>on business principles. An operating agreement with Swaziland on the same principles as those applying to Rhodesia and Mozambique followed the opening on 1 November 1978 of the rail connection between Golela in Natal and Phuzumoya in Swaziland. Agreement has been reached between the South African Railways and the Zambian Railways, and traffic is running smoothly.</p>

<p>In South Africa 1978 was a year of economic recovery, albeit on a moderate scale. The upswing, which was characterized by increases in production, employment and general economic activity, has not yet developed adequate momentum, and the real rate of economic growth is not yet as high as it could and should be.</p>

<p>The Government is now in a position to adopt a more determined growth policy, thanks to the remarkable performance of the balance of payments on current account in 1978. The final figures will show that the current account registered a record surplus of approximately one thousand five hundred million rand in 1978. The increase in the gold price was one of the main reasons for this exceptionally large surplus. Another reason for the recovery has been the extremely satisfactory improvement in the tourist industry.</p>

<p>South Africa&#x2019;s credit rating overseas has improved still further, as is evidenced by the fact that the Government succeeded in raising new foreign loans amounting to some two hundred and fifty million dollars which will be used predominantly for the provision of housing and education for lower income groups, and for the creation of new employment opportunities in underdeveloped areas in accordance with the Government&#x2019;s decentralization policy.</p>

<p>An event of considerable significance to every inhabitant of South Africa was the acceptance by the Government on 24 January this year of the Interim Report on Exchange Rates of the De Kock Commission. It has been decided to begin immediately with a process of development of South Africa&#x2019;s own foreign exchange market, with the ultimate objective of introducing a unitary exchange rate system in which the rand will find its own level under Reserve Bank surveillance. The rand will their no longer be pegged to the US dollar. It will be an independent currency with an exchange rate largely determined by South Africa&#x2019;s economic circumstances and not by the fortunes of another country&#x2019;s currency. When the new exchange rate system later comes into full operation, it should afford South Africa more independence in the determination and application of a dynamic policy of economic growth with financial discipline.</p>

<p>It has also been decided to amend exchange control by transforming the old so-called securities rand into a &#x201C;financial&#x201D; rand with broader utilization possibilities. This step should promote productive foreign investment in South Africa by raising profitability, and also because non-residents can now bring their capital in and take it out more freely without any effect on South Africa&#x2019;s gold and other foreign reserves.</p>

<p>Because a profit-oriented free market economy is the most effective system to achieve the highest rate of economic development, the Government is purposefully continuing to apply positive measures to extend and promote the country&#x2019;s secondary industry, particularly with a view to combating unemployment. Attention is also being given to ways and means of countering wasteful use of capital and foreign exchange.</p>

<p>While constantly seeking to encourage the domestic production of goods and services, the Government is also continuing its efforts to expand South Africa&#x2019;s economic and trade ties with other countries. Particular attention is given to the promotion of exports. A decrease in the export earnings from various minerals, especially those associated with the steel and related industries, can be attributed to the world-wide weakness in commodity markets. Nevertheless, mainly as a result of the steady increase in the price of gold, the Republic&#x2019;s export earnings from minerals again reached an all-time high in 1978. Uranium continues to make an important contribution to the Republic&#x2019;s economy, and the search for this strategic material continues unremittingly.</p>

<p>A suitable drilling rig has been obtained to carry out prospecting for oil in the deeper off-shore areas which cannot be explored by the rig at present being used in <span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0025"/>our southern waters. In addition to the existing fuel-saving measures, the Government is constantly exploring ways and means of effecting further savings. The development of alternative liquid fuels is receiving continuous attention. Furthermore, serious consideration is being given to the development of alternative sources of energy. Existing coal, uranium and other resources should be fully utilized to achieve maximum short-term and long-term advantages.</p>

<p>*Although economic affairs are of necessity given high priority, the political development of all population groups also receives the constant attention of the Government. The Government has decided, believing this to be in the best interests of the country, not to adhere to the Westminster system of government slavishly. It will be adapted to meet the needs of our multi-national society. The necessary measures will be taken during this session of Parliament to replace the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, so as to give effect to the Government&#x2019;s constitutional proposals.</p>

<p>The political development of the Indian community was taken a step further when a delimitation committee was appointed on 1 October 1978 to divide the Provinces of Natal, the Transvaal and the Cape of Good Hope into 27, 10 and 3 electoral divisions, respectively. A date will be fixed as soon as possible for the first general election in the history of South Africa&#x2019;s Indians.</p>

<p>As regards the Coloured population, additional agricultural land was bought during 1978 and further purchases are under consideration. Two interdepartmental committees have investigated the possibility of buying land for the resettlement of Coloureds in the Northern Cape, as well as an area of land for Coloureds in East Griqualand.</p>

<p>Education for Coloureds continues to show exceptional growth. There are over 700 000 pupils at school, and the number increases by about 4,4 per cent every year. The number of secondary pupils increased by 13 per cent in 1978, while the student enrolment at the University of the Western Cape has risen to 3 200.</p>

<p>The establishment of community councils has given Black urban representative bodies a greater say as well as greater responsibilities and status in purely local matters and ensures continuing dialogue with urban Blacks. Over a hundred councils have been established since July 1977, which is an indication that Blacks have largely accepted the new dispensation.</p>

<p>Within the limits of available means, attention will be given to consolidation, which is undergoing a dynamic reappraisal, and in particular the economic development of the Black states, especially with a view to the creation of employment opportunities. Technical assistance to the developing Black states will demand more and more time and means.</p>

<p>The Government of Venda has requested the Government of South Africa to grant it sovereignty. Good progress is being made with preparatory work towards Venda&#x2019;s attainment of independence during 1979.</p>

<p>The interests of Black children constantly receive the attention of the Government. Active steps will be taken in the course of the year to provide for nursery school education, school health services and the establishment of a teachers&#x2019; council, as well as progress towards compulsory education.</p>

<p>In the field of tertiary education for Blacks there is a growing demand for technicians, secondary school teachers and other professionally qualified people, and the development of further training facilities is therefore being given priority.</p>

<p>Standards of White education are being maintained. The system of differentiated education has virtually been fully implemented at school level, and special attention is being given to the development of education at the tertiary level.</p>

<p>In the field of agriculture, production was higher in 1977-&#x2019;78 than during the previous year, but farmers&#x2019; net income dropped. This decrease is mainly attributable to general rises in costs. Agriculture remains of primary importance in providing food for the population of South Africa and its neighbouring states. Gratitude is due to the agricultural industry for its exceptional contribution in this regard.</p>

<p>Satisfactory progress is being maintained in the field of housing, thanks to, <i>inter</i> <span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0026"/><i>alia,</i> the additional amount of R250 million which has been granted for low-cost housing for Blacks, Coloureds and Indians. New houses will be made available at a steady rate to satisfy the housing needs of the less privileged members of all population groups to an increasing extent.</p>

<p>Since 1979 has been declared Health Year, during which a healthy pattern and way of life will be cultivated, active community involvement in health matters will be encouraged, and a healthier environment will be created, the Government appeals to all to take part in the Health Year in the interests of the health of their fellow-men as well as their own.</p>

<p>Priority continues to be given to the fostering of sound and happy internal sport relations on an orderly basis, which is the only criterion by which the international sporting community should judge its members.</p>

<p>The actions of some international groups and organizations make it imperative for South Africa to be constantly on the alert. The peace, prosperity and security in our country must be attributed mainly to the dedicated services and loyalty of the members of the South African Defence Force and the South African Police. Special gratitude and homage are due to those who have made the supreme sacrifice in the service of their country.</p>

<p>It is gratifying to know that good progress is being made in continually improving the efficiency and capability of the South African Defence Force. The Armaments Corporation of South Africa, in close collaboration with the private sector, is now producing a wide range of weapons, equipment and components in accordance with the Government&#x2019;s policy of being as self-sufficient as possible in this regard. It is equally gratifying to know that the South African Police are constantly on the alert and have succeeded in rendering harmless those terrorists who have attempted to infiltrate the Republic from outside its borders. The public may rest assured that the Defence Force and the Police are fully prepared for any eventuality.</p>

<p>The Government wishes to express its sincere gratitude and appreciation to public servants for the dedicated and efficient services they are rendering to the community.</p>

<p>South Africa is entering a new epoch in its history&#x2014;an era in which new economic and financial measures will come into operation, a new constitutional dispensation is awaiting Whites, Coloureds and Indians, and the Black people will see the meaningful consolidation of their areas, while the Government is also preparing a blueprint on where they will fit into the constitutional dispensation.</p>

<p>Let us all put our shoulders to the wheel and make this new dispensation a lasting and an enriching reality. The key is beyond all doubt the maintenance and fostering of sound relations between people and population groups at every level of society. This is a wonderful challenge. Let us accept it gladly and strive with faith, perseverance and dedication to fulfil our mission.</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY</p>

<p>Additional estimates of expenditure for the current financial year and estimates of revenue and expenditure for the ensuing financial year will be laid before you.</p>

<p>MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<p>I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.</p>

<p>I now declare this the Third Session of the Sixth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions_for_oral_reply_to_have_precedence_on_wednesdays_and_fridays">

<heading>QUESTIONS FOR ORAL REPLY TO HAVE PRECEDENCE ON WEDNESDAYS AND FRIDAYS</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That, notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order No. 42(2), questions for <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0027"/>oral reply shall have precedence on Wednesdays and Fridays.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#motion_of_condolence">

<heading>MOTION OF CONDOLENCE</heading>

<summary><i>(The late Mr. J. P. A. Reyneke)</i></summary>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 8 August 1978 of Mr. Josias Petrus Albertus Reyneke, who represented the electoral division of Boksburg, and desires to place on record its appreciation of his Parliamentary service, which extended over a period of more than 12 years.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that its sincere sympathy in their bereavement be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased.</block>

<p>Mr. Reyneke was a well-known figure in Parliament. He left us at a stage when he could undoubtedly still have done valuable work for South Africa at his ripe age of 59 years and seven months, having represented Boksburg here for 12 years and four months. From 27 January 1978 he was a Whip on this side of the House.</p>

<p>His death deprives the House of a well-loved personality, a person with an engaging sense of humour. Everyone will remember him for the friendly way in which he associated with his colleagues in Parliament and his flashes of wit in debate. In general, this hon. member&#x2019;s life was a gracious one. He regularly took part in sport. The announcement of his sudden death came as a shock to all of us.</p>

<p>On behalf of this side of the House I should like to extend our deepest sympathy to his family and assure them that we think of him as a person whose useful life enriched the world he lived in.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#eglin">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. W. EGLIN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I second the motion. We in these benches wish to associate ourselves with the motion, the sentiments and the words of the hon. the Prime Minister concerning the late Mr. Sias Reyneke. We knew him first as an ordinary member and later, for a time, as a Whip. He impressed us as a high-spirited person who displayed a sense of humour in his personal dealings and in politics. It seemed to us that he was at his happiest when asked to attempt to extract the ball from the political scrum. We also wish to convey our deepest sympathy to his family in their loss.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#raw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. V. RAW</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I want to associate myself with the words of the hon. the Prime Minister concerning the friendly personality and zest for life of our late colleague. Throughout his period of service I too was a member of the House and we never had a quarrel or unpleasantness of any nature. He was a man whom one could fight while at the same time respecting him. On behalf of the members of this party I want to associate myself with the motion of condolence and sympathy towards his family.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wiley">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. W. E. WILEY</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we in these benches associate ourselves with the tribute and the words of sympathy expressed in regard to our late colleague.</p>

<p>Question agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#motion_of_condolence">

<heading>MOTION OF CONDOLENCE</heading>

<summary>(<i>The late Mr. J. H. Nortje</i>)</summary>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 6 December 1978 of Mr. Jan Hendrik Nortje, who represented the electoral division of Beaufort West, and desires to place on record its appreciation of his Parliamentary service, which extended over a period of more than a year.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that its sincere sympathy in their bereavement be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker, the late Jan Nortje was a member of this House and for only a short period, died at the age of 55, having represented his constituency in this House for only one year and five months. Those of us who knew the hon. member well, however, know that for 12 years he rendered valuable <span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0028"/>service in the Cape Provincial Council and that to his friends there he was always a very pleasant personality to meet and to associate with. In this House he could hardly make a lasting impression, but I think that those who knew him will agree with me that he always carried in him something of the Karoo, the characteristics of the Karoo: a tranquillity and, in his own way, a richness of spirit which one did not always expect. He was in fact a man of the Karoo and to the good people of that region he was a pillar of strength. Although he was not able to participate in our proceedings over a long period, his friends in the Karoo trusted him. His death also reminds us of the mortality of us who are still serving here, and it is with regret that I move this motion and express my heartfelt sympathy to his wife and children.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#eglin">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. W. EGLIN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I second the motion. We in the PFP also wish to associate ourselves with the motion just moved by the hon. the Prime Minister. As the hon. the Prime Minister rightly said, Mr. Nortje&#x2019;s term of office was of so short a duration that he did not have the opportunity to make his mark in this House. During his brief presence here we nevertheless saw that he was a quiet and unassuming man and one who did his duty as representative of the voters in his constituency. We associate ourselves with the expression of sympathy to his next of kin.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#raw">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. V. RAW</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I would like to associate my party with the motion before the House. Our late friend, as the hon. the Prime Minister said, was not here very long, but although we have not known him as well as we know those who have been here longer, he impressed us immediately as a quiet and friendly person with a pleasant and friendly personality. We would also like to associate ourselves with the sympathy which the House expresses to those who mourn him.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wiley">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. W. E. WILEY</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we in the SAP associate ourselves with the sympathy conveyed by the hon. the Prime Minister to the next of kin of the late Jan Nortje.</p>

<p>Question agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#motion_of_condolence">

<heading>MOTION OF CONDOLENCE</heading>

<summary><i>(The late State President Dr. N. Diederichs)</i></summary>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House, deeply conscious of the great loss sustained by South Africa on 21 August 1978 through the death of Dr. Nicolaas Diederichs, State President of the Republic of South Africa, places on record its sincere appreciation of the invaluable services so selflessly rendered by him to his country and its people, in particular as a member of this House for an uninterrupted period of almost 27 years, as a Cabinet Minister from 1958 to 1975 and as State President from 1975.</block>

<block name="quote">This House expresses its profound sorrow at the loss of an outstanding statesman, whose memory is held in affection and admiration not only by the members of this House, but also by the people of the Republic of South Africa.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that an expression of its heartfelt sympathy in their sad bereavement be conveyed to Mrs. Diederichs and the other members of Dr. Diederichs&#x2019;s family.</block>

<p>On an occasion such as this it is probably not necessary for me to use many words, for striking tribute has already been paid to the late President Diederichs on the occasion of his funeral. Tribute was paid to him on that and also on other occasions by the Government, including myself. Consequently I do not want to make a long speech now on his excellent qualities. I just want to point out that he died at a relatively advanced age and that he therefore had an opportunity to use the talents which he possessed&#x2014;and they were many&#x2014;in a fruitful way in the service of his country. His parliamentary service extended over a period of 26 years and eight months and, in succession, he represented the constituencies of Randfontein, Losberg and Overvaal. As Cabinet Minister the late President Diederichs was in charge of various portfolios, including Economic Affairs, Mines and, ultimately, Finance. From 1974 to 1975 he was also Leader of the House of Assembly. For the ensuing three years he was our State President.</p>

<p><span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0029"/>Personally I knew Dr. Diederichs very well, having come to know him at the early age of 16. At the time he was my lecturer at university, and that was where I received my first impressions of him. Subsequently we both came to the House of Assembly in the same year, i.e. 1948, and eventually became benchfellows here. He was a valued friend to me throughout. While I am speaking on this personal level now I also wish to express the thought that few people were blessed with as much talent and brain power as that with which the late President Diederichs was blessed.</p>

<p>To his students he was an inspiration. He was gentle-natured, and could sometimes be a little absentminded. People who knew him, saw in him a personality of great richness, great spiritual strength and with a great love for his fatherland. I should like to convey our sympathy to Mrs. Diederichs, and to their children.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#eglin">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. W. EGLIN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to second the motion introduced by the hon. the Prime Minister. The late Dr. Nico Diederichs was a man of remarkable talents and a man who made his mark on the life of the nation as he moved from a relatively modest beginning into the highest office of the Republic of South Africa. I imagine that most people will remember him for his contribution to the economic life of South Africa, firstly in his term of office as Minister of Economic Affairs and subsequently as Minister of Finance. Others will remember him as a young man assisting the economic uplift of a community struggling in the aftermath of a world depression. We in this House remember Dr. Diederichs as an extremely conscientious member of Parliament and an extremely conscientious and approachable Minister. Above all, in the Government and in the Opposition he is being remembered as a man who displayed unfailing courtesy to all with whom he came into contact.</p>

<p>We in these benches would like to be associated with the expressions of sympathy to Mrs. Diederichs, and, at the same time, to convey our thanks to her for the support she gave him over many years of public office.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#raw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. V. RAW</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I should like to associate my party with this motion. As the hon. the Prime Minister said, we have already paid our tribute on another occasion and consequently I do not want to elaborate on it at length now. I should also like to say, as did the hon. the Leader of the Opposition, that Dr. Diederichs, as Cabinet Minister, was a person who was always friendly, a person with whom one could always discuss a matter or a problem. He was also a person who devoted his life to his party, to his compatriots and to this Parliament, and who ultimately served in the highest office in the country. We associate ourselves with the tribute that has been paid to his memory.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wiley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. W. E. WILEY</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, to be elected to the highest office in one&#x2019;s own country is to achieve a feat of great distinction. Dr. Diederichs had already made a name for himself in many fields before that great honour was conferred upon him. His election as State President was merely a climax to a long and notable career.</p>

<p>*Everyone will remember him as an economist and philosopher who was rewarded with various distinctions. We in this House will remember him as a politician who achieved political success and who, as Minister of Finance, strove courageously in international circles for a fair price for gold. In addition everyone will remember him as a courteous person, a person who through his perfect use of our two official languages carried the standard of bilingualism to new heights.</p>

<p>We in this party, too, convey our sympathy to Mrs. Diederichs and all the members of her family.</p>

<p>Question agreed to unanimously, all members standing.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#adjournment_of_house">

<heading>ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the House do now adjourn.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1979-02-02T12:21:00">12h21</recordedTime>.</p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

