---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol94 - FRIDAY 31 JULY 1981'
layout: debate
year: 1981
month: JULY
month_slug: Jul
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading><span class="col_1-2" refersTo="page_0019"/>FRIDAY, 31 JULY 1981</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Members assembled in the Assembly Chamber at <recordedTime time="1981-07-31T08:30:00">08h30</recordedTime>.</p>

<p>The Secretary read the following Proclamation of the State President, dated 26 February 1981, summoning Parliament to meet today:</p>

<p>No. 42, 1981]</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#prorogation_and_summoning_of_the_house_of_assembly">

<heading>PROROGATION AND SUMMONING OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY</heading>

<p>Under and by virtue of the power and authority vested in me by section 25 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, I hereby prorogue the House of Assembly until Friday, the Thirty-first day of July 1981, and I declare that the First Session of the Seventh Parliament of the Republic of South Africa will commence at Cape Town on that day for the dispatch of business.</p>

<p>Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Republic of South Africa at Pretoria on this Twenty-sixth day of February, One thousand Nine hundred and Eighty-one.</p>

<p>M. VILJOEN, State President.</p>

<p>By Order of the State President-in-Council,</p>

<p>P. W. BOTHA.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING</heading>

<p>The Secretary announced:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) That the following letters had been received from the Director-General: Office of the Prime Minister:

<ol>

<li>(a) Letter stating that the State President <span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0020"/>would open Parliament at 11h00 today in the Assembly Chamber;</li>

<li>(b) letter notifying the names of the persons declared duly elected in terms of section 40 (1) (a) of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, as members of the House of Assembly at the general election;</li>

<li>(c) letter notifying the names of the persons nominated as members of the House of Assembly by the State President in terms of section 40 (1) (b) of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961;</li>

<li>(d) letter notifying the names of the persons elected as members of the House of Assembly in terms of section 40 (1) (c) of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961;</li></ol></li>

<li>(2) that the Honourable Mr. Justice P. J. Wessels, Judge of Appeal, had been authorized by a Commission from the State President to administer the oath or affirmation to members of the House of Assembly.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oath_or_affirmation">

<heading>OATH OR AFFIRMATION</heading>

<p>The Serjeant-at-Arms announced the Honourable Mr. Justice P. J. Wessels, who was received by members standing and, having taken his seat at the Table, administered the oath or solemn affirmation to the members present and thereupon withdrew.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#election_of_speaker">

<heading>ELECTION OF SPEAKER</heading>

<p>The Secretary intimated that the House would proceed to the election of a Speaker.</p>

<speech by="#van_breda">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. VAN BREDA</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Victor, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Mr. Johannes Petrus du Toit take the Chair of this House as Speaker.</block>

<p>Mr. Du Toit has a record spanning more than two decades in our representative public service, for he has represented the electoral division of Vryburg since 1959, first in the Provincial Council of the Cape, and since 1966 here in this House. In the provincial council already he distinguished himself as Whip and as chairman of the important Select Committee on Public Accounts. You can understand that it means a very great deal to me as Whip to know that Mr. Du Toit was also one, for I believe that he will therefore have a thorough understanding of our desires as Whips, who must at all times intercede with Mr. Speaker on behalf of our members. If he succeeds in making us happy, we, in our turn, can make our members happy, and that will contribute to a very good, relaxed and obliging atmosphere, something which will consequently make his task so much easier.</p>

<p>In 1966 he was one of the largest group of newcomers ever to enter this House. On our side alone 49 new members arrived here. In addition to serving on the executive committees of several of our study groups, he was also a member of the Select Committee on Co-operation and Development. In 1974 he was appointed to the then Bantu Affairs Commission and he occupied that position very creditably indeed until 1978.</p>

<p>It was also in 1978 that he took his first step in the direction of the respected Chair when he became Deputy Chairman of Committees. In that office he distinguished himself to such an extent that he was promoted to Deputy Speaker in 1980. That apprenticeship, too, he completed with very great distinction.</p>

<p>As a result of his decisiveness and absolute fairness, he is held in high esteem in this House. He has the ability to maintain discipline in the House relentlessly, without emerging prominently in the foreground himself. He is not one of those referees who whistle a match to death. He can certainly take a decision; you need only ask the hon. member for Houghton. He has asked her to withdraw from the Chamber, but he also provided her with her greatest moment of glory in that five of her colleagues withdrew with her out of solidarity! [Interjections.]</p>

<p>I do not think there is a single upstanding member in this House who is not jealous of the dignity of this House. Sometimes there are the malcontents who defy authority, but Mr. Du Toit has always succeeded in setting them straight without stifling the humour which is such an essential part of this House.</p>

<p>Despite his versatility he remains in the <span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0021"/>final instance a farmer. In fact he has made some of his greatest public contributions in the sphere of organized agriculture. If it pleases this House to elect him as Speaker he will, according to my information, be only the second Speaker without a legal background and the first who is a full-time farmer.</p>

<p>Allow me, by way of conclusion, to relate an anecdote which testifies to his great loyalty to his friends. In 1974 the two of us fought an election for the position of Whip, and I won by two votes. To this day I still believe that one of those votes was my own and the other was that of Hannes du Toit. [Interjections.] That is why I wish to cast my vote for him today with so much devotion.</p>

<p>The unruly spirit of the times has also become noticeable in the council chambers of the world, but I am convinced that under the firm but supple hand of Mr. du Toit this House will continue to remain one of the examples of good order in the world.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. L. VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Victor, it is an exceptional pleasure for me to second the motion of the hon. member for Tygervallei.</p>

<p>There being no other proposal, the Secretary called upon Mr. J. P. du Toit to indicate whether he accepted the nomination.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#du_toit">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. DU TOIT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Victor, I am pleased to submit in all humility to the choice of the House of Assembly.</p>

<p>Thereupon the Secretary declared Mr. J. P. du Toit duly elected.</p>

<p>Mr. A. van Breda and Mr. W. L. van der Merwe conducted Mr. J. P. du Toit to the Chair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>It is with pride, but also with a feeling of humility that I accept the office of Speaker today. I am proud because you place so much confidence in me here that you have elected me to this important office, and I am humble because I am aware of the heavy demands which the office of Speaker will make on me.</p>

<p>As I ascended this podium I thought of my predecessors, the Speakers who previously occupied this Chair. I thought of Sir James Molteno, our first Speaker in 1910, and all the others who succeeded him, up to and including my immediate predecessor, the Honourable J. J. Loots. They all accomplished great things and made their mark. They all left their own impress on this House and, together with their staff, made great contributions towards evolving and consolidating the preservation of order in this House, to such an extent, in fact, that the South African Parliament is one of the most orderly and dignified Parliaments in the world. That is why I feel small today in accepting this high office because I am following in the footsteps of such illustrious persons.</p>

<p>&#x2020;The office of Speaker is unique because, as the designation implies, the Speaker speaks on behalf of the members of the House. In other words, the Speaker has to act as the representative of all members of the House in matters affecting Parliament, the highest legislative authority. He is the interpreter and the custodian of the rights and privileges of the House and of the members of the House. In addition the Speaker has to maintain order in the House. At the same time he is the servant of the House and cannot carry out his duties properly without the support of all hon. members.</p>

<p>I want to assure hon. members that in the maintenance of order I regard the following as basic and of the utmost importance: Firstly, total impartiality and, secondly, the protection of the rights and privileges of all members, in the minority as well as in the majority parties.</p>

<p>*I repeat that as presiding officer I shall do my utmost to be fair and impartial at all times in my endeavour to gain the confidence of all sides of this House, because I am thoroughly aware that I will not otherwise be able to carry out my duties properly. Consequently I am today asking for the co-operation of all hon. members in order to uphold and to preserve the prestige, the dignity and the order of Parliament. I pray that I may be granted the strength, the grace and the insight to enable me to carry out my duties in this important office.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, <span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0022"/>it is a great privilege to convey a message of sincere thanks to you on behalf of the Government and this side of the House on your acceptance of this high office. I congratulate you, too, on behalf of your wide circle of friends. By that I do not mean that your friendships should necessarily guide you in your decisions.</p>

<p>As your proposer rightly said, you have a long career of public service behind you and from the time that you completed your education you have learned to pass judgment and take decisions in various fields. This you did as a public servant and also when you occupied positions in various service organizations in your community. You also acquired further experience as a member of the provincial council, but it is primarily by virtue of the service you have rendered in the House of Assembly in recent years that you have been prepared for this office.</p>

<p>This House can be turbulent at times, but can also be over-friendly at other times. This place has a spirit and character of its own which only those who have been here long enough can attest to.</p>

<p>It is our prayer and our earnest wish that in occupying this high office you will not only enjoy the support of hon. members but will also occupy a special place in the line of great Speakers who have made their mark in the history of South Africa in so many ways.</p>

<p>&#x2020;On behalf of this side of the House I congratulate not only you, but also your pleasant wife, Mrs. Du Toit, and we wish you and your family everything of the best for the future.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bamford">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">B. R. BAMFORD</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, may I on behalf of this side of the House heartily congratulate you on your election this morning to this high office. Thereby you join a unique line of very distinguished South Africans.</p>

<p>We have known you in the Cape Provincial Council and we have got to know you here, and we have no reservations at all in regard to your integrity, ability, dignity and impartiality. You have yourself referred to the exacting and challenging tasks that you would have to perform, and you have rightly referred to the fact that you embody and represent Parliament in the eyes of the outside world. That in itself is an almost chilling task. In the second place you referred to an equally important task, and that is to maintain a balance&#x2014;and it is a delicate balance&#x2014;between, on the one hand, the obligation of the governing party to carry out the mandate the people of South Africa have given it and, on the other hand, the protection of minority rights, without which a democratic Parliament cannot possibly function.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker, particularly one in my position would I suppose have wished for a lawyer to have been elected to the Chair, but Providence not having ordained that I suppose a farmer is the next best. We on this side have in recent weeks learnt that the word &#x201C;obey&#x201D; is no longer used in certain ceremonies. I do not know whether one should say that we &#x201C;obey&#x201D; the Chair, but we certainly honour the Chair and will obey it as long as the instructions from the Chair are lawful.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we wish you and Mrs. Du Toit well.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#raw">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. V. RAW</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, may I add the congratulations of the New Republic Party to those that have been extended to you. We, like others in the House, wish you well. We have already had the pleasure of experiencing your impartiality in the Chair. It has been my personal privilege to know you since you first came to this House and to respect the abilities you now bring to this high office. Of course, I have never given the Speaker any trouble in the past and my team will follow that example. I am sure they will do their best to facilitate your task. I assure you of the full support and co-operation of the members of this party and of our very best wishes.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>My sincere thanks to the hon. the Prime Minister for the words he addressed to me. I wish to thank him and his Cabinet for having seen fit to recommend me for this high post. I greatly appreciate it.</p>

<p>&#x2020;I also wish to express my sincere thanks to the Chief Whip of the official Opposition and to the hon. member for Durban Point for their kind words and congratulations. I do appreciate this very much. I also appreciate the fact that my election was unopposed. <span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0023"/>I thank the Opposition parties for their support. I feel it augurs well for the future. Thank you.</p>

<p>*I also wish to thank the Government Chief Whip for his words. We have known one another for many years and have always been great friends. Accordingly I am particularly gratified that I was able to have his vote, too, for my election as Speaker. I also thank the hon. member for Meyerton for his support. I appreciate your good wishes and know that you will give me your co-operation.</p>

<p>In conclusion I wish to thank my immediate predecessor, the hon. J. J. Loots. It was an privilege to co-operate with him fruitfully over a period of three years, first as Deputy Chairman of Committees and then as Deputy Speaker. We were very loyal to each other and he helped me a great deal in this difficult task.</p>

<p>I wish to assure you that I shall at all times strive to follow the example set by my predecessors since 1910.</p>

</speech>

<p>Proceedings Suspended at 09h27.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening_ceremony">

<heading>OPENING CEREMONY</heading>

<p>Members met in the Senate Chamber at 10h40 and accompanied Mr. Speaker to the Assembly Chamber to attend the opening ceremony.</p>

<p>Proceedings Resumed at 11h53.</p>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>took the Chair.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#mr_speaker&#x2019;s_report">

<heading>MR. SPEAKER&#x2019;S REPORT</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I have to report that after the House had suspended proceedings this morning, I proceeded to Tuynhuys, accompanied by the Prime Minister, Ministers, the Leader of the Opposition and other honourable members, where we were received by the State President, to whom I presented myself pursuant to the Standing Orders of this House. The State President then congratulated me on my election.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#state_president&#x2019;s_address">

<heading>STATE PRESIDENT&#x2019;S ADDRESS</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>stated that at the opening ceremony he had received a copy of the State President&#x2019;s Address to members of the House of Assembly, which was in the following terms:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker And Members Of The House Of Assembly:</p>

<p>I am glad to welcome you to this the First Session of the Seventh Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</p>

<p>*In the general election in April this year the majority of the electorate subscribed to the Goverment&#x2019;s policy initiatives towards development and continued progress in the constitutional, economic and social spheres. This Seventh Parliament will be of decisive importance, since various steps in the constitutional sphere will shortly have to be considered and taken in response to reports by the President&#x2019;s Council and in the interests of the peaceful coexistence of the various national groups of the country. The goodwill and positive results which have already been achieved and consolidated in the President&#x2019;s Council will form the basis of the important decisions which the Government may take on the proposals for the effective and meaningful participation of Coloureds and Asians in the decision-making processes and on the socio-economic position of these population groups. The Government is likewise giving serious attention to the improvement of the living conditions and rights of the Black communities. As regards the constitutional development of the national states, the gaining of independence by the Ciskei on 4 December this year will receive your attention during this Session.</p>

<p>Important developments in connection with the creation of a confederation and a constellation of Southern African states can be expected in the next few months.</p>

<p>On the question of economic development and co-operation, discussions and negotiations are at present being conducted with the independent and self-governing national states.</p>

<p>Peaceful development and sustained progress to a large extent depend on a sound economy. Therefore it is gratifying that in 1980 South Africa, which had <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0024"/>experienced one of her longest upswing phases since the Second World War, was one of the few countries which were able, in the midst of world-wide recession, to achieve the high real growth rate of eight per cent.</p>

<p>Although in all the sectors of the national economy favourable conditions have been in evidence in varying degrees for the past number of years, it must be expected that such a high level of economic activity will not continue indefinitely and that there must inevitably be a levelling-off. It is expected that a growth rate of between four and five per cent will nevertheless be maintained in 1981. By international standards this is a highly satisfactory situation.</p>

<p>The maintenance of a steady growth rate and the improvement in the living conditions of all the people of the Republic are, however, being affected by the rate of inflation.</p>

<p>There are heartening signs of a slight decline in the rate of inflation. The Government is doing everything in its power to promote this trend. The fact that financial discipline with regard to Government spending will continue to be maintained, and that monetary policy measures are now also being applied more successfully, should produce positive results in this difficult field. However, the State cannot achieve this object on its own, and it remains essential for every individual and undertaking to realize their responsibility as regards wage and salary demands, unwarranted price increases, judicious spending, increased productivity and thrift in the consumption of goods and the use of services.</p>

<p>The recent sharp decline in the gold price&#x2014;which can be attributed mainly to the high level of American interest rates, tight money conditions and the low level of economic activity in Western countries &#x2014;does of course entail certain inevitable adjustments for the South African economy. Not only is it reducing the revenue of the gold mines and therefore also the revenue of the Exchequer, which in itself is aggravating the State&#x2019;s problems in financing the Budget in a non-inflationary manner, but, together with lower earnings on exports and persistently high imports, it has already given rise to a moderate deficit in the current account of the balance of payments. This deficit is not unexpected, however, and is normal in the present phase of the business cycle. Thanks to the Republic&#x2019;s particularly high credit rating in the foreign capital markets, no insurmountable difficulties are foreseen in financing this deficit by means of trade financing as well as capital inflow.</p>

<p>In the phase in which the South African economy finds itself at present, the aim will, however, continue to be the preservation of a healthy balance between the maintenance of an optimal economic growth rate, the limiting of general price increases to the lowest possible rates, and the maintenance of a sound balance of payments.</p>

<p>Fiscal policy, which is at present aimed at not encouraging gross domestic expenditure excessively, will at the same time have to be directed at consistently financing public accounts on a sound basis.</p>

<p>At the same time fiscal policy will have to be underpinned by a monetary policy which will be directed at getting a more effective grip on the money supply and which will not be inconsistent with the application of free-market principles.</p>

<p>The monetary position has changed considerably during the past twelve months. A year ago rates of interest in the South African money and capital markets were still abnormally low after the decreases of the previous three years. These low rates were closely related to the abnormally high level of liquidity that had built up in the South African economy in the course of 1979 and 1980, mainly as a result of the increase in the gold price and the large surpluses that persisted in the current account of the balance of payments.</p>

<p>Particularly because of the subsequent decline in the gold price, normal cyclical developments and official policy measures aimed at draining the excess liquidity from the financial system, there has been a drastic change in these conditions during the past ten months. The changes in the financial markets as a result of these developments naturally gave rise to a sharp increase in rates of interest, as is evident from the four increases in the <span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0025"/>bank rate since January of this year. This sharp upward adjustment in the interest-rate pattern should be seen as an essential part of the Government&#x2019;s current monetary policy, which is aimed at establishing more moderate rates of increase in bank credit and the money supply within the framework of the Government&#x2019;s broader anti-inflation strategy. The application of the necessary fiscal and monetary discipline will inevitably entail certain adjustments; but to deviate from the already adopted course for the sake of illusory short-term benefits will be catastrophic and will in the long term give rise to unacceptable economic and other costs in the economy.</p>

<p>From the point of view of employment it must be accepted that it will be more difficult to achieve the set targets in the short term. Therefore it is essential to continue to give high priority to the improvement of the country&#x2019;s capacity to create new employment opportunities. It is equally essential to continue to pursue the important objectives of upgrading the expertise and developing the entrepreneurial talent of all South Africans.</p>

<p>In this connection the purposeful co-ordination of the activities of all public development agencies in accordance with the needs of the private sector is of cardinal importance. At present attention is being given to the revision of the National Physical Development Plan, and in the process due note is being taken of all planning and development actions so that planning guidelines at regional and urban levels can be converted into programmed development plans in order to promote goal-directed growth.</p>

<p>To give effect to the Government&#x2019;s policy of limiting State interference in the operation of the market mechanism as far as possible, the Competition Board is at present engaged in investigations in various industries with a view to eliminating practices that may possibly hamper healthy competition. The recent relaxation of import control measures has helped to augment the supply of commodities on the domestic market and to encourage greater competitiveness. This should also make a positive contribution towards combating inflation.</p>

<p>To achieve greater economic co-operation with the independent states neighbouring the Republic, the Government recently accepted in principle a system of investment guarantees for South African entrepreneurs who wish to invest in these countries. Measures for the implementation of this decision in principle will be laid before you. In this connection, and also in promoting entrepreneurial talent among all people, an important contribution will be made by the Small Business Development Corporation and the Council for the Promotion of Small Business. The Council, which is responsible for the co-ordination of training, guidance and advice to small businessmen, recently commenced its activities.</p>

<p>So far as agriculture is concerned, the Republic had a good year and farmers&#x2019; incomes generally increased, in spite of rising production costs. The prospects for this year are also good, and a record maize crop is expected. In some areas drought, and in others floods, took a heavy toll, with the result that State assistance of unprecedented proportions was necessitated. Nevertheless agriculture was able, with a few exceptions, to meet the country&#x2019;s food requirements. As in other spheres, the shortage of scientists in the public sector is causing concern in agriculture as well.</p>

<p>&#x2020;The new realism in international circles towards the key role South Africa is playing as producer of essential raw materials, is encouraging. This realism can be attributed to the steady increases in exports of those commodities which are of crucial importance to the economies of the Western World.</p>

<p>A fundamental principle in the Government&#x2019;s energy policy is to aim at becoming self-supporting. This in effect means a limitation of the increase, if not a curtailment, of crude-oil imports and an increased production of alternative fuels from indigenous feed stock. In this respect the private sector should be able to play an important role. The interest shown by the private sector in energy affairs is encouraging and attention is at present being given to ways in which interactions between the public and private sectors can <span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0026"/>be stimulated in energy affairs of national concern.</p>

<p>Energy conservation is of vital importance. The high cost of energy makes it essential that all forms of energy should be used efficiently and conserved wherever possible.</p>

<p>Science and technology still have an extremely important role to play in the future development of the Republic, especially in relation to the supply of food and energy, mineral exploitation and infrastructural services. Hence the shortage of highly trained manpower, and especially natural scientists, is at present cause for concern and has an inhibitory effect on our national research effort. The envisaged establishment of a professional council for registered scientists should contribute to an improvement in this important field.</p>

<p>In regard to manpower utilization 1981 may justly be considered a most important year. During the first half of the year, significant progress was made in developing, utilizing and conserving the country&#x2019;s entire work force. Important changes in the Workmen&#x2019;s Compensation Act and the Unemployment Insurance Act provided for improved benefits and parity between beneficiaries. Positive results were also achieved with the training and retraining of labour, and the Manpower 2000 programme proved to be most successful.</p>

<p>The current Session will be marked by the introduction of measures to provide for the active promotion of co-ordinated and improved training guidance and placement services to all workseekers, and to regulate further relations between employers and employees in the interest of stability and order. The final parts of the Report of the Commission of Inquiry into Labour Legislation and the relevant Government White Papers are expected to be tabled during this Session.</p>

<p>It is gratifying that the new regulations published in terms of the Education and Training Act provide uniform conditions of service for all teachers in the employ of the Department of Education and Training. Of significance also are the steps envisaged for the further extension of university training for Black people in White areas. The upgrading of the professional qualifications of Black teachers is a high priority.</p>

<p>The investigation into education in respect of all population groups conducted by the Human Sciences Research Council has been completed and submitted to the Government. It is a matter for satisfaction that the implementation of the findings of the first report by the Project Committee of the Department of National Education on the quality of the working life of the educator has met with general approval. The Project Committee is continuing its investigation into further important aspects identified in the report. It is the intention to confer on technical colleges greater autonomy with a view to increased flexibility in adjusting to the ever changing demands for vocational training.</p>

<p>The provision of housing for as many citizens in the lower income groups as possible within the framework of available funds is of paramount importance to the Government. The whole matter is complicated by the persistent rise in building costs which affects all income groups. This pressing problem is receiving particular attention in an attempt to find ways and means of providing less expensive and more effective housing.</p>

<p>Notwithstanding the determined efforts being made to eliminate the housing shortage and the favourable results thus far obtained, the ultimate goal is not yet within reach. It is therefore more imperative than ever that the pace at which housing is provided should be increased to catch up with the demand, and in this the private sector, in particular employers, building societies and utility companies, have a great responsibility.</p>

<p>*While there is every indication that the development of new economic and constitutional structures is taking place along evolutionary and meaningful lines, the prevailing unstable conditions in the world must be viewed with considerable concern, particularly the deteriorating conditions in the Middle East, which may inevitably affect South Africa as well.</p>

<p>While world peace continues to be seriously threatened by the Soviet Union with its expansionist aims and actions, it is <span class="col_17-18" refersTo="page_0027"/>nevertheless heartening that in certain Western circles it is realized that the free world is faced with a global onslaught that must be resisted. There is also a growing realization that world peace cannot be achieved as long as the aggressive actions of the Soviet Union and its fellow-travellers are accepted with resignation. It is to be hoped that these signs of a greater sense of reality will lead to an appreciation of the value of Southern Africa to the free world, and the implications if South Africa were also to land in the sphere of influence of the Soviet Union.</p>

<p>South Africa does not threaten anyone and wishes to live in peace with all her neighbours. But she cannot and will not allow terrorist groups to act against her or South-West Africa from bases in surrounding countries. We trust that the countries of Southern Africa will come to the conviction that progress for the subcontinent lies on the road of positive co-operation.</p>

<p>The sustained United Nations vendetta and Communist-inspired radical onslaught on South Africa are becoming all the more fierce and are being concentrated chiefly on the South-West Africa issue. South Africa and the internal leaders of South-West Africa, on the other hand, remain prepared to seek a reasonable solution to the problem. Recently these viewpoints were once more conveyed anew to the United States Government.</p>

<p>What holds the diversity of South Africa&#x2019;s peoples together in spite of their differences are the values, ideals and convictions they have in common. The Government is displaying its firm resolve to ensure the quality of life of all people and the self-determination of all nations in peaceful coexistence with each other and to do so in a properly planned and orderly manner. To this end the mutual goodwill, understanding and dedication of all population groups and the example and initiative of their leaders are essential and indispensable.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker And Members Of The House Of Assembly:</p>

<p>Estimates of revenue and expenditure for the current financial year will be laid before you.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker And Members Of The House Of Assembly:</p>

<p>I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.</p>

<p>I now declare this the First Session of the Seventh Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#appointment_of_deputy_speaker_and_chairman_of_committees">

<heading>APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY SPEAKER AND CHAIRMAN OF COMMITTEES</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Mr. Francois Jacobus le Roux be appointed Deputy Speaker and Chairman of Committees of the Whole House.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#appointment_of_deputy_chairman_of_committees">

<heading>APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY CHAIRMAN OF COMMITTEES</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Mr. Thomas Langley be appointed Deputy Chairman of Committees of the Whole House.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#adjournment_of_house">

<heading>ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the House do now adjourn.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1981-07-31T12:03:00">12h03</recordedTime>.</p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

