---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol91 - FRIDAY 23 JANUARY 1981'
layout: debate
year: 1981
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 23 JANUARY 1981</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Members assembled in the Assembly Chamber at <recordedTime time="1981-01-23T09:45:00">09h45.</recordedTime>.</p>

<p>The Secretary read the following Proclamation of the State President, dated 23 October 1980, summoning Parliament to meet today:</p>

<p>No. 17, 1981]</p>

<debateSection name="#prorogation_and_summoning_of_the_house_of_assembly">

<heading>PROROGATION AND SUMMONING OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY</heading>

<p>Under and by virtue of the power and authority vested in me by section 25 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, I hereby prorogue the House of Assembly on the Twenty-second day of January, 1981, and I declare that the House of Assembly of the Republic of South Africa will commence at Cape Town on the Twenty-third day of January 1981, for the dispatch of business.</p>

<p>Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Republic of South Africa at Pretoria on this Twenty-third day of October, One thousand Nine hundred and Eighty.</p>

<p>M. VILJOEN,</p>

<p>State President.</p>

<p>By Order of the State President-in Council,</p>

<p>P. W. BOTHA.</p>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacancies">

<heading>VACANCIES</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>announced that during the recess vacancies had occurred in the representation in this House of the following electoral divisions:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Simonstown, owing to the resignation, with effect from 30 June 1980, of Mr. J. W. E. Wiley.</li>

<li><span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0014"/>(2) East London North, owing to the resignation, with effect from 16 August 1980, of Mr. D. J. N. Malcomess.</li>

<li>(3) Kroonstad, owing to the resignation, with effect from 6 October 1980, of the Hon. A. L. Schlebusch.</li>

<li>(4) Witbank, owing to the appointment to the President&#x2019;s Council, with effect from 7 October 1980, of the Hon. T. N. H. Janson.</li>

<li>(5) Nelspruit, owing to the appointment to the President&#x2019;s Council, with effect from 7 October 1980, of the Hon. A. J. Raubenheimer.</li>

<li>(6) Turffontein, owing to the resignation, with effect from 7 October, 1980, of the Hon. S. J. M. Steyn.</li>

<li>(7) Gordonia, owing to the appointment to the President&#x2019;s Council, with effect from 7 October 1980, of the Hon. S. W. van der Merwe.</li>

<li>(8) Cape Town Gardens, owing to the appointment to the President&#x2019;s Council, with effect from 7 October 1980, of Dr. D. J. Worrall.</li>

<li>(9) Bethlehem, owing to the resignation, with effect from 1 November 1980, of Mr. L. J. Botha.</li>

<li>(10) Griqualand East, owing to the death on 13 December 1980 of Mr. J. H. Jordaan.</li>

<li>(11) Bezuidenhout, owing to the appointment to the President&#x2019;s Council, with effect from 1 January 1981, of Mr. J. D. du P. Basson.</li>

<li>(12) Vanderbijlpark, owing to the appointment to the President&#x2019;s Council, with effect from 1 January 1981, of Mr. J. M. Henning.</li>

<li>(13) Potgietersrust, owing to the appointment to the President&#x2019;s Council, with effect from 1 January 1981, of Mr. F. Herman.</li>

<li>(14) Moorreesburg, owing to the appointment to the President&#x2019;s Council, with effect from 1 January 1981, of Mr. P. S. Marais.</li>

<li>(15) Mooi River, owing to the appointment to the President&#x2019;s Council, with effect from 1 January 1981, of Mr. W. M. Sutton.</li>

<li>(16) Uitenhage, owing to the resignation, with effect from 1 January 1981, of Mr. J. G. Swiegers.</li>

<li>(17) Piketberg, owing to the appointment to the President&#x2019;s Council, with effect from 1 January 1981, of Mr. N. F. Treurnicht.</li>

<li>(18) Newcastle, owing to the appointment to the President&#x2019;s Council, with effect from 1 January 1981, of Dr. P. J. van B. Viljoen.</li>

<li>(19) Schweizer-Reneke, owing to the resignation, with effect from 23 January 1981, of Mr. H. J. D. van der Walt.</li>

</ol>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_members">

<heading>NEW MEMBERS</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>announced that during the recess the following members of the House of Assembly had been elected or nominated under the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961:</p>

<block name="quote">(a) In terms of section 40 (1) (a):</block>

<block name="quote">Dr. M. S. Barnard, with effect from 28 July 1980, for the electoral division of Parktown</block>

<block name="quote">Mr. J. W. E. Wiley, with effect from 3 September 1980, for the electoral division of Simonstown</block>

<block name="quote">Mr. H. G. H. Bell, with effect from 22 October 1980, for the electoral division of East London North</block>

<block name="quote">(b) in terms of section 40 (1) (b), with effect from 23 January 1981:</block>

<block name="quote">Prof. O. P. F. Horwood</block>

<block name="quote"><span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0015"/>Dr. W. A. Odendaal</block>

<block name="quote">Mr. H. J. D. van der Walt</block>

<block name="quote">Mr. J. W. van Staden</block>

<block name="quote">(c) in terms of section 40 (1) (c), with effect from 22 January 1981:</block>

<block name="quote">Mr. J. F. Dippenaar</block>

<block name="quote">Mr. H. B. Klopper</block>

<block name="quote">Mr. W. T. Kritzinger</block>

<block name="quote">Prof. N. J. J. Olivier</block>

<block name="quote">Mr. J. H. Steyl</block>

<block name="quote">Mr. L. J. van den Berg</block>

<block name="quote">Mr. J. A. J. Vermeulen</block>

<block name="quote">Dr. A. J. Visser</block>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oath">

<heading>OATH</heading>

<p>Prof. O. P. F. Horwood, introduced by Mr. A. van Breda and Mr. N. J. Pretorius, made and subscribed the oath and took his seat.</p>

<p>Dr. M. S. Barnard, introduced by Mrs. H. Suzman and Mr. C. W. Eglin, made and subscribed the oath and took his seat.</p>

<p>Mr. J. W. E. Wiley, introduced by Mr. A. van Breda and Mr. J. H. Hoon, made and subscribed the oath and took his seat.</p>

<p>Mr. H. G. H. Bell, introduced by Mr. B. W. B. Page and Mr. P. A. Pyper, made and subscribed the oath and took his seat.</p>

<p>Mr. J. W. van Staden, Mr. H. B. Klopper, Dr. A. J. Visser, Mr. H. J. D. van der Walt and Mr. J. H. Steyl, introduced by Mr. A. van Breda and Mr. W. L. van der Merwe, made and subscribed the oath and took their seats.</p>

<p>Prof. N. J. J. Olivier, introduced by Mr. I. F. A. de Villiers and Mr. H. H. Schwarz, made and subscribed the oath and took his seat.</p>

<p>Mr. J. F. Dippenaar, Mr. J. A. J. Vermeulen, Mr. L. J. van den Berg, Mr. W. T. Kritzinger and Dr. W. A. Odendaal, introduced by Mr. A. van Breda and Mr. P. J. Clase, made and subscribed the oath and took their seats.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>announced that a letter had been received from the Director-General: Office of the Prime Minister, stating that the State President would open Parliament at llh00 today in the Assembly Chamber.</p>

<p>Proceedings Suspended at 10h02 and Resumed at 11h53.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>took the Chair.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#state_presidents_address">

<heading>STATE PRESIDENT&#x2019;S ADDRESS</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>stated that at the opening ceremony he had received a copy of the State President&#x2019;s Address to members of the House of Assembly, which was in the following terms:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">I am glad to welcome you to this the Fifth Session of the Sixth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</block>

<block name="quote">*Although South Africa, together with many other countries, has cause for concern about unstable world conditions in the military, economic and social spheres, the sustained progress of the Republic contrasts sharply with conditions in the rest of Africa.</block>

<block name="quote">The period of renewal and progress which the country has entered, continues. In the year ahead this process will receive added impetus from the deliberations on, and the creation of, constitutional structures which can accommodate, in an orderly fashion, the political aspirations of the various peoples and population groups and their right to self-determination.</block>

<block name="quote">The recommendations of the Commission of Inquiry into the Constitution Act resulted in radical changes being <span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0016"/>made to our Constitution during the 1980 session of Parliament. Among the most important amendments were the abolition of the Senate and the creation of a President&#x2019;s Council. As an advisory body, whose very able members have been drawn from various population groups, the Council will serve to advise the State President. For the first time in the history of our country a constitutional body has been created in which persons of different population groups can deliberate together on the future of our country. As an advisory body, the President&#x2019;s Council is not charged with the final responsibility for drawing up a new constitution, but it will fill the need for consultation in a way that would not be possible for Parliament or a Constitution Act Commission or any other government institution. At this stage the Council&#x2019;s activities are largely directed towards contributing to the process of constitutional development by means of investigations, discussions, negotiations and recommendations. As a new constitutional dispensation has a bearing on every facet of society, the members of the President&#x2019;s Council have been divided into a Constitution Committee, a Science Committee and a Planning Committee, as well as committees on Economic Affairs and on Community Relations. Since we are now on the threshold of this new phase in the development of our country&#x2019;s constitutional structure, I wish to make an earnest appeal to everyone to support whole-heartedly the Government&#x2019;s efforts to ensure peaceful and orderly coexistence in our country.</block>

<block name="quote">In the interests of the orderly advancement of the Black people of Southern Africa, and of raising their standard of living, the development of the national states is receiving the Government&#x2019;s constant attention. The Government is constantly engaged in actively promoting the constitutional development of the self-governing national states in order to confer greater autonomy upon them. The Ndebele nation will attain self-government status on 1 April 1981. Another important step has been the Ciskeian nation&#x2019;s decision, by means of a referendum, to accept independence. A new dispensation for Black people will be ushered in by the further implementation of the Government&#x2019;s decisions on the recommendations made by the Riekert Commission.</block>

<block name="quote">&#x2020;South Africa is intimately concerned with developments in Southern Africa. The stability and peaceful development of the Southern African region continue to be threatened by Soviet expansionism in the form of surrogate Cuban and East German forces and by Soviet-supported subversion. To counter these grave threats, it has become imperative for the states of Southern Africa to stand together and South Africa has continued to encourage increased co-operation and consultation in the search for solutions to political and economic problems in the sincere belief that this is the only way to achieve the stability and progress so necessary for the peaceful development of the region. An important development in this context has been the steps which are now being taken towards the establishment of a constellation of states in Southern Africa, a matter to which I shall revert presently in another context.</block>

<block name="quote">It is a matter for regret as far as South West Africa is concerned that a peaceful settlement is still an elusive objective. The South African Government has consistently over a long period proved its readiness to find a fair and just settlement for South West Africa and has firmly held the view that it is for the people of South West Africa themselves to decide their future. The major stumbling block has been the inability of the United Nations to convince the people of South West Africa of its impartiality in the light of its continued official favouring of Swapo. United Nations support for Swapo, which uses terror and intimidation as methods of seeking to impose itself on the inhabitants of the territory, cannot be condoned. The practical and visible demonstration by the United Nations of its impartiality in contrast with its past and present actions is a prerequisite to the creation of the necessary confidence that free and fair elections without a built-in advantage to any party can take place under United Nations supervision.</block>

<block name="quote">The South African Government had agreed to the multi-party conference held <span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0017"/>in Geneva last week, <i>inter alia,</i> in an endeavour to afford the parties the opportunity to resolve these problems. Although these issues were further accentuated as a result of the direct participation of the elected leaders of South West Africa/Namibia, the discussions did not resolve these cardinal obstacles. The democratic political parties were not satisfied that it would not be a case of one man, one vote, once. In addition, their concerns for solid guarantees regarding freedom of speech, the freedom to form political parties, a free and independent judiciary, a free economy, and respect for property&#x2014;concepts basic to the democratic process envisaged in the settlement plan&#x2014;were not addressed. It can only be hoped that due regard will be had by all concerned to the legitimate anxieties of the democratic parties of South West Africa/Namibia.</block>

<block name="quote">During the past year the Security Forces have again achieved great success in antiterrorist operations. A number of terrorist bases were destroyed in successful preventive operations and their command and control and logistic organizations were disrupted. The Government pays tribute to all those members of the Security Forces who have contributed to the maintenance of law and order in Southern Africa and especially to those who have sacrificed their lives in the execution of their duties.</block>

<block name="quote">South Africa, under pressure of the mandatory arms embargo, has continued to make remarkable progress in the production of the armaments necessary to defend the country and so increased the level of preparedness of the South African Defence Force. These developments have resulted in far-reaching improvements in technology throughout the economy.</block>

<block name="quote">It is equally gratifying that at a time when most countries are experiencing declining growth rates and increasing balance-of-payments deficits, the performance of the South African economy over the past year was indeed outstanding.</block>

<block name="quote">The exceptionally high economic growth rate and the large surplus on the current account of the balance of payments made possible the continuing pursuit of better living conditions for all sections of the population, and employment is running at a high level. With the high rate of economic activity there has emerged a shortage of skilled labour, and inflation remains a stubborn and serious problem, despite the on-going discipline brought to bear on official financial policy and the ever-increasing importance assigned to education and training throughout the country.</block>

<block name="quote">South Africa&#x2019;s convincing economic performance can to a major extent be attributed to the favourable conditions of the gold market and to the official policy of fiscal and monetary discipline applied in recent years. Clearly, it would be irresponsible to depart lightly from a policy with which so much success has been achieved&#x2014;and in a world economy beset by major problems. The great aim in the year ahead must be to achieve a realistic government spending policy&#x2014;a policy which, on the one hand, eliminates all unnecessary expenditures and which, on the other, ensures the maintenance and proper extension of the necessary functions of government in all their manifold ramifications.</block>

<block name="quote">Despite the prevailing boom conditions and the excellent economic prospects for the year ahead, it would be shortsighted to imagine that prosperity of this exceptional order can continue unabated.</block>

<block name="quote">On the side of revenue, adjustments in the tax system aimed at achieving an ever more equitable distribution of the tax burden and the encouragement of initiative and productivity in all sectors of the economy will receive further attention from the tax authorities. Urgent attention will also be given to the final report of the De Kock Commission, expected by midyear, with a view to obtaining more effective control over the money supply.</block>

<block name="quote">It is good to note that South Africa&#x2019;s credit rating is excellent, and that outstanding success has been achieved in raising capital abroad, not only in the form of syndicated and other loans, but through public bond issues, which are the ultimate test of a country&#x2019;s creditworthiness. It is also a source of real satisfaction that South Africa&#x2019;s sustained plea in recent years that gold be assigned a more central and effective <i>monetary</i> role in the <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0018"/>form of a gold-based international currency, is at this time attracting the serious attention of authoritative opinion in several countries, notably the United States of America.</block>

<block name="quote">Another major development, with far-reaching financial and economic implications, is the progress which has been made with the Prime Minister&#x2019;s concept of a constellation of states in Southern Africa. Following the summit meeting in July 1980 of the Heads of State of South Africa, Transkei, Bophuthatswana and Venda, positive steps have been taken to promote inter-state co-operation and development by the establishment of a number of multilateral technical committees dealing with spheres of mutual interest. This year the concept of Southern African co-operation will be taken further by the Development Bank for Southern Africa, and a broad programme for the promotion of small business enterprises, through, <i>inter alia,</i> the Small Business Development Corporation, to which both the public and the private sectors of the Republic have already pledged substantial contributions.</block>

<block name="quote">In addition the Government&#x2019;s approach to decentralization by way of regionally orientated development co-operation across the borders of national states will help to broaden our country&#x2019;s industrial base and lead to a better distribution of economic activities in all parts of the country.</block>

<block name="quote">Industry, commerce and tourism are currently experiencing buoyant conditions, as increased industrial capacity, capital investment, employment, and domestic turnover and exports all testify. Considering the important part which tourism plays in the country&#x2019;s economy, it is encouraging to note that the Republic has lately been experiencing a substantial increase in tourist traffic.</block>

<block name="quote">The strengthening of the productive capacity of the private sector, as of the economy generally, and the protection of the interests of the consuming public against undesirable exploitation are two important aspects of official economic policy. The Competition Board is investigating, among other things, the possibility of the further lifting of price control in those areas where it is justified by competitive conditions.</block>

<block name="quote">Successful economic activity depends to a large extent on an effective communications system. Constant attention is therefore being paid to numerous and important developments in the telecommunications field with regard to both the application of new technology and the demand for telecommunication services.</block>

<block name="quote">The active role played by the South African Railways in the provision of the necessary infrastructure is augmented by forward planning to ensure timeous provision of essential facilities to meet traffic demands and at the same time improve the quality of the service. Among the projects that will have a positive influence on the Railways&#x2019; ability to cope with the expected increased traffic volume are the accelerated electrification programme, extensions to the line to Richards Bay, and the new marshalling yard at Bapsfontein.</block>

<block name="quote">The rapid growth of the population in Southern Africa necessitates increased food production which, in turn, makes increasing demands on the limited agricultural resources. The optimal utilization of land is therefore imperative. To satisfy the anticipated needs of the &#x2019;eighties, special emphasis falls on in-depth agricultural research, extension services, refined evaluation and classification of resources, and the development of optimum production systems. Agriculture satisfies the food requirements of our own peoples, as well as those of other countries in Africa which, to a large extent, are dependent on food produced in South Africa. The judicious utilization of the water resources of our country is essential not only for food production but also for sound development generally. Constant surveillance of our water resources therefore remains a high priority.</block>

<block name="quote">*As is the case in so many other spheres, sound progress continues to be maintained in the country&#x2019;s mining industry. The earnings from mineral exports exceeded R15 000 million in 1980, a major portion of this amount being contributed by gold.</block>

<block name="quote">The development of South Africa&#x2019;s economic assets and the increased prosperity <span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0019"/>of her people are making ever greater demands on her energy resources. In working towards a rationalized energy programme in order to meet the Republic&#x2019;s increasing energy needs, it has become necessary to consolidate all public efforts in the energy field. Good progress is being made with a national strategy to counter the Republic&#x2019;s energy problems. It is also gratifying that the Atomic Energy Board commissioned a new isotope production centre during the past year.</block>

<block name="quote">South Africa&#x2019;s progress in all spheres is very closely bound up with the country&#x2019;s ability to utilize its manpower judiciously and to the satisfaction of all. The broad policy objectives of the Government encompass the training, retraining and effective use of the country&#x2019;s work force, the maintenance of industrial peace, and ensuring the workers&#x2019; job security, health and safety. The adaptation, rationalization, co-ordination and streamlining of labour legislation will be taken further this year, while closer liaison and co-operation with independent and self-governing states, aimed at maintaining stability, order and discipline in the manpower field, will continue to receive the necessary attention.</block>

<block name="quote">The dynamic continued existence of a society ultimately depends on the quality of its intellectual life, which also determines its national will. Therefore the high quality of service rendered by our dedicated educators at all levels, our scientists and research workers, and the leaders of our cultural institutions, is of fundamental importance to the Republic. The important research results in connection with education and educators in the Republic which have already come to hand this year and those that are being awaited will enable the Government further to consolidate and develop this sector.</block>

<block name="quote">In order to continue to raise the standard of living of all South Africa&#x2019;s people, the provision of adequate housing will be given high priority. This applies particularly to the less privileged in our country. The 175 000 dwelling units that have been built over the past six years are estimated to have brought relief to almost a million people.</block>

<block name="quote">Of late, flat buildings have increasingly been withdrawn from the letting market and converted for selling under the Sectional Titles Act of 1971. This is creating problems for tenants who are unable to afford or obtain alternative accommodation. Measures to provide more security for flat tenants and at the same time to avoid discouraging investors are being exhaustively investigated.</block>

<block name="quote">Compulsory school attendance for Black people has been introduced in certain areas this year, in order to ensure equal education for all population groups. In spite of disruptive circumstances, good progress has been made in the provision of education facilities, the provision of technical education, the maintenance of uniform standards, and in improving the quality of teaching for Black people.</block>

<block name="quote">The Government is going ahead with its programmes of rationalisation, placing the accent particularly on the increased effectiveness of the administration of the State in so far as the limited manpower situation in the country allows. Those who man the Public Service and all who are connected with the public sector deserve special thanks for their sterling services.</block>

<block name="quote">The Government is thoroughly aware of the difficulties with which some elderly people and pensioners are faced in the present circumstances and is doing everything in its power to alleviate their position.</block>

<block name="quote">The rapid developments in South Africa necessitate constant renewal of health services. The National Health Service Facilities Plan was launched last year to meet the basic health needs of the whole population by establishing community health centres throughout the country. Provision has been made for participation by the private sector, voluntary organisations and all public bodies that render health services.</block>

<block name="quote">In May this year, the twentieth anniversary of the Republic is being celebrated. The theme of the national celebrations is to be &#x201C;Unity in Diversity&#x201D;. On 31st May, South Africa will look back upon two decades of sustained development, unprecedented economic progress, splendid achievements by her people, and the unfolding of a process of constitutional <span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0020"/>development which has seen three national states gain their independence.</block>

<block name="quote">South Africa can look with pride and confidence upon the high degree of prosperity which she offers the population as a whole, upon the stability and order that her inhabitants enjoy in a highly unstable word, upon the resourcefulness and drive with which the process of renewal and reform is being furthered in the interests of orderly progress. South Africa&#x2019;s greatest asset is, and will always be, her people and their national will and determination. As Table Mountain here in our Cape of Good Hope is sometimes enveloped in heavy storm-clouds and as, once the clouds roll by and the storm abates, Table Mountain still towers there firm and strong and inviolate&#x2014;so are South Africa and her people.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">Additional estimates of expenditure for the current financial year and estimates of revenue and expenditure for the ensuing financial year will be laid before you.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.</block>

<block name="quote">I now declare this the Fifth Session of the Sixth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</block>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#motion_of_condolence">

<heading>MOTION OF CONDOLENCE</heading>

<summary><i>(The late State President J. J. Fouche)</i></summary>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House, deeply conscious of the great loss sustained by South Africa on 23 September 1980 through the death of Mr. Jacobus Johannes Fouch&#x00E9;, D.M.S., former State President of the Republic of South Africa, places on record its sincere appreciation of the invaluable services so selflessly rendered by him to his country and its people, in particular as a member of this House for more than 17 years, as Administrator of the Province of the Orange Free State from 1950 to 1959, as a Cabinet Minister from 1959 to 1968 and as State President from 1968 to 1975.</block>

<block name="quote">This House expresses its profound sorrow at the loss of an outstanding statesman, whose memory is held in affection and admiration not only by the members of this House, but also by the people of the Republic of South Africa.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that an expression of its heartfelt sympathy in their sad bereavement be conveyed to Mrs. Fouch&#x00E9; and the other members of Mr. Fouch&#x00E9;&#x2019;s family.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker, nothing I can say can detract from or add to the pleasant memories which the colleagues, friends and family of the late ex-President Fouche have of him. A great man once said: &#x201C;Service is life, life is service&#x201D;. I think that if these words ever applied to or could be applied to anyone, it is to the late Oom Jim Fouch&#x00E9;. An excellent character trait of his was that he derived joy and satisfaction from making this motto a part of his life.</p>

<p>I do not wish to repeat what has already been stated in the motion concerning the positions in public life which he occupied with so much dignity. At his funeral I quoted the words of Ingersoll which he used in 1879 on the occasion of the funeral of his own brother, and applied them to our deceased State President&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">With loyal heart and purest hands he faithfully discharged public duties.</block>

<p>I think I can apply this tribute with every confidence to the memory of our departed friend.</p>

<p>Oom Jim was an interesting personality, a humble personality and an ardent person brimming with a sense of humour, and those who knew him, knew joy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#slabbert">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. VAN Z. SLABBERT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, it is an honour for me to second the motion of the hon. the Prime Minister.</p>

<p>From the tribute paid to him by the hon. the Prime Minister it is clear that our departed former President Fouch&#x00E9; left a lasting imprint on our public life. In fact, it is <span class="col_17-18" refersTo="page_0021"/>clear from a description of his career that he devoted his entire adult life to public life. He also lived a full life, and according to general testimony he was a lovable, courteous person. In this time of loneliness his memory is a source of comfort to his next-of-kin.</p>

<p>Unfortunately I did not personally have the privilege of getting to know him well, but judging from what I have read and heard about him it is very clear to me why people speak of him with such compassion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#raw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. V. RAW</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, when I associate the NRP with the motion and with what has been said, I think of a friendly person, a family man and a humane person who occupied the highest office in our country. The State gave him the highest award, but the people were not satisfied with that and gave him the title of &#x201C;Oom Jim&#x201D;. In my opinion this is what one remembers: The way in which he presented himself to the people.</p>

<p>&#x2020;I remember him for many incidents which are more of a personal nature. Tribute has been paid to his public service and to his sense of humor, e.g. the headaches he sometimes used to give the protocol officials at State banquets when he used to egg me on to urge them: &#x201C;Let us have the toast now so that we can have a smoke&#x201D;&#x2014;and he always knew he had a good supporter for that suggestion! He was the last of the State Presidents to bring a President&#x2019;s Cricket XI to Fernwood to play against a team from this House. It is things like these that brought him to the people. Above all&#x2014;and I conclude with this&#x2014;I remember his contribution to the spirit of the S.A. Defence Force and what he did to rebuild morale at a time when it was at an ebb. He was instrumental in retaining the Navy uniforms when a change was suggested, because he recognized the strength of tradition as part of an essential element of a defence set-up. He helped to re-build regimental spirit, and Force spirit, which today still lives in our Defence Force. It is therefore with complete sincerity that I remember and pay tribute to Oom Jim for all that he did to serve South Africa and its people.</p>

</speech>

<p>Question agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#motion_of_condolence">

<heading>MOTION OF CONDOLENCE</heading>

<summary><i>(The late Mr. J. H. Jordaan)</i></summary>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 13 December 1980 of Mr. Jan Hendrik Jordaan, who represented the electoral division of Griqualand East, and desires to place on record its appreciation of his Parliamentary service, which extended over a period of more than three years.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that its sincere sympathy in their bereavement be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased.</block>

<p>The late Mr. Jordaan served for only a brief period in this House before his untimely death. Despite having had an intimation of the illness which was to cause his death, he nevertheless cheerfully continued to fulfil his duties as a public figure and as head of his family.</p>

<p>Humanly speaking, he could not have become a member of Parliament if political opponents had not voted for him, since in view of the state of the political parties in the constituency at the time, no one believed that he would become MP. This attests to the fact that those who knew him put a great deal of trust in him as a person and displayed a special affection for him in the political sphere, even if they differed with him.</p>

<p>He was a typical &#x201C;plattelander&#x201D; and sincerity and loyalty formed part of his set of values. We deeply regret his early passing and shall always remember him as a very pleasant friend and colleague.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#slabbert">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. VAN Z. SLABBERT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, it is once again an honour for me to second the motion of the hon. the Prime Minister.</p>

<p>The parliamentary career of our late colleague was cut short by his untimely death. It was difficult for us to get to know him well in his brief period of service in this House, but nevertheless we honour his memory and convey our sympathy to his family.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#raw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. V. RAW</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I associate <span class="col_19-20" refersTo="page_0022"/>the NRP with the motion and the tribute paid to the memory of our departed colleague.</p>

<p>He was not in this House long enough to make his mark in Parliament as such. We knew him as a friendly person and in his capacity as member of Parliament he devoted his energies to serving the interests of the local community in his own part of the world, and those of the constituency as a whole and the neighbouring districts. In the service he rendered to the community, he left his mark.</p>

</speech>

<p>Question agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#adjournment_of_house">

<heading>ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the House do now adjourn.</block>

</speech>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1981-01-23T12:09:00">12h09.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

