---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol57 - THURSDAY 19 JUNE 1975'
layout: debate
year: 1975
month: JUNE
month_slug: Jun
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>THURSDAY, 19 JUNE 1975</heading>

<p>Clause 10:</p>

<speech by="#webber">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. T. WEBBER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, clause 10 is the second clause in this Bill to which we take exception. This is a new provision which has been inserted in the Bill and in the rubric we find the words &#x201C;investigation of suspected offences&#x201D;. I heard a Nationalist member during the Second Reading of this debate refer to this &#x2026; [Interjections.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Order!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#webber">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. T. WEBBER</person>:</from>

<p>During the Second Reading debate I heard a Nationalist member refer to this as the &#x201C;teeth&#x201D; which the hon. the Minister is inserting in the Bill. I am the first one to concede that if the hon. the Minister is serious about what he wants to do, he must have the power to do it and enforce it. However, I do not believe that he needs the Draconian powers which he asks for in terms of this Bill. I do not believe they are necessary at all. I do not believe that it is at all necessary to insist that the officer who is instructed to conduct an investigation shall conduct the investigation as provided for in the proposed new subsection (1) &#x201C;without warrant&#x201D; and &#x201C;at any time during the day enter upon any premises&#x201D;. He can go into any place and require people to provide information, or he can inspect books, ask questions and do all the other things provided for in the proposed new subsection (2). I believe that it is utterly wrong and that it is totally against the principles of justice, as we have grown to expect them to be applied in this country, that he should allow any officer of his department to do all these things without producing any warrant at all. I therefore move the first amendment which stands in my name on the Order Paper&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) On page 14, in line 31, to omit &#x201C;without warrant&#x201D;.</li>

</ol>

<p>Sir, you will find on the Order Paper an amendment which will be moved a little later by my hon. friend, the hon. member for Berea, in which we ask the Minister to provide that this officer whom he appoints shall display his letter of appointment. In terms of subsection (1), the Minister shall appoint him in writing, and I believe it would be a simple matter for him to produce his letter of appointment. This Bill goes further and provides that this officer who may enter premises without any warrant can seize any book, document or other thing which-he considers provides evidence of an offence having been committed. Sir, we had a similar provision in a Bill which was before this House a little earlier. It is still on the Order Paper and I am precluded from discussing it, but I refer particularly to the Trade Practices Bill, which went to a Select Committee. In terms of the Bill which was returned from the Select Committee, that provision has now been done away with, and I want to appeal to the hon. the Minister to do away with this provision whereby his inspector may seize any such book, document or other thing, and I therefore move the second amendment which stands in my name on the Order Paper&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(2) On page 14, in lines 45 and 46, to omit &#x201C;and seize any such book, document or other thing&#x201D;.</li>

</ol>

<p>Sir, there are certain factors which I believe the hon. the Minister has got to take into consideration when he considers these amendments. The first thing is the ordinary practice of justice in this country, but even more important than that, within the industrial sphere, because we are a growing country and because there is industrial development, there is jealousy and hatred and perpetual vying amongst industrialists for a head lead over their competitors. There is an awful lot of industrial sabotage in this country, and there is even more industrial espionage to find out the secrets of competitors. What is going to happen, Sir, if a man walks into my factory next week and says, &#x201C;Mr. Webber, I want to see all your books&#x201D;? You know what I am going to say to him? I am going to tell him to get lost, and immediately I tell him to get lost, he is going to seize all my papers, and how am I to know who he is? He might even be a spy for one of my competitors who is coming to learn all my secrets. Sir, I commend the two amendments to the hon. the Minister</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. I. DE VILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I move the two amendments standing in my name on the Order Paper, as follows&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) On page 14, to add the following proviso at the end of subsection (2) of the proposed section 9A: <span class="col_8975-8976" refersTo="page_1371"/>Provided that, for the purposes of paragraph (c) the person from whose possession or custody books or other documents were taken when they were so seized, shall, as long as such books or other documents are in the possession or custody of the officer concerned, at his request be allowed, at his own expense and under supervision of the officer, to make copies of or take extracts from such books or other documents at any reasonable time.;</li>

<li>(2) on page 14, to add the following subsection at the end of the proposed section 9A:</li>

<li>(3) Information furnished pursuant to subsection (2) shall not be disclosed to any person save in a court of law in a prosecution arising in terms of this Act.</li>

</ol>

<p>These two amendments &#x2026; [Interjection.] Sir, if the hon. member for Carletonville will go back to sleep, I will be able to deal with these amendments more quickly. These two amendments will provide some relief to anyone whose books and papers or documents have been seized. We know what happens where a man&#x2019;s books are in fact seized. He needs those books to carry on his business. He is unable to carry on his business if he does not have access to his books. The point that is made in this proviso which I am moving is that the owner of the books will be able to have access to his books at all reasonable times. He will be able to have access to these books under the supervision of the officer who seized them and he will be able to make copies of or take extracts from the books or documents at any reasonable time. It seems to me that this provision is one which should commend itself to the hon. the Minister. It is similar in substance to other provisions that have been suggested to cover similar circumstances in other legislation that has come before this House.</p>

<p>My second amendment deals with the information that is obtained by an officer who visits the premises of a person to seize books or for the purpose of questioning that person. The information can obviously only be necessary for the purpose of instituting a criminal action against the person to whom the books belong or who is to be interrogated. My amendment provides that such information as is then obtained by the officer in charge of the investigation shall not be disclosed to any person save in a court of law in a prosecution arising in terms of the Act. The reasons for this amendment are the same as those put forward a moment ago by the hon. member for Pietermaritzburg South, viz. that industrial espionage is something that we have to take into account. We believe that this information should be sacrosanct and should only be divulged in a court of law.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wood">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">L. F. WOOD</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I wish to move the amendment to this clause standing in my name on the Order Paper, viz.&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">On page 14, to add the following subsection at the end of the proposed section 9A:</block>

<ol>

<li>(4) Such an officer shall not exercise any power conferred upon him under subsection (2) unless he first exhibits the inspection authority, furnished under this section, to the person in charge of any premises, place, goods, books, documents or other thing.</li>

</ol>

<p>The proposed new section 9A(1) inserted by this clause states that the Secretary may, whenever he suspects that anything requires an investigation in relation to sections 2, 3 or 8 of the Act, appoint an officer with a rank not lower than that of administrative officer to conduct the investigation the details of which have been referred to by other hon. members on this side off the House. In fact, the hon. member for Durban Point made a stirring speech in relation to the provisions of the proposed new section 9A(2)(d). It is therefore not my intention to repeat the conditions under which an investigation can be carried out. However, no indication is given as to how the official will identify himself to the person who is being investigated. In terms of the proposed new section as it stands he is not obliged to produce a written instruction. He is not required to identify himself in any way or carry any means of identification on him. I believe that the investigator can walk into any place at any time and carry out the very comprehensive duties that are laid down in this proposed new section. He can also demand to examine, question and interrogate. I believe that a citizen whose activities fall under the ambit of sections 2, 3 and 8 of the Act <span class="col_8977-8978" refersTo="page_1372"/>could find himself in a difficult position. He could find himself being inspected and having to satisfy himself of the <i>bona fides</i> of the person who inspects him. He could find himself in two situations. The first situation is where he is reluctant to query the <i>bona fides</i> of the person who investigates, because he does not want to cause offence. Rut if he does not query the <i>bona fides,</i> he could find himself left in the middle of a confidence trick, because it could be a bogus investigator. My hon. colleagues have referred to industrial sabotage and I believe it is something which could well happen We know that in these days of con-men, hijackers and smart-alecks it is quite easy for people to impose on the gullibility of others. I believe that the State has a duty to protect all citizens against any form of exploitation and that the owners of a factory or anybody acting under the ambit of this Bill should also enjoy such protection. I have indicated that he runs the risk of antagonizing the investigator if he queries the investigator&#x2019;s <i>bona fides</i> and it could result in the investigator himself becoming stroppy, as the hon. member for Pietermaritzburg has said, and making things difficult for the person concerned. I believe that if the hon. the Minister will accept this amendment it will tend to make for the smoother working of the Bill, because I think it will lead to the elimination of any friction that may develop between an innocent person who suffers an investigation and an inspector who in the interest of courtesy and decency, should be required to establish his <i>bona fides</i> by showing his certificate of authority before he conducts any investigation in terms of the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_planning_and_the_environment">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF PLANNING AND THE ENVIRONMENT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I regret that I am unable to accept the amendments, and I shall briefly furnish my reasons for being unable to do so. The hon. members want us to insert a provision in terms of which the official who carries out the investigation should have a warrant. I merely want to point out that the person who will furnish the warrant&#x2014;not a warrant in the sense in which the courts issue one&#x2014;is, after all, a very responsible person. He is the head of a Government department. He is a person who has status in our public life, and is very sensitive to criticism. He is a person who is in daily contact with the FCI, the Handelsinstituut, and so on. He is a person who may be criticized through the Minister in Parliament, and hauled over the coals. I think the instructions we are making provision for are a better type of instruction than those issued by an official who is perhaps employed in the magistrate&#x2019;s office and who is not held in such high esteem. I think the instructions we are envisaging are a more satisfactory form of instructions, which are more open to investigation and criticism. Therefore, I am not accepting the amendment.</p>

<p>Nor can I consent to our providing that the person may not require the books, documents and other things which he ought to be able to require, for this is in fact the evidence material which the Attorney-General wants, since he does not wish to prosecute without it. He needs the books to be able to institute a prosecution. I realize that the Opposition is opposed to the institution of a prosecution, but seen from our point of view we want to establish the necessary machinery to make a prosecution possible. Since these are our objectives, surely I cannot delete from the legislation a fundamental element required to enable me to perform my task successfully. Consequently I cannot accept that amendment either.</p>

<p>I come next to the amendment moved by the hon. member for Wynberg which asks that the documents, books or registers should be made available for examination by the owners. They must be able to make photostatic copies, etc., of such documents. As far as I am concerned, it is obvious that this should be the case, and I am giving the unqualified assurance tonight that this will in fact be the case. The hon. members must bear in mind that the FCI will read every word I have spoken during this debate, and quite rightly, too. They will look after the interest of their members on the basis of my words here. It goes without saying that the persons from whom such documents are taken will be able to examine them. They will also be able to make copies of such documents as it suits them, and as is being requested here. Therefore I regard it as unnecessary to include such provisions in the legislation. Then, too, there is the question of secrecy. In this regard I want to say that every Public Servant signs an oath of secrecy the day he joins the Public Service, and he may use any knowledge which he acquires only in the course of his service. If he does so outside the scope of his service, he could expose himself to the heaviest of <span class="col_8979-8980" refersTo="page_1373"/>penalties. I have no objection to this, but I honestly think that it is not necessary to state this, because the people whom we are going to send are not people whom we are going to pick up off the streets and appoint to the inspectorate. These are responsible people of our department, people who have already taken an oath of secrecy.</p>

<p>The hon. member for Berea said that the inspector should be able to identify himself. His amendment is aimed at achieving this end. I just want to say that such a person could be identified in three ways. In the first place he would have a letter from the Secretary for Planning. Hon. members may now say that this letter may have been forged. In the second place I would, if I were an industrialist&#x2014;and industrialists would do well to take note of what I am saying this evening&#x2014;ask this person: &#x201C;How am I to know that you are the Mr. Prins mentioned here?&#x201D; To which he could reply: &#x201C;Here is my identity card&#x201D;. I shall instruct the Secretary for Planning to inform the officials whom he will send that they should identify themselves not only by means of the letter, but also by means of their identity cards. In addition any industrialist would be free, if he still has any doubts, to telephone my department immediately and say: &#x201C;I have here a certain Mr. X who is carrying out an inspection. Did you send him?&#x201D; Then this could immediately be verified. For those reasons I am not prepared to accept the amendments. I have given these assurances, and if the Opposition is not prepared to accept them, we shall simply have to vote again.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wood">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">L. F. WOOD</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I am sorry that the hon. the Minister will not accept this amendment. I think it embodies a perfectly reasonable request and I do not think that the hon. the Minister has given any convincing and valid reason for not accepting this particular amendment. There are precedents one can refer to. As far as I know, there are precedents going back to 1964: The Atmospheric Pollution Act, for instance, provides that any inspector in terms of the Act shall produce evidence of his identity before he carries out his duty. As far as I know there have been no problems during the almost 11 years of the operation of the Act. The Hazardous Substances Act has the same conditions. The Dental Mechanicians Act and the Drugs Control Act are further examples. The hon. the Minister referred to the fact that the people in his department who will conduct the investigations are senior people: But also the people who conduct the investigations under the Drugs Control Act are professional people with high, qualifications and integrity. Nevertheless, the Act insists that they should act in the manner I have referred to. Under the Foods, Cosmetics and Disinfectants Act a similar provision applies. I believe that if the hon. the Minister wants this measure to function smoothly, there is no valid reason why he should not accept a perfectly sensible amendment, a provision which has already withstood the test under other Acts.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#webber">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. T. WEBBER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, everything the hon. member has said is correct; it is so true! What is also true, is that the hon. the Minister has, in fact, indicated that he agrees with the amendment. He now says he will issue an instruction to the Secretary of the department to see that the officials who are appointed to conduct these investigations do precisely what the hon. member for Berea has asked. Why is the hon. the Minister being so stubborn? Why is he not prepared to amend the Bill? The point is that what he has said in this House has no force outside.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wood">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">L. F. WOOD</person>:</from>

<p>Let us have a nice end to the session.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#webber">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. T. WEBBER</person>:</from>

<p>As the hon. member for Berea pointed out, it is for the sake of the protection of the industrialist. I want to agree with what the hon. the Minister said regarding the Secretary. I want to agree that he is a man of integrity and will appoint senior officials of his department who are also people of integrity, people whom we can respect and trust to do their job properly. However, how does the industrialist, the shopkeeper, the land-owner, the house-owner or whoever it might be, know that that is the official concerned? When Joe Soap arrives, he says: &#x201C;I am an inspector from the Department of Planning&#x201D;. The householder or the industrialist asks: &#x201C;Please, can you identify yourself?&#x201D;, and he says: &#x201C;I am under no obligation whatsoever to identify myself.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_walt">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. J. D. VAN DER WALT</person>:</from>

<p>You are talking nonsense.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#webber">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. T. WEBBER</person>:</from>

<p>He can, because there is no obligation placed on him in terms of this measure. There is no protection whatsoever for the industrialist. This is <span class="col_8981-8982" refersTo="page_1374"/>the point. The hon. the Minister agrees with us in essence but will not accept the amendment. Will he give us an undertaking that he will consider these amendments and perhaps introduce them during the next session? Will he make just this one little concession? We agree with him and are <i>ad idem</i> with him, but through, sheer stubbornness and pigheadedness the hon. the Minister does not want to accept these amendments. I really cannot understand it. It is no good his saying that it is not necessary and that he will issue an instruction.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_planning_and_the_environment">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF PLANNING AND THE ENVIRONMENT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, it is not a question of stubbornness. I do not feel that there is any sense in accepting these amendments. Can you imagine any person coming on to any premises and saying that he is an inspector? Can you imagine any industrialist falling for a ruse like that? It is a most reasonable thing and the most elementary and natural right he has; it is a common law right, and an industrialist is not guilty of any offence if he tells a person that if he cannot identify himself, he cannot permit him on his premises. If such a person cannot produce a document to identify himself, the industrialist can tell that person that he is not prepared to talk to him or to answer his questions, and that he must go away because he is wasting his time. This speaks for itself. I am not averse to the amendments but I do feel that it is really not necessary to put them in the Bill. If I find during the administration Of this Bill that it is necessary to do so, if the FCI after a short period requests me to put them into the Bill, I will do so. I go on record as saying that. If the FCI requests me to put these matters embodied in the various amendments into this measure, although, I do not deem them to be necessary for the administration thereof, I will comply.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#webber">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. T. WEBBER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I want to tell the hon. the Minister that what he is now saying is that all the Acts that were mentioned by my hon. friend for Berea have unnecessary clauses in them. Obviously his colleagues in the Cabinet do not agree with him regarding the necessity for these provisions. If you will allow me briefly, Sir, to refer to clause 11, I want to draw the attention of the hon. the Minister to the new section 11(1)(e) inserted by clause 11, where it becomes an offence for any person who &#x201C;hinders or obstructs any such officer in the exercise of his powers in terms of the said section 9A&#x201D;. Let us say that this officer arrives at my factory and says that he is an inspector from the Department. On requesting his authority, he may then reply: &#x201C;Look, I am an inspector. Do not hinder me in my duty because you are committing an offence in terms of section 11(1)(e) of the Act&#x201D;. What do I do then? All I am asking of the hon. the Minister is to provide the protection which is necessary. If I should throw him out, where would I be then? It is liable to happen, but what protection is this hon. Minister giving to the industrialist? I am sorry, but we cannot accept his attitude.</p>

<p>Amendments moved by Mr. W. T. Webber negatived (Official Opposition dissenting).</p>

<p>Amendments moved by Mr. J. I. de Villiers negatived (Official Opposition dissenting).</p>

<p>Amendment moved by Mr. L. F. Wood put and the Committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;37: Aronson, T.; Baxter, D. D.; Bell, H. G. H.; Boraine, A. L.; Cadman, R. M.; Deacon, W. H. D.; De Villiers, I. F. A.; De Villiers, J. I.; De Villiers, R. M.; Eglin, C. W.; Graaff, De V.; Hughes, T. G.; Jacobs, G. F.; Larimer, R. J.; McIntosh, G. B. D.; Miller, H.; Mills, G. W.; Murray, L. G.; Oldfield, G. N.; Olivier, N. J. J.; Page, B. W. B.; Pyper, P. A.; Raw, W. V.; Schwarz, H. H.; Slabbert, F. van Z.; Streicher, D. M.; Van Coller, C. A.; Van den Heever, S. A.; Van Eck, H. J.; Van Hoogstraten, H. A.; Van Rensburg, H. E. J.; Von Keyserlingk, C. C.; Waddell, G. H.; Webber, W. T.; Wood, L. F.</p>

<p>Tellers: W. G. Kingwill and W. M. Sutton.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;85: Albertyn, J. T.; Aucamp, P. L. S.; Badenhorst, P. J.; Ballot, G. C.; Barnard, S. P.; Botha, G. F.; Botha, J. C. G.; Botha, L. J.; Botha, P. W.; Botma, M. C.; Brandt, J. W.; Clase, P. J.; Coetsee, H. J.; Coetzee, S. F.; Cronje, P.; De Beer, S. J.; De Jager, A. M. van A.; De Klerk, F. W.; De Villiers, D. J.; Du Plessis, B. J.; Du Plessis, G. C.; Du Toit, J. P.; Greeff, J. W.; Greyling, J. C.; Grobler, W. S. J.; Hayward, S. A. S.; Hefer, W. J.; <span class="col_8983-8984" refersTo="page_1375"/>Herman, F.; Heunis, J. C.; Hoon, J. H.; Janson, J.; Janson, T. N. H.; Koornhof, P. G. J.; Kotz&#x00E9;, G. J.; Kotz&#x00E9;, S. F.; Krijnauw, P. H. J.; Le Roux, F. J. (Brakpan); Le Roux, F. J. (Hercules); Le Roux, Z. P.; Loots, J. J.; Louw, E.; Malan, G. F.; Malan, J. J.; Malan, W. G; Marais, P. S.; McLachlan, R.; Morrison, G. de V.; Nel, D. J. L.; Niemann, J. J.; Nothnagel, A. E.; Palm, P. D.; Pansegrouw, J. S.; Potgieter, J. E.; Potgieter, S. P.; Reyneke, J. P. A.; Roux, P. C.; Schoeman, J. C. B.; Scott, D. B.; Smit, H. H.; Snyman, W. J.; Swiegers, J. G.; Terblanche, G. P. D.; Treurnicht, N. F.; Ungerer, J. H. B.; Uys, C.; Van den Berg, J. C.; Van der Merwe, H. D. K.; Van der Spuy, S. J. H.; Van der Walt, H. J. D.; Van Heerden, R. F.; Van Rensburg, H. M. J.; Van Tonder, J. A.; Van Wyk, A. C.; Van Zyl, J. J. B.; Venter, A. A.; Viljoen, P. J. van B.; Vilonel, J. J.; Vlok, A. J.; Volker, V. A.; Vosloo, W. L.; Wentzel, J. J. G.</p>

<p>Tellers: J. M. Henning, A. van Breda, C. V. van der Merwe and W. L. van der Merwe.</p>

<p>Amendment negatived.</p>

<p>Clause put and the Committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;84: Albertyn, J. T.; Aucamp, P. L. S.; Badenhorst, P. J.; Ballot, G. C.; Barnard, S. P.; Botha, G. F.; Botha, J. C. G.; Botha, L. J.; Botha, P. W.; Botma, M. C.; Brandt, J. W.; Clase, P. J.; Coetsee, H. J.; Coetzee, S. F.; Cronje, P.; De Beer, S. J.; De Jager, A. M. van A.; De Klerk, F. W.; De Villiers, D. J.; Du Plessis, B. J.; Du Plessis, G. C.; Du Toit, J. P.; Greeff, J. W.; Greyling, J. C.; Grobler, W. S. J.; Hayward, S. A. S.; Hefer, W. J.; Herman, F.; Heunis, J. C.; Hoon, J. H.; Janson, J.; Janson, T. N. H.; Koornhof, P. G. J.; Kotz&#x00E9;, G. J.; Kotz&#x00E9;, S. F.; Krijnauw, P. H. J.; Le Roux, F. J. (Brakpan); Le Roux, F. J. (Hercules), Le Roux, Z. P.; Loots, J. J.; Louw, E.; Malan, G. F.; Malan, J. J.; Malan, W. C.; Marais, P. S.; Morrison, G. de V.; Nel, D. J. L.; Niemann, J, J.; Nothnagel, A. E.; Palm, P. D.; Pansegrouw, J. S.; Potgieter, J. E.; Potgieter, S. P.; Reyneke, J. P. A.; Roux, P. C.; Schoeman, J. C. B.; Scott, D. B.; Smit, H. H.; Snyman, W. J.; Swiegers, J. G.; Terblanche, G. P. D.; Treurnicht, N. F.; Ungerer, J. H. B.; Uys, C.; Van den Berg, J. C.; Van der Merwe, H. D. K.; Van der Spuy, S. J. H.; Van der Walt, H. J. D.; Van Heerden, R. F.; Van Rensburg, H. M. J.; Van Tonder, J. A.; Van Wyk, A. G; Van Zyl, J. J. B.; Venter, A. A.; Viljoen, P. J. van B.; Vilonel, J. J.; Vlok, A. J.; Volker, V. A.; Vosloo, W. L.; Wentzel, J. J. G.</p>

<p>Tellers: J. M. Henning, A, van Breda, C. V. van der Merwe and W. L. van der Merwe.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;37: Aronson, T.; Baxter, D. D.; Bell, H. G. H.; Boraine, A. L.; Cadman, R. M.; Deacon, W. H. D.; De Villiers, I. F. A.; De Villiers, J. I.; De Villiers, R. M.; Eglin, C. W.; Graaff, De V.; Hughes, T. G.; Jacobs, G. F.; Lorimer, R. J.; McIntosh, G. B. D.; Miller, H.; Mills, G. W.; Murray, L.G.; Oldfield, G. N.; Olivier, N. J. J.; Page, B. W. B.; Pyper, P. A.; Raw, W. V.; Schwarz, H. H.; Slabbert, F. van Z.; Streicher, D. M.; Van Coller, C. A.; Van den Heever, S. A.; Van Eck, H. J.; Van Hoogstraten, H. A.; Van Rensburg, H. E. J.; Von Keyserlingk, C. C.; Waddell, G. H.; Webber, W. T.; Wood, L. F.</p>

<p>Tellers: W. G. Kingwill and W. M. Sutton.</p>

<p>Clause agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause 11:</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#miller">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. MILLER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I move the following amendment standing in my name on the Order Paper&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">On page 16, in line 30, after &#x201C;continued&#x201D;, to insert:</block>

<block name="quote">Provided that, for the purposes of paragraph (c), no person need furnish any information which will incriminate him of an offence.</block>

<p>I want to say immediately that I think this amendment is a self-evident one and I sincerely hope that the hon. the Minister will accept it because it is recognized legal practice in our country that a person, when he is in the witness box, is not obliged to answer a question which may incriminate him. I want to go a little further because I do not think that even the Minister will deny the fact that the clause itself is extremely harsh. It is very possible that he <span class="col_8985-8986" refersTo="page_1376"/>may say that this clause gives him the teeth to enable him to handle the matter. As I have said, however, this is a very harsh clause indeed. If one looks at the new section 11(1)(c), one finds that it reads <i>inter alia</i>&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Any person who refuses or fails, without sufficient cause, to answer fully and satisfactorily to the best of his knowledge and belief &#x2026;</block>

<p>Regarding the question of &#x201C;satisfactorily&#x201D;, to whom must it be satisfactory? It must be satisfactory to the individual who makes the inquiry, who enters a man&#x2019;s premises to examine his books and to ask questions, and he is the judge of whether this man answers satisfactorily. It is a very severe and harsh provision. In fact, we find other instances in our law where people are even detained at the pleasure of a magistrate for some days when called to give evidence and they fail to answer satisfactorily in respect of the questions put. That in itself is sufficiently harsh, but this measure goes further and provides for increased penalties as well. All that I am asking for, in view of the harshness of the provisions relating to paragraph (c), is that the person questioned should at least have the normal protection which the law gives him in any other matter of this nature, namely the right to refuse to answer a question which he feels would or possibly could incriminate him. This also relates to confessions, and I think that any of the legal men on the Government side will immediately agree with me that in this type of provision every person is entitled to that form of protection. Of course, the hon. the Minister might say: &#x201C;How else am I to get the evidence?&#x201D; But I say that in view of the discussions which took place on the previous clause and particularly in view of the reasons which the hon. the Minister gave in the Other Place when he introduced this Bill and to which I have already referred, it is quite clear that the evidence which is called for, is the evidence that will be sought in the examination of books and in the production of records. Therefore, following the normal course of our legal tenets, a man should be entitled to this protection and I accordingly appeal to the hon. the Minister to accept this amendment in the interest of the citizen.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_planning_and_the_environment">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF PLANNING AND THE ENVIRONMENT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I am sorry, but I cannot accept the amendment. I am not trying to be difficult, but the fact of the matter is that this provision relates to any person who refuses to answer &#x201C;without sufficient cause&#x201D;. That is the one point. The other point is that the official still has to prove his case in court, and that it is not for him to say that the person failed to answer fully and satisfactorily. That is for the court to find. The court will find the person guilty, and not us. But we do, after all, have to have the information from the documents, and we also have to ask this person questions. However, if the person refuses to answer any questions he may simply say, in terms of the hon. member&#x2019;s amendment: &#x201C;No, I am sorry, it may incriminate me and I am not going to answer your question&#x201D;.</p>

<p>&#x2020;Then, where are we? We will not be able to get him to reply to any question, because it may incriminate him. Therefore, I feel that I cannot accept this amendment. I know how this will work in practice. If the man says that he wants to see his lawyer first, my people will say he can get his lawyer and come to our offices the next day or the day after that. That is how it will work. If I accept the hon. member&#x2019;s amendment it will be a very difficult measure to apply. Does the hon. member not think so? As the provision reads now it will be very difficult for an official to go to court and prove that the man did not want to answer. The man can simply deny it and it will be his word against the official&#x2019;s word. Therefore I think we should leave it as it is and give it a trial. Hon. members on that side can be the watchdogs, and the FCJ can be the watchdogs for the industrialists.</p>

<p>Amendment negatived.</p>

<p>Clause agreed to.</p>

<p><b>House Resumed:</b></p>

<p>Bill reported with an amendment.</p>

<p>Report Stage taken without debate.</p>

<p><i>Third Reading</i></p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_planning_and_the_environment">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF PLANNING AND THE ENVIRONMENT</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a Third Time.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#jacobs">

<from><span class="col_8987-8988" refersTo="page_1377"/>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. F. JACOBS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I am sure that at this early hour of the morning hon. members in this Chamber would wish me to give a comprehensive review and assessment of the implications of this piece of legislation. [Interjections.] I am greatly encouraged by the response I get from the other side. Very briefly, however, we find it a great pity that the hon. the Minister was not prepared to accept the amendments that were proposed by members of this side of the House, which we all thought to be useful and which would have eased the administration of this measure. We are not against planning and we have indicated this all along, but we believe that what we have here before us is in many ways completely divorced from the activity of planning. We were opposed to the kind of methods which were put forward, particularly in clause 6, because we felt that inadequate protection is provided for land-owners, both individual and corporate We were unhappy about the right of appeal which was not provided for and we were interested to note that hon. members on our left, although they initially indicated that they would support clause 6, changed their minds very quickly when we mentioned the phrase &#x201C;the rule of law&#x201D; and, in fact, turned against it. We are opposed to the Draconian measures in clause 10. We believe that the powers asked for here will clash completely with the activity of planning. Planning is not a new thing. Many of us have been concerned with it in big business organizations, and if there is one lesson that is learnt in big business, it is that planning must be a staff function, an advisory function, and you must divorce it from executive activity. We believe that what the hon. the Minister is doing here is that he is in fact including certain operating activities and we believe that this is wrong. We accept the objectives of decentralization, but we do not believe that it should be done in the way it is being done here. We believe that you must provide a magnet to draw people there and that one should not use the big stick as is being done here. The hon. the Minister indicated that he wants these powers to give impetus to the border areas scheme. We are opposed to border area schemes and we have indicated this on many an occasion. We have never objected to decentralization to the homelands themselves, but we do not support what is being done here. We believe that what is being provided here will retard the development of the homelands. You are siphoning off their labour and all the taxes that are being paid accrue to the White Exchequer and do not go to the homelands itself. We are opposed to this measure because we believe that it emphasizes once again the growth of bureaucracy and in this case, it goes further because it gives bureaucracy some &#x201C;teeth&#x201D; as well. We are not opposed to the idea of a planned economy, but we are opposed to this particular measure as it is not positive but uses negative procedures. It is not voluntary, but mandatory and it does not depend on the planning of natural resources, but what is involved here is planning based on racial ratios. We know of no country in the world where this kind of procedure will be tolerated. We feel that it is tragic that the limited staff we have in this department are to be used for the purposes as specified in this measure. We find the measure repugnant to the free enterprise system, because here you have a measure where, if you use and employ one additional Black man, this whole rigmarole is to be introduced. We believe the hon. the Minister will fail in this measure. The hon. the Minister will find himself in a position where he can influence this matter only in a very marginal way. We believe that it will one day be shown in some kind of museum as a relic of the philosophy which is based on a myth. The hon. the Minister is shouting against thunder, because ultimately the tendency will be &#x2026; [Interjections.] We are not supporting the hon. the Minister in his folly and that is why we are opposed to this Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#webber">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. T. WEBBER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we have witnessed here this evening another chapter in the sad saga of the erosion of provincial powers by this Government. We have seen here the end of the powers of the provinces to plan their own development and to look after their own future. We have seen here the jealousy of this Government at last get the better of them. This is another manifestation of the megalomania of the Nationalist Party, who cannot afford and cannot allow any other person or any other body to do anything, or to decide anything for themselves.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker, you are aware that our attitude towards the government of the Republic is based on a federal plan. We believe that this is one of the powers which should have been decentralized. We believe that this is one of the powers that should have been left in the hands of the provinces <span class="col_8989-8990" refersTo="page_1378"/>and of the legislative Assemblies. This was not to be, and through weight of numbers the Government has won the day.</p>

<p>It is in particular a sad day for Natal, Natal which has led the field in the sphere of planning in this country. I think that I have to perform one last sad duty before I sit down tonight.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hayward">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">S. A. S. HAYWARD</person>:</from>

<p>Don&#x2019;t cry.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#webber">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. T. WEBBER</person>:</from>

<p>That is to speak the epitaph which will be inscribed over the Natal Town and Regional Planning Commission, and in this respect I would like to paraphrase Pitt and the words that he spoke after Trafalgar. I would like to say: &#x201C;You have inspired Natal by your exertions, and South Africa by your example. Rest in peace.&#x201D; [Interjections.]</p>

<p>In conclusion I would like to say to the hon. the Minister, in all sincerity and in all seriousness, that I wish him well with this Bill. I wish him well with the intentions that he stated here tonight and I sincerely hope that all that he has said, and all the good intentions which he has expressed, are in fact going to come to pass and that he will administer this Bill in such a way that it can only be to the benefit of South Africa.</p>

<p>Question put,</p>

<p>Upon which the House divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;84: Albertyn, J. T.; Aucamp, P. L. S.; Badenhorst, P. J.; Ballot, G. C.; Barnard, S. P.; Botha, G. F.; Botha, J. C. G.; Botha, L. J.; Botha, P. W.; Botma, M. C.; Brandt, J. W.; Clase, P. J.; Coetsee, H. J.; Coetzee, S. F.; Cronje, P.; De Beer, S. J.; De Jager, A. M. van A.; De Klerk, F. W.; De Villiers, D. J.; Du Plessis, B. J.; Du Plessis, G. C.; Du Toit, J. P.; Greeff, J. W.; Grobler, W. S. J.; Hayward, S. A. S.; Hefer, W. J.; Herman, F.; Heunis, J. C.; Hoon, J. H.; Janson, J.; Janson, T. N. H.; Koornhof, P. G. J.; Krijnauw, P. H. J.; Le Roux, F. J. (Brakpan); Le Roux, F. J. (Hercules); Le Roux, Z. P.; Loots, J. J.; Louw, E.; Malan, G. F.; Malan, J. J.; Malan, W. C.; Marais, P. S.; McLachlan, R.; Meyer, P. H.; Morrison, G. de V.; Nel, D. J. L.; Niemann, J. J.; Nothnagel, A. E.; Palm, P. D.; Pansegrouw, J. S.; Potgieter, J. E.; Potgieter, S. P.; Reyneke, J. P. A.; Schoeman, J. C. B.; Scott, D. B.; Smit, H. H.; Snyman, W. J.; Swiegers, J. G.; Terblanche, G. P. D.; Ungerer, J. H. B.; Uys, C.; Van Breda, J. C.; Van den Berg, J. C.; Van der Merwe, C. V.; Van der Merwe, H. D. K.; Van der Merwe, W. L.; Van der Spuy, S. J. H.; Van der Walt, H. J. D.; Van Heerden, R. F.; Van Rensburg, H. M. J.; Van Tonder, J. A.; Van Wyk, A. C.; Van Zyl, J. J. B.; Venter, A. A.; Viljoen, P. J. van B.; Vilonel, J. J.; Vlok, A. J.; Volker, V. A.; Vosloo, W. L.; Wentzel, J. J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: J. M. Henning, S. F. Kotz&#x00E9;, P. C. Roux and N. F. Treurnicht.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;40: Aronson, T.; Baxter, D. D.; Bell, H. G. H.; Boraine, A. L.; Cadman, R. M; Dalling, D. J.; Deacon, W H. D.; De Villiers, I. F. A.; De Villiers, J. I.; De Villiers, R. M.; Eglin, C. W.; Enthoven (t&#x2019; Hooft), R. E.; Graaff, De V.; Hughes, T. G.; Jacobs, G. F.; Lorimer, R. J.; McIntosh, G. B. D.; Miller, H.; Mills, G. W.; Murray, L. G.; Oldfield, G. N.; Olivier, N. J. J.; Page, B. W. B.; Pyper, P. A.; Raw, W. V.; Schwarz, H. H.; Slabbert, F. van Z.; Streicher, D. M.; Suzman, H.; Van Coller, C. A.; Van den Heever, S. A.; Van Eck, H. J.; Van Hoogstraten, H. A.; Van Rensburg, H. E. J.; Von Keyserlingk, C. C.; Waddell, G. H.; Webber, W. T.; Wood, L. F.</p>

<p>Tellers: W. G. Kingwill and W. M. Sutton.</p>

<p>Question agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a Third Time.</p>

</speech>

<debateSection name="#suspension_of_business">

<heading>SUSPENSION OF BUSINESS</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the House now suspend business until 1.10 a.m., provided that Mr. Speaker may if he thinks fit, accelerate or postpone the time for the resumption of business.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Business suspended at 12.55 a.m. and resumed at 1.6 a.m.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#adjournment_of_house">

<heading><span class="col_8991-8992" refersTo="page_1379"/>ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary> <speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, before I move the adjournment of the House, I have two minor duties to perform. This is a special occasion. It does not happen every day that we refer in this House to a person who is not really a member of the House, but who has nevertheless experienced with us the weal and woe of this House for almost a lifetime. I am referring to Mr. A. J. Classen of SAPA, who has for 35 years rendered service for SAPA in the House of Assembly as well as in the Senate.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_members">

<from><person refersTo="hansard_za">*HON. MEMBERS</person>:</from>

<p>Hear, hear!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>He began his journalistic career on 1 June 1938, when SAPA was established. He enjoyed the confidence of important parliamentarians spell as Gen. Smuts, Dr. Malan, Dr. Verwoerd, the present Prime Minister and others. He was a trusted figure to all parties in the House of Assembly, and I think a friend to all. In 1958 he represented the South African Press at the Commonwealth Conference on Economics and Trade in Montreal, and represented SAPA in London on the historic occasion of the last conference of Commonwealth countries in which South Africa participated. I think I am speaking on behalf of us all when I convey our good wishes to him and his family, and on the occasion of his retirement now, wish them everything of the best for the years which lie ahead. We wish to give them the assurance that our memories of them will be pleasant ones.</p>

<p>While I am speaking, I should also, before I move the adjournment, simply like to inform this House on behalf of the Prime Minister that a proclamation will be issued summoning Parliament to meet again on 23 January 1976.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I now move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the House do now adjourn.</block> </speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House had the opportunity a little while back to take leave of Mr. Classen, to offer him our felicitations, our thanks and our best wishes for the future. I think I can say that I have had considerable experience of his ability, his impartiality, his perspicacity and his helpfulness, not only here in Parliament but in many other parts of South Africa. He is one of those exceptional people in the Press world to whom truth and accuracy were inviolable. His summaries and his precis were masterly and models of impartiality. I have known him a long time and I have never known him to break a confidence, not even after the passage of years. I think that has earned him not only the respect of both sides of the House, but also friends on both sides of the House. We on this side would like to be associated with the words that have come from the Leader of the House, and extend to him also our very best wishes for a happy retirement. Our best wishes also to his wife.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#suzman">

<from>Mrs. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. SUZMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, it remains only for me to say that we on these benches would like to associate ourselves with the words that have been uttered by the Leader of the House and the Leader of the Opposition. I have had a very long, friendly and co-operative association with Mr. Classen, and I wish him a very happy and healthy retirement. I must say that he has my utmost admiration for his stamina in lasting all these years with all my colleagues.</p>

<p>Motion agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1975-06-18T01:12:00">1.12 a.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#orders_which_dropped_owing_to_the_prorogation_of_parliament">

<heading>ORDERS WHICH DROPPED OWING TO THE PROROGATION OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Consideration of Third Report of Select Committee on Bantu Affairs [S.C. 9a&#x2014;&#x2019;75]&#x2014;(Minister of Bantu Administration and Development).</p>

<p>Consideration of Second Report of Select Committee on Public Accounts [S C. 1&#x2014;&#x2019;75]&#x2014;(Minister of Finance).</p>

<p>Consideration of Report of Select Committee on the Electoral Consolidation Act [S.C. 5&#x2014;&#x2019;75]&#x2014;(Minister of the Interior).</p>

<p>Committee Stage,&#x2014;Trade Practices Bill [A.B. 25&#x2014;&#x2019;75]&#x2014;[Sel. Com.]&#x2014;(Minister of Economic Affairs).</p>

<p>Second Reading,&#x2014;Financial Institutions Amendment Bill [A.B. 38&#x2014;&#x2019;75]&#x2014;(Minister of Finance).</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#proclamation">

<heading><span class="col_8993" refersTo="page_1380"/>PROCLAMATION</heading>

<p>By the State President of the Republic of South Africa.</p>

<p>Prorogation and Summoning of Parliament.</p>

<p>UNDER and by virtue of the power of authority vested in me by section 25 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, I hereby prorogue Parliament until Friday, the Twenty-Third day of January, 1976, and I declare that the Third Session of the Fifth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa will commence at Cape Town on that day for the dispatch of business.</p>

<p>Given under my hand and the Seal of the Republic of South Africa at Pretoria, on this Nineteenth day of June, One thousand Nine hundred and Seventy-five.</p>

<p>N. DIEDERICHS,</p>

<p>State President.</p>

<p>By Order of the State President-in-Council,</p>

<p>B. J. VORSTER.</p>

<p>No. 151, 1975.]</p>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#appendix">

<heading><span class="col_I01" refersTo="page_1381"/>APPENDIX</heading>

<debateSection name="#index_to_speeches">

<heading><noteRef href="#note01_p1380" marker="*"/>INDEX TO SPEECHES</heading>

<p>Abbreviations&#x2014;(R.)&#x2014;&#x201C;Reading&#x201D;; (C.)&#x2014;&#x201C;Committee&#x201D;; (A.)&#x2014;&#x201C;Amendment&#x201D;;S.C.&#x2014;&#x201C;Select Committee&#x201D;.</p>

<p><b>ALBERTYN, Mr. J. T. (False Bay)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Housing (A.) (3R.), 4109.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5812; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6449; Public Works, 6708; Community Development, 6833, 6835, 6841.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>ARONSON, Mr. T. (Walmer)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1510; (C.), 2090.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2441.</li>

<li>Trade Practices (2R.), 2787.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (C.), 3556.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3771; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Interior, 5144; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5809; Public Works, 6711, 6718; Community Development, 6837; Economic Affairs, 8362.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 4526; (C.), 5905, 5910, 5912, 6206, 6213; (3R.), 6233.</li>

<li>Exchequer and Audit (2R.), 7224, 7279.</li>

<li>Finance (2R.), 8804.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8899; (C.), 8948.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>AUCAMP, Mr. P. L S. (Bloemfontein East)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2278, 2280.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4490; Interior, 5120; Health, 5749; (3R.), 8590.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 6965.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 323.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BADENHORST, Mr. P. J. (Oudtshoorn)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2507.</li>

<li>Co-operative Societies (A.) (2R.), 3097; (C.), 4122.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3333.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Water Affairs, 5596; Forestry, 5667; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5805; Agriculture, 7714; Sport and Recreation, 8060; Tourism, 8253.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 257.</li>

<li>Merit Selection of Sportsmen, 3184.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BALLOT, Mr. G. C. (Overvaal)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 4989; Police, 7545.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I02" refersTo="page_1382"/><b>BARNARD, Mr. S. P. (Langlaagte)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1420.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1552.</li>

<li>Housing (A.) (C.), 4096.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 4670; (C.), 5918.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6638; Community Development, 6805; Sport and Recreation, 8069; (3R.), 8558.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BARTLETT, Mr. G. S. (Amanzimtoti)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2232; (C.), 2484.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5336; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6595; Agriculture, 7710.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Supply of Food and Raw Materials, 776.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BASSON, Mr. J. D. du P. (Beznidenhout)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1186, 1237.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1701, 1721, 1724.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3354; (C.), 3535, 3555; (3R.), 4071.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4486; Foreign Affairs, 4741, 4838; Information, 5008, 5016; Interior, 5137; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5802.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 54.</li>

<li>Co-operation Among and Assistance to Countries in Africa South of the Sahara, 2176.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6029.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BAXTER, Mr. D. D. (Constantia)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 849, 1006; (3R.), 1391.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (2R.), 1688; (C.), 1698, 1731, 1732.</li>

<li>Groot Constantia State Estate Control (2R.), 1760.</li>

<li>Trade Practices (2R.), 2062, 2779.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3419, 3602; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 7719; Finance, 8109; Economic Affairs, 8308; (3R.), 8482.</li>

<li>Industrial Development (A.) (2R.), 4853.</li>

<li>Public Accountants&#x2019; and Auditors&#x2019; (A.) (2R.), 6509; (C), 6550; Senate A, 7602.</li>

<li>Exchequer and Audit (2R.), 7145; (C.), 7578, 7589, 7612, 7617; (3R.), 7631.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8676.</li>

<li>Revenue Laws (A.) (2R.), 8784.</li>

<li>Customs and Excise (A.) (2R.), 8787.</li>

<li>Finance (2R.), 8800; (C.), 8806, 8809.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Business Activities Amongst Urban Bantu, 1801.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Public Accounts (First Report of), 6234.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BELL, Mr. H. G. H. (East London City)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1713.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2490, 2492.</li>

<li>Criminal Procedure (A.) (C.), 2554, 2576, 3281.</li>

<li>Co-operative Societies (A.) (C.), 4132.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4602; Justice and Prisons, 7459; Police, 7540; Tourism, 8246.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 4682; (C.), 5913, 6201-5, 6214, 6223, 6227, 6232.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 6582, 6939; (C.), 7153, 7157, 7167&#x2013;9.</li>

<li>National Supplies Procurement (A.) (C.), 6976, 6989, 7000.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7179.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li><span class="col_I03" refersTo="page_1383"/>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Legal Disabilities of Women, 971.</li>

<li>Decentralization of Industries, 1666.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BODENSTEIN, Dr. P. (Rustenburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 2925.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4409; Labour, 4995; Health, 5752; Mines, 7937, 7942; Economic Affairs, 8329.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Utilization of Mineral Resources, 2680.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BORAINE, Dr. A. L. (Pinelands)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 670; (C.), 746, 879.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1745.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2519.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3449; (C.), 3545; (3R.), 4011.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3736; (C.). <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4786; Labour, 4927, 4938; Bantu Administration and Development, 5409; Bantu Education, 5498; Health, 5733; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6423, 6430; Justice and Prisons, 7370; Police, 7529; (3R.), 8552.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (3R.), 4716.</li>

<li>Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works (A.) (2R.), 5891; (C.), 5902.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (A.) (2R.), 6483; (C.), 6554.</li>

<li>Unemployment Insurance (A.) (2R.), 7310.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 317.</li>

<li>Legal Disabilities of Women, 984.</li>

<li>Labour Situation in S.A., 1198.</li>

<li>Bantu Education and Training of Bantu Workers, 1611.</li>

<li>Business Activities Amongst Urban Bantu, 1827.</li>

<li>Adjournment of the House (Riots at Northfield Colliery), 1974.</li>

<li>Programmes Presented by the S.A.B.C. on Radio and Television, 2645.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, Mr. G. F. (Ermelo)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Forest (A.) (2R.), 1894; (C.), 4200.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3648; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4795; Forestry, 5684; Agriculture, 7785; Finance, 8130.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7067.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8700.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Legal Disabilities of Women, 966.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, Mr. J. C. G. (Eshowe)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2456.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3831; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5387; Police, 7543; Sport and Recreation, 8063.</li>

<li>Lake Areas Development (2R.), 4151.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6132.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, Mr. L. J. (Bethlehem)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2259; (C.), 2528.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 2979.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, 5548; Agriculture, 7802; Sport and Recreation, 8029; Tourism, 8249.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Supply of Food and Raw Materials, 781.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6109.</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I04" refersTo="page_1384"/><b>BOTHA, the Hon. M. C. (Roodepoort)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Bantu Administration and Development and of Bantu Education</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5230, 5351, 5416; Bantu Education, 5437; (3R.), 8602.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7190, 7206.</li>

<li>Transkei Constitution (A.) (2R.), 7313, 7320; (C.), 7574.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 119.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 5925, 6153.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, the Hon. P. W. (George)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Defence and Leader of the House</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1699, 1700.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.), (1R.), 3022.</li>

<li>Parliamentary and Provincial Medical Aid Scheme (2R.), 3670.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4573, 4642; (3R.), 8573.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 290.</li>

<li>Defence of Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean, 1383.</li>

<li>Hours of Sitting of House, 7044, 8104, 8107.</li>

<li>Retirement of Mr. A. J. Classen (Adjournment of House), 8991.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Statement&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Business of the House, 367, 738, 1560, 2069, 3913, 4802, 5278, 5670, 6152, 6584, 7043.</li>

<li>Termination of Simonstown Agreement, 8489.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTHA, the Hon. S. P. (Soutpansberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Water Affairs and of Forestry</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Forest (A.) (2R.), 1880, 1902; (C.), 4202, 4207; (3R.), 4211.</li>

<li>Water Research (A.) (2R.), 4213.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Water Affairs, 5605, 5643; Forestry, 5660, 5702.</li>

<li>Water (A.) (2R.), 5670, 5680.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 141.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BOTMA, Mr. M. C. (Omaruru)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4396; Bantu Administration and Development, 5405; Community Development, 6780; Agriculture, 7768.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>BRANDT, Dr. J. W. (Etosha)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>South West Africa Diamond Industry Protection (A.) (2R.), 900.</li>

<li>Mineral Laws Supplementary (2R.), 929.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4600; Mines, 7917, 7953.</li>

<li>Expropriation (C.), 7895.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Utilization of Mineral Resources, 2685.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>CADMAN, Mr. R. M. (Umhlatuzana)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1116.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (3R.), 3975.</li>

<li>Lake Areas Development (2R.), 4149; (C.), 4177, 4179, 4183.</li>

<li>Natal Ecclesiastical Properties and Trusts (Private A.) (2R.), 4189, 4199; (C.), 7670.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5234; Community Development, 6769; Indian Affairs, 8163; (3R.), 8563, 8571.</li>

<li><span class="col_I05" refersTo="page_1385"/>Transkei Constitution (A.) (C.), 7575.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 110.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 5937</li>

</ul>

<p><b>CLASE, Mr. P. J. (Virginia)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3789; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Education, 5462; National Education, 6292; Agriculture, 7830; Mines, 7930.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Business Activities Amongst Urban Bantu, 1823.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>COETSEE, Mr. H. J. (Bloemfontein West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 608; (C.), 747, 750, 887.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4362; Defence, 4549; Justice and Prisons, 7373, 7406.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Defence of Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean, 1346, 1390.</li>

<li>Commission of Inquiry into Universities, 2127.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6059.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>COETZEE, Mr. S. F. (Karas)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>South West Africa Diamond Industry Protection (A.) (2R.), 906.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 7815.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>CRONJE, Mr. P. (Port Natal)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 462.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2500.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3815; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4789; Bantu Administration and Development, 5273; National Education, 6374; Indian Affairs, 8187.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 5998.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>CRUYWAGEN, the Hon. W. A. (Germiston)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Deputy Minister of Bantu Affairs</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5311.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DALLING, Mr. D. J. (Sandton)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (C.), 742.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1276.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1560, 1567; (C.), 2766.</li>

<li>Criminal Procedure (A.) (2R.), 2047; (C.), 2560.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 2932; (C.), 3002.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3951; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Information, 5080; Interior, 5129; Justice and Prisons, 7356; Police, 7523; Agriculture, 7772; Sport and Recreation, 8040; Tourism, 8256.</li>

<li>Law Societies (2R.), 4881.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7033.</li>

<li>Second Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7116; (C.), 7131.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (2R.), 7141.</li>

<li>Revenue Laws (A.) (2R.), 8785.</li>

<li>Universities (A.) (2R.), 8836.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Merit Selection of Sportsmen, 3192.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DEACON, Mr. W. H. D. (Albany)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 711.</li>

<li>Agricultural Produce Agency Sales (2R.), 1345, 1455.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2268.</li>

<li><span class="col_I06" refersTo="page_1386"/>Appropriation (2R.), 3822; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4624; Bantu Administration and Development, 5347; Water Affairs, 5630; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6439; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6631; Agriculture, 7833.</li>

<li>Lake Areas Development (2R.), 4153; (C.), 4185&#x2013;7.</li>

<li>Water (A.) (2R.), 5677.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Supply of Food and Raw Materials, 788.</li>

<li>Defence of Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean, 1380.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6016.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE BEER, Mr. S. J. (Geduld)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4364; Information, 5032; Sport and Recreation, 8082.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE JAGER, Mr. A. M. van A. (Kimberley North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5276, 5278; Water Affairs, 5636; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5826; National Education, 6318; Agriculture, 7725; (3R.), 8495.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE KLERK, Mr. F. W. (Vereeniging)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Mineral Laws Supplementary (C.), 948.</li>

<li>Criminal Procedure (A.) (2R.), 2045; (C.), 3291.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3445.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4483; Interior, 5133; Bantu Administration and Development, 5266; Water Affairs, 5641; Justice and Prisons, 7431.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7040, 7053; (3R.), 7259.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence. 83.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE VILLIERS, Mr. D. J. (Johannesburg West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3425.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3782; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4766; Bantu Administration and Development, 5329; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5829; National Education, 6360.</li>

<li>Natal Ecclesiastical Properties and Trusts (Private A.) (2R.), 4199.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Business Activities Amongst Urban Bantu, 1809.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE VILLIERS, Mr. I. F. A. (Von Brandis)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Precious Stones (A.) (2R.), 1316; (C.), 1321, 1323, 1325.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1429.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1736.</li>

<li>Uranium Enrichment (A.) (2R.), 1780.</li>

<li>National Institute for Metallurgy (A.) (2R.), 3066.</li>

<li>Gold Mines Assistance (A.) (2R.), 3077; (C.), 3081.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3655; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4315, 4399; Foreign Affairs, 4760, 4798, 4832; Information, 5034, 5041; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5832; Mines, 7905, 7913; Economic Affairs, 8369.</li>

<li>Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works (A.) (2R.), 5877; (C), 5904.</li>

<li>National Supplies Procurement (A.) (2R.), 6923.</li>

<li><span class="col_I07" refersTo="page_1387"/>Exchequer and Audit (C.), 7624, 7626.</li>

<li>Copyright (A.) (C.), 7665.</li>

<li>Finance (C.), 8814.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 371.</li>

<li>Adjournment of the House (Riots at Northfield Colliery), 1975.</li>

<li>Co-operation Among and Assistance to Countries in Africa South of the Sahara, 2163.</li>

<li>Utilization of Mineral Resources, 2675.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE VILLIERS, Mr. J. I. (Wynberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1544.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 2903; (C.), 2962; (3R.), 3029.</li>

<li>Co-operative Societies (A.) (2R.). 3091; (C.), 4127.</li>

<li>Trade Practices (2R.), 3235.</li>

<li>Trade Metrology (A.) (2R.), 3515.</li>

<li>Housing (A.) (C.), 3581.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3794; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Interior, 5175; National Education, 6363; Finance, 8132; Economic Affairs, 8349.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 4674; (C.), 5923, 6220, 6223, 6228.</li>

<li>Expropriation (2R.), 7867; (C.), 7896&#x2013;903.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8685; (C.), 8755, 8756, 8760, 8765.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8921; (C.), 8958, 8963, 8974.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE VILLIERS, Mr. R. M. (Parktown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 616.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 2916; (C.), 2990.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3477; (C.), 3548.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Information, 5025; Interior, 5123, 5154; National Education, 6344; Immigration, 7991; Economic Affairs, 8343.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7182, 7186.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Fingerprint System in respect of Motor Licences, 835.</li>

<li>Co-operation Among and Assistance to Countries in Africa South of the Sahara, 2173.</li>

<li>Programmes Presented by the S.A.B.C. on Radio and Television, 2617.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DE WET, Mr. M. W. (Welkom)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 2940.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3943; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 4924; Transport, 5521.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Fingerprint System in respect of Motor Licences, 817.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DIEDERICHS, Dr. the Hon. N. (Overvaal)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Finance</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 101.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DU PLESSIS, the Hon. A. H. (Windhoek)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Public Works and of Community Development</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1479, 1947, 1981; (C.), 2089, 2750, 2754, 2763, 2765, 2766, 2771, 2776, 2778; (3R.). 2855.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1728&#x2013;34.</li>

<li>Architects (A.) (2R.), 2001, 2005; (C.), 2729, 2730.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.) (2R.), 2005, 2027; (3R.), 2826.</li>

<li><span class="col_I08" refersTo="page_1388"/>Housing (A.) (2R.), 3575, 3589; (C.), 4086, 4090, 4092, 4095, 4104; (3R.), 4118.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Public Works, 6726; Community Development, 6754, 6794, 6849.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No Confidence, 63.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DU PLESSIS, Mr. B. J. (Florida)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1051.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Information, 5038; National Education, 6350; Economic Affairs, 8311.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Programmes Presented by the S.A.B.C. on Radio and Television, 2653.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DU PLESSIS, Mr. G. C. (Kempton Park)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (3R.), 2595.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 2993.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, 5541; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6421; Immigration, 7994.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DU PLESSIS, Mr. G. F. C. (Heilbron)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1147.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2481.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Agricultural Land and Industrial Development, 559.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DU PLESSIS, Mr. P. T. C. (Lydenburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Land Bank (A.) (2R.), 6244; (3R.), 6882.</li>

<li>Exchequer and Audit (C.), 7578, 7586, 7621.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 7818; Sport and Recreation, 8079; Finance, 8127.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 273, 277.</li>

<li>Supply of Food and Raw Materials, 771.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6010.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>DU TOIT, Mr. J. P. (Vryburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6095.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>EGLIN, Mr. C W. (Sea Point)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (C.), 754.</li>

<li>Mineral Laws Supplementary (C.), 947, 953.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1255.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1915; (C.), 2076, 2756, 2777; (3R.), 2836.</li>

<li>Architects (A.) (2R.), 2003; (C.), 2727.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (1R.), 3009; (2R.), 3322; (C.), 3538.</li>

<li>Criminal Procedure (A.) (C.), 3280.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3918; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4328, 4456; Foreign Affairs, 4770, 4814; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5788, 5852; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6605; Community Development, 6756; Justice and Prisons, 7441; (3R.), 8453.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 129.</li>

<li>Address to the State President, 3714, 4470.</li>

<li>Adjournment of the House (Incidents at the Israeli Consulate in Johannesburg, 5183.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6046.</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I09" refersTo="page_1389"/><b>ENGELBRECHT, Mr. J. J. (Algoa)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3671; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4803; Information, 5087; National Education, 6275; Justice and Prisons, 7359.</li>

<li>Human Sciences Research (A.) (2R.), 4164.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7188.</li>

<li>Universities (A.) (2R.), 8832.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 155.</li>

<li>Bantu Education and Training of Bantu Workers, 1588.</li>

<li>Commission of Inquiry into Universities, 2113.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>ENTHOYEN, Mr. R. E. (Randburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1418.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.) (C.), 2734.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (1R.), 3027; (2R.), 3464; (C.), 3536.</li>

<li>Group Areas (A.) (2R), 3062.</li>

<li>Industrial Development (A.) (2R.), 4732, 4846.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4822; Community Development, 6784; Finance, 8138; Indian Affairs, 8201.</li>

<li>Land Bank (A.) (2R.), 6263, 6486; (C.), 6528; (3R.), 6888.</li>

<li>National Supplies Procurement (A.) (C.), 6977, 6985, 6999, 7010.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (C.), 7161, 7163.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7174.</li>

<li>Exchequer and Audit (2R.), 7283; (C.), 7577, 7580, 7585, 7588, 7590, 7591&#x2013;2, 7597, 7604, 7610, 7612, 7618&#x2013;9, 7621&#x2013;4; (3R.), 7637.</li>

<li>Unemployment Insurance (A.) (2R.), 7310.</li>

<li>Expropriation (C.), 7884, 7886, 7887, 7896.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8694; (3R.), 8776.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 284.</li>

<li>Programmes Presented by the S.A.B.C. on Radio and Television, 2650.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6065, 6070.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>FISHER, Dr. E. L. (Rosettenville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 478; (C.), 883.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (C.), 693.</li>

<li>South West Africa Diamond Industry Protection (A.) (2R.), 900.</li>

<li>Mineral Laws Supplementary (2R.X 915.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1734, 1744, 1748.</li>

<li>Parliamentary and Provincial Medical Aid Scheme (2R.), 3671.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 4247; (C.) 4701&#x2013;4, 4710, 4713; (3R.), 4715.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Health, 5718; Mines, 7923.</li>

<li>Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works (A.) (2R.), 5885.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>GRAAFF, Sir DE VILLIERS, M.B.E. (Groote Schuur)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Leader of the Opposition</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1277.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (1R.), 3013; (2R.), 3301.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4297, 4307, 4388, 4413, 4503; (3R.), 8408.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li><span class="col_I10" refersTo="page_1390"/>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Adjournment of House (Condolence&#x2014;ex-Ministers P. C. Pelser and P. V. G. van der Byl), 12; (Retirement of Mr. A. J. Classen), 8991.</li>

<li>No confidence, 15, 403.</li>

<li>Address to the State President, 3713, 4470.</li>

<li>Adjournment of House (Appointment of Judicial Commission on Disclosure of Budget) (Notice), 4061; (Incidents at the Israeli Consulate in Johannesburg), 5179.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Personal Explanation, 4058.</li>

<li>Statements&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Explosion at Sasol, 4102.</li>

<li>Incidents at the Israeli Consulate in Johannesburg, 4974</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>GREEFF, Mr. J. W. (Aliwal)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4636; Justice and Prisons, 7456.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6024.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>GREYLING, Mr. J. C. (Carletonville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Trade Practices (2R.), 3218.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3372.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4402; Defence, 4640; Foreign Affairs, 4826; National Education, 6358; Planning and the Environment and Statics, 6686; Agriculture, 7775; Mines, 7908; Economic Affairs, 8359.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>GROBLER, Mr. M. S. F. (Marico)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1742.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4560; Bantu Administration and Development, 5315; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6646; Agriculture, 7760; Mines, 7946.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6121.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>GROBLER, Mr. W. S. J. (Springs)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 2973.</li>

<li>Industrial Development (A.) (2R.), 4848.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 4932; National Education, 6368; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6427; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6681; Immigration, 7980; Indian Affairs, 8208; Economic Affairs, 8336.</li>

<li>Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works (A.) (2R.), 5893.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Labour Shortage in South Africa, 1205.</li>

<li>Utilization of Mineral Resources, 2669.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p>HARTZENBERG, Dr. F. (Lichtenburg)&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 453; (C.), 538.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4443; Bantu Administration and Development, 5262; Agriculture, 7732.</li>

<li>Land Bank (A.) (2R.), 6492; (C.), 6520; (3R.), 6863.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Agricultural Land and Industrial Development, 570.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 5949.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HAYWARD, Mr. S. A. S. (Graaff-Reinet)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;National Education, 6306.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I11" refersTo="page_1391"/><b>HEFER, Mr. W. J. (Standerton)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3745; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Education, 5489; Water Affairs, 5624; Forestry, 5693; National Education, 6315; Agriculture, 7836; Economic Affairs, 8373.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Education and Training of Bantu Workers, 1615.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HENNING, Mr. J. M. (Vanderbijlpark)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1126.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2242.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 2966.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour 4912; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6457; Immigration, 7987; Economic Affairs, 8365.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Training and Utilization of Manpower, 3116.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HERMAN, Mr. F. (Potgietersrus)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 4517; (C.), 5908.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5332; Police, 7519.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 6576; (C.), 7158; (3R.), 7267.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Fingerprint System in respect of Motor Licences, 806, 844.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6147.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HEUNIS, the Hon. J. C. (Helderberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Economic Affairs</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Fishing Industry Development (A.) (2R.), 1333, 1339; (3R.), 1340.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1750, 1752.</li>

<li>Trade Practices (A.) (2R.), 2052, 3243.</li>

<li>Trade Metrology (A.) (2R.), 3507, 3519; (C.), 3571, 3573, 3574.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3707, 3715; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Economic Affairs, 8382; (3R.), 8648.</li>

<li>Explosives (A.) (2R.), 4169, 4172.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 4215, 4687; (C.), 5908, 5919, 5923, 6198, 6201, 6204&#x2013;6, 6211, 6219&#x2013;24, 6231; (3R.), 6233.</li>

<li>Industrial Development (A.) (2R.), 4719, 4856; (C.), 4867; (3R.), 4868.</li>

<li>Regulation of Monopolistic Conditions (A.) (2R.), 4869, 4876.</li>

<li>National Supplies Procurement (A.) (2R), 6897, 6930; (C.), 6977, 6985, 7001, 7011; (3R.), 7049.</li>

<li>Copyright (A.) (2R.), 7657, 7663; (C.), 7668&#x2013;9.</li>

<li>Finance (C.), 8807, 8809, 8812.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Statement&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Explosion at Sasol, 4101.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HICKMAN, Mr. T. (Maitland)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (2R.), 679; (C.), 689.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2213; (C.), 2425; (3R.), 2587.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3934; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 4920, 4991; Transport, 5538.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Acts (A.) (2R.), 4897; (3R.), 4900.</li>

<li>Second Wine and Spirit Control (A.) (2R.), 7651; (3R.), 7655.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Fingerprint System in respect of Motor Licences, 823.</li>

<li>Labour Situation in South Africa, 1221.</li>

<li>Training and Utilization of Manpower. 3110.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I12" refersTo="page_1392"/><b>HOON, Mr. J. H. (Kuruman)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6592; Sport and Recreation, 8037; Tourism, 8273.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Decentralization of Industries, 1661.</li>

<li>Merit Selection of Sportsmen, 3167.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6042.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HORN, Mr. J. W. L. (Prieska)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2432.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Water Affairs, 5583; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5792; Community Development, 6843; Agriculture, 7707.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HORWOOD, Senator the Hon. O. P. F.</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Finance</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 846, 1291; (3R.), 1446.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (2R.), 1685, 1691; (C.), 1695&#x2013;99; (3R.), 1757.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3383, 4025; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Finance, 8144; (3R.), 8656.</li>

<li>Land Bank (A.) (2R.), 6235, 6502; (C.), 6531, 6538; (3R.), 6893.</li>

<li>Public Accountants&#x2019; and Auditors&#x2019; (A.) (2R.), 6507, 6546; (C.), 6551, 6552.</li>

<li>Exchequer and Audit (2R.), 7143, 7295; (C.), 7579, 7583, 7587, 7590, 7598, 7607, 7612&#x2013;3, 7617, 7619, 7622, 7626, 7628, 7631; (3R.), 7645; Senate A., 8821.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8669, 8744; (C.), 8754&#x2013;5. 8757; 8763&#x2013;8; (3R.), 8768, 8777.</li>

<li>Revenue Laws (A.) (2R.), 8782.</li>

<li>Customs and Excise (A.) (2R.), 8785, 8795.</li>

<li>Finance (2R.), 8799, 8805; (C.), 8809, 8818.</li>

<li>S.C. on Public Accounts (First Report of), 6235.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HOURQUEBIE, Mr. R. G. L. (Musgrave)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Rents (A.) (C.), 2072.</li>

<li>Architects (A.) (C.), 2730.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 4539, 4658.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Community Development, 6831.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>HUGHES, Mr. T. G. (Griqualand East)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1694, 1704, 1706, 1709&#x2013;10.</li>

<li>Criminal Procedure (A.) (C.), 2584.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4322; Bantu Administration and Development, 5393.</li>

<li>Land Bank (A.) (2R.), 6498.</li>

<li>Transkei Constitution (A.) (2R.), 7317; (C.), 7572.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 363.</li>

<li>Sitting Hours of House, 3522, 8105.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 5957.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>JACOBS, Dr. G. F., O.B.E. (Hillbrow)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1727.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (3R.), 2850.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3720; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4471, 4479; Labour, 4901; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6585; (3R.), 8435.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8856; (3R.), 8987.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 224.</li>

<li><span class="col_I13" refersTo="page_1393"/>Labour Situation in South Africa, 1187, 1236.</li>

<li>Adjournment of the House (Riots at Northfield Colliery), 1969.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>JANSON, Mr. J. (Losberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2474.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4438; Mines, 7939; Finance, 8141.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>JANSON, the Hon. T. N. H. (Witbank)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Deputy Minister of Bantu Administration and Education</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3926; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5299, 5412; Bantu Education, 5469, 5470, 5503; (3R.,) 8444.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 215.</li>

<li>Bantu Education and Training of Bantu Workers, 1627.</li>

<li>Business Activities amongst Urban Bantu, 1845.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KINGWILL, Mr. W. G. (Port Elizabeth Central)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1749.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3483.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5777; Community Development, 6777; Agriculture, 7822; Economic Affairs, 8380.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 147.</li>

<li>Decentralization of Industries, 1635, 1684.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KOORNHOF, Dr. the Hon. P. G. J. (Primrose)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Mines, of Immigration and of Sport and Recreation</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>South West Africa Diamond Industry Protection (A.) (2R.), 898, 907; (3R.), 1309.</li>

<li>Mineral Laws Supplementary (2R.), 910, 930; (C.), 942, 946, 947, 950, 954, 1310.</li>

<li>Precious Stones (A.) (2R.), 1313, 1319; (C.), 1321, 1324.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1734&#x2013;41, 1744&#x2013;46.</li>

<li>Uranium Enrichment (A.) (2R.), 1778, 1780.</li>

<li>National Institute for Metallurgy (A.) (2R.), 3064, 3069.</li>

<li>Gold Mines Assistance (A.) (2R.), 3074, 3079; (C.), 3082.</li>

<li>Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works (A.) (2R.), 5871, 5896; (C.), 5903, 5905.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Mines, 7956, 7964; Immigration, 8008; Sport and Recreation, 8804; (3R.), 8540.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Labour Situation in South Africa, 1226.</li>

<li>Adjournment of the House (Riots at Northfield Colliery), 1976.</li>

<li>Utilization of Mineral Resources, 2706.</li>

<li>Merit Selection of Sportsmen, 3196.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KOTZ&#x00C9;, Mr. G. J. (Malmesbury)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Wine and Spirit Control (A.) (2R.), 2740.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3665; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Forestry, 5695; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5844; Agriculture, 7722; Finance, 8135.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7208.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li><span class="col_I14" refersTo="page_1394"/>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Supply of Food and Raw Materials, 792.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KOTZ&#x00C9;, Mr. S. F. (Parow)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2289.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Interior, 5225; Transport, 5525.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KOTZ&#x00C9;, Dr. W. D. (Parys)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3690; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4453; Defence, 4606; Information, 5019; Agriculture, 7697; Mines, 7920.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KRIJNAUW, Mr. P. H. J. (Koedoespoort)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 4976; Interior, 5126; Bantu Administration and Development, 5373; Police, 7526; Immigration, 8005.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>KRUGER, the Hon. J. T. (Prinshof)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Justice, of Police and of Prisons</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Judges&#x2019; Remuneration and Pensions (2R.), 1561.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1756.</li>

<li>Police (A.) (2R.), 1774, 1777.</li>

<li>Prisons (A.) (2R.), 1777.</li>

<li>Criminal Procedure (A.) (2R.), 2031, 2049; (C.), 2343, 3263, 3283, 3293&#x2013;6.</li>

<li>Law Societies (2R.), 4878, 4889.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 6560, 7083; (C.), 7155, 7157, 7162, 7167; (3R.), 7270.</li>

<li>Prescribed Rate of Interest (2R.), 7104, 7107; (C.), 7108.</li>

<li>Second Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7109, 7129; (C.), 7131&#x2013;4.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (2R.), 7135, 7143; (C.), 7181, 7187, 7189, 7192&#x2013;3, 7195, 7208&#x2013;9, 7212.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Justice and Prisons, 7412, 7465, 7473, 7498; Police, 7522, 7536, 7560.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 194.</li>

<li>Legal Disabilities of Women, 1000.</li>

<li>Adjournment of House (Persons presently being detained under the Terrorism Act without trial), 2358.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Statements&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Incident in the Katutura Compound in Windhoek, 4673.</li>

<li>Declaration of the Christian Institute of Southern Africa as an Affected Organization, 7043.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LANGLEY, Mr. T. (Waterkloof)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4589; Foreign Affairs, 4811; Justice and Prisons, 7332; Police, 7516.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7025; (C.), 7159.</li>

<li>Expropriation (2R.), 7864; (C.), 7878, 7884, 7888, 7895&#x2013;6.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Defence of Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean, 1372.</li>

<li>Co-operation among and Assistance to Countries in Africa South of the Sahara, 2169.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LE GRANGE, the Hon. L. (Potchefstroom)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Deputy Minister of Information and of the Interior</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Provincial Powers Extension (A.) (2R.), 2724, 2726.</li>

<li><span class="col_I15" refersTo="page_1395"/>Appropriation (2R.), 3957; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Information, 5083; Interior, 5148; Justice and Prisons, 7347.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LE ROUX, Mr. F. J. (Brakpan)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1926.</li>

<li>Criminal Procedure (A.) (C.), 2556, 2574.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3880; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4782; Labour, 4945; Bantu Administration and Development, 5341; Justice and Prisons, 7446; Mines, 7927.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 6948.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Legal Disabilities of Women, 977.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LE ROUX, Mr. F. J. (Hercules)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1519.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.) (2R.), 2016.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 4980; Bantu Education, 5453; National Education, 6286; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6419; Community Development, 6787.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Training and Utilization of Manpower, 3102, 3149.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LE ROUX, Mr. J. P. C. (Vryheid)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2412.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3902; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5285.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LE ROUX, Mr. Z. P. (Pretoria West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2406.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 4524; (C.), 5910.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4627; Labour, 4999; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6648; Police, 7551; Immigration, 7998.</li>

<li>Regulation of Monopolistic Conditions (A.) (2R.), 4873.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7177.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8895; (C.), 8955.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LLOYD, Mr. J. J. (Pretoria East)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 4967; Information, 5078; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6601; Police, 7537.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8876.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Labour Situation in South Africa, 1216.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LOOTS, the Hon. J. J. (Queenstown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Planning and the Environment and of Statistics</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1727.</li>

<li>Group Areas (A.) (2R.), 3058, 3063.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6618, 6624, 6669, 6689.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8848, 8936; (C.), 8948, 8950, 8963, 8965, 8967, 8977, 8981, 8985.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 339.</li>

<li>Decentralization of Industries, 1671.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LORIMER, Mr. R. J. (Orange Grove)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (2R.), 683; (C.), 689</li>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 708.</li>

<li><span class="col_I16" refersTo="page_1396"/>Mineral Laws Supplementary (C.), 943.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1403.</li>

<li>Forest (A.) (2R.), 1901.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2334; (C.), 2418, 2503; (3R.), 2603.</li>

<li>Criminal Procedure (A.) (C.), 3283, 3298.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 4982; Transport, 5527; Water Affairs, 5593; Forestry, 5669, 5682; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6661; Public Works, 6703; Agriculture, 7690, 7799; Indian Affairs, 8171, 8184.</li>

<li>Water (A.) (2R.), 5679.</li>

<li>National Supplies Procurement (A.) (C.), 7014.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7208.</li>

<li>Second Wine and Spirit Control (A.) (2R.), 7652; (3R.), 7656.</li>

<li>Expropriation (2R.), 7864.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8890; (C.), 8961.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Agricultural Land and Industrial Development, 579.</li>

<li>Training and Utilization of Manpower, 3124.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>LOUW, Mr. E. (Durbanville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1534; (C.), 2092, 2758.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (3R.), 3033.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3861; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5838; Community Development, 6748.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (3R.), 4018. 4063.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (3R.), 7245.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Fingerprint System in respect of Motor Licences, 828.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MALAN, Mr. G. F. (Humansdorp)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2013;

<ul>

<li>Agricultural Produce Agency Sales (2R.), 1344.</li>

<li>Forest (A.) (2R.), 1887.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2429.</li>

<li>Co-operative Societies (A.) (2R.), 3101, 3592.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, 5531; Forestry, 5664; Agriculture, 7766.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MALAN, the Hon. J. J. (Swellendam)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Deputy Minister of Agriculture.</i>]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Land Titles (Division of George) Adjustment (A.) (2R.), 1476, 1479.</li>

<li>Wine and Spirit Control (A.) (2R.), 2735, 2741.</li>

<li>Second Wine and Spirit Control (A.) (2R.), 7650, 7653; (3R.), 7656.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 7683.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MALAN, Mr. W. C. (Paarl)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1016; (3R.), 1399.</li>

<li>Groot Constantia State Estate Control (2R.), 1764.</li>

<li>Trade Practices (2R.), 2784.</li>

<li>Trade Metrology (A.) (2R.), 3514.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3612; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Finance, 8114; Economic Affairs, 8299; (3R.), 8489.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8682.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MARAIS, Mr. P. S. (Moorreesburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Water Affairs, 5589; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6599.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Decentralization of Industries, 1651.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I17" refersTo="page_1397"/><b>MAREE, Mr. G. de K. (Namakwaland)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1246.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5799.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>McINTOSH, Mr. G. B. D. (Pinetown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 644; (C.), 742, 865.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1748.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1792; (C.), 2075.</li>

<li>Housing (A.) (C.), 4087, 4092, 4095, 4099.</li>

<li>Natal Ecclesiastical Properties and Trusts (Private A.) (2R.), 4196.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5318; Health, 5739; Community Development, 6745; Justice and Prisons, 7496.</li>

<li>Second Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7120.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Training and Utilization of Manpower, 3136.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>McLACHLAN, Dr. R. (Westdene)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 623.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3887; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 4935; Information, 5075; Bantu Education, 5466; National Education, 6341; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6404; Community Development, 6824.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Programmes Presented by the S.A.B.C. on Radio and Television, 2628.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MEYER, Mr. P. H. (Vasco)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4750; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6665.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Co-operation among and Assistance to Countries in Africa South of the Sahara, 2156.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MILLER, Mr. R (Jeppe)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 717.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1942.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2251; (C.), 2434.</li>

<li>Criminal Procedure (A.) (C.), 2344, 2570.</li>

<li>Trade Practices (2R.), 3226.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3753; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4450; Foreign Affairs, 4792; Bantu Administration and Development, 5269; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6415; Justice and Prisons, 7452; Immigration, 7977; Economic Affairs, 8332.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 4280.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 4662; (C.), 6210, 6213.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (A.) (C.), 6553, 6557.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7074; (3R.), 7238.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8912; (C.), 8955, 8966, 8984.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Labour Situation in South Africa, 1210.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MILLS, Mr. G. W. (Pietermaritzburg North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 715.</li>

<li>Human Sciences Research (A.) (C.), 4167.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Education, 5449; National Education, 6283; Sport and Recreation, 8026.</li>

<li>University of Pretoria (Private A) (2R.), 7674.</li>

<li>Universities (A.) (C.), 8845.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Merit Selection of Sportsmen, 3162.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MITCHELL, Mr. M. L. (Durban North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Judges&#x2019; Remuneration and Pensions (2R.), 1562.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1756.</li>

<li>Police (A.) (2R.), 1776.</li>

<li><span class="col_I18" refersTo="page_1398"/>Prisons (A.) (2R.), 1778.</li>

<li>Criminal Procedure (A.) (2R.), 2036; (C.), 2344, 2563, 3277, 3287, 3295&#x2013;8.</li>

<li>Architects&#x2019; (A.) (C.), 2727.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3364.</li>

<li>Law Societies (2R.), 4880.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 6565; (C.), 7159; (3R.), 7228.</li>

<li>National Supplies Procurement (A.) (2R.), 6902; (C.), 6972, 6983, 6992, 7014; (3R.), 7045.</li>

<li>Prescribed Rate of Interest (2R.), 7106.</li>

<li>Second Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7115.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (2R.), 7140.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Justice and Prisons, 7323, 7428, 7467; Police, 7513, 7554; (3R.), 8595.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 72.</li>

<li>Adjournment of House (Persons presently being detained under the Terrorism Act without trial), 2356.</li>

<li>Adjournment of House (Appointment of Judicial Commission on Disclosure of Budget) (Notice), 4061.</li>

<li>Personal Explanation, 8753.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MORRISON, Dr. G. de V. (Cradock)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 4276.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4462; Defence, 4556, 4609; Bantu Education, 5455; Health, 5736; Justice and Prisons, 7366; Agriculture, 7806.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Defence of Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean, 1359.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 5969.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MULDER, Dr. the Hon. C. P. (Randfontein)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Information and of the Interior</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Public Service (A.) (2R.), 1328, 1332.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1721, 1722.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Information, 5045, 5048, 5094; Interior, 5178, 5190, 5228.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 234.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MULLER, Dr. the Hon. H. (Beaufort West)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Foreign Affairs</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1702.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4733, 4806, 4842.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 39.</li>

<li>Co-operation Among and Assistance to Countries in Africa South of the Sahara, 2184.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MULLER, the Hon. S. L. (Ceres)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Transport</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (2R.), 675, 684; (C.), 689, 692, 694.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1266.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1718&#x2013;20.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 1853, 2363; (C.), 2458, 2535; (3R.), 2717.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Acts (A.) (2R.), 4892, 4899.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Transport, 5551.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>MUNNIK, Dr. L. A. P. A. (Caledon)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 657; (C.), 880.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Community Development, 6846.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I19" refersTo="page_1399"/><b>MURRAY, Mr. L. G, M.C. (Green Point)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (C.), 546.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (C.), 694.</li>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 701.</li>

<li>Mineral Laws Supplementary (C.), 953.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1163.</li>

<li>Precious Stones (A.) (C.), 1327.</li>

<li>Public Service (A.) (2R.), 1331.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1489; (C.), 2069, 2074, 2750, 2772, 2775; (3R.), 2828.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1695, 1714, 1723-8.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.) (2R.), 2008; (C.), 2731; (3R.), 2824.</li>

<li>Provincial Powers Extension (A.) (2R.), 2726.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (1R.), 3017.</li>

<li>Group Areas (A.) (2R.), 3060.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3836; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4335; Information, 5071; Interior, 5107, 5224; Transport, 5509; Health, 5747; National Education, 6295; Community Development, 6731; Justice and Prisons, 7362, 7403; Agriculture, 7700; Sport and Recreation, 8019, (3R.), 8520.</li>

<li>Housing (A.) (C.), 4084, 4091, 4097, 4100, 4103; (3R.), 4105.</li>

<li>Land Bank (A.) (2R.), 6248; (C.), 6512, 6525, 6536; (3R.), 6891.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (A.) (C.), 6556.</li>

<li>Second Liquor (A.) (C.), 7134.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7170, 7173.</li>

<li>Expropriation (2R.), 7861; (C.), 7887.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 164.</li>

<li>Commission of Inquiry into Universities, 2136.</li>

<li>Programmes Presented by the S.A.B.C. on Radio and Television, 2633.</li>

<li>Merit Selection of Sportsmen, 3150.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>NEL, Mr. D. J. L. (Pretoria Central)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2533.</li>

<li>Criminal Procedure (A.) (C.), 2579.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4319; Information, 5022; Justice and Prisons, 7387; (3R.), 8463.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 172, 178.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>NIEMANN, Mr. J. J. (Kimberley South)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5836; Community Development, 6808; Sport and Recreation, 8053; Indian Affairs, 8191; Tourism, 8263.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>NOTHNAGEL, Mr. A. E. (Innesdal)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3763; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4427; Interior, 5159, 5190; Bantu Administration and Development, 5291; Sport and Recreation, 8043; Economic Affairs, 8345.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>OLDFIELD, Mr. G. N. (Umbilo)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 632; (C.), 743, 862, 890.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1726, 1732.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1935.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2409.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3891; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Social Welfare and Pensions, 6393.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 4285; (C.), 4704&#x2013;7.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (A.) (2R.), 6478.</li>

<li>Unemployment Insurance (A.) (2R.), 7307.</li>

<li>Pensions (Supplementary) (2R.), 8822; (C.), 8823.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I20" refersTo="page_1400"/><b>OLIVIER, Mr. N. J. J. (Edenvale)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 458; (C.), 528, 535, 548.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3455; (C.), 3542, 3564; (3R.), 3992.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4367, 4440; Foreign Affairs, 4779; Information, 5091; Bantu Administration and Development, 5279, 5308, 5368; Bantu Education, 5439; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5841; (3R.), 8619.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7017; (3R.), 7250.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 206.</li>

<li>Legal Disabilities of Women, 991.</li>

<li>Bantu Education and Training of Bantu Workers, 1596.</li>

<li>Business Activities Amongst Urban Bantu, 1815.</li>

<li>Co-operation Among and Assistance to Countries in Africa South of the Sahara, 2146, 2192.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6135.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>OTTO, Dr. J. C. (Gezina)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2224.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (3R.), 3043.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Commission of Inquiry into Universities, 2096.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PAGE, Mr. B. W. B. (Umhlanga)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1754.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.) (2R.), 2020.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 2947.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence. 4562; National Education, 6338; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6675.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7175, 7188.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Fingerprint System in respect of Motor</li>

<li>Licences, 835.</li>

<li>Programmes Presented by the S.A.B.C. on Radio and Television, 2637.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PALM, Mr. P. D. (Worcester)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1436.</li>

<li>Groot Constantia State Estate Control (2R.), 1769.</li>

<li>Wine and Spirit Control (A.) (2R.), 2737.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A) (2R.), 3361.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4355 Defence, 4593; Water Affairs, 5626; Public Works, 6722; Agriculture, 7778; Tourism, 8259.</li>

<li>Second Liquor (A.) (C.), 7131.</li>

<li>Customs and Excise (A.) (2R.), 8792.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PANSEGROUW, Mr. J. 6. (Smithfield)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3731; (C.), <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4757; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6589; Justice and Prisons, 7470; Economic Affairs, 8305.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8864.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 365, 367.</li>

<li>Decentralization of Industries, 1642.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PIENAAR, Mr. L. A. (Bellville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (3R.), 1409.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2522.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (3R.), 2832.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4332; Foreign Affairs, 4801; Interior, 5141; Justice and Prisons, 7439.</li>

<li>National Supplies Procurement (A.) (2R.), 6913.</li>

<li><span class="col_I21" refersTo="page_1401"/>General Law (A.) (C.), 7184.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (3R.), 7233.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8738.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>POTGIETER, Mr. J. E. (Brits)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4338, 4507; Foreign Affairs, 4834; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5820; Agriculture, 7826.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 354.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>POTGIETER, Mr. S. P. (Port Elizabeth North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2415.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3909, 3913.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>PYPER, Mr. P. A. (Durban Central)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 628; (C.), 762.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1723.</li>

<li>National Education Policy (A.) (2R.), 2745; (C.), 2749.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 2970.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3432.</li>

<li>Human Sciences Research (A.) (2R.), 4162.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Interior, 5117; Bantu Education, 5459; National Education, 6265; Economic Affairs, 8356.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7175&#x2013;6, 7187, 7189.</li>

<li>Universities (A.) (2R.), 8827; (C.), 8843, 8846.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 264.</li>

<li>Bantu Education and Training of Bantu Workers, 1607.</li>

<li>Commission of Inquiry into Universities, 2104.</li>

<li>Programmes Presented by the S.A.B.C. on Radio and Television, 2658.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>RALL, the Hon. J. W. (Middelburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Deputy Minister of Transport</i>]&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Fingerprint System in respect of Motor Licences, 839.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>RAUBENHEIMER, the Hon. A. J. (Nelspruit)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Deputy Minister of Bantu Development</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 429, 466; (C.), 531, 544, 590; (3R.), 855.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1068.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1704. 1707-16.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4423; Bantu Administration and Development, 5245, 5398.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6073; (Second Report of), 7577.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>RAW, Mr. W. V. (Durban Point)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Additional Appropriation (2R.), 681; (C.), 688, 691, 694.</li>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 709.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1059.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1699, 1706, 1710, 1716&#x2013;9, 1729&#x2013;30.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1796. 1910; (C.), 2083, 2095, 2751, 2766, 2767, 2773; (3R.), 2846.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 1877, 2193; (C.), 2393, 2468; (3R.), 2611.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 2822, 2887; (C.), 2996; (3R.), 3039.</li>

<li><span class="col_I22" refersTo="page_1402"/>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (1R.), 3025.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4359; Defence, 4540, 4633; Transport, 5518, 5545; Community Development, 6821; (3R.), 8469.</li>

<li>National Supplies Procurement (A.) (C.), 6968, 6986, 7006.</li>

<li>Second Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7126; (C.), 7132, 7133.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8935; (C.), 8949.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 248.</li>

<li>Fingerprint System in respect of Motor</li>

<li>Licences, 812, 844.</li>

<li>Defence of Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean, 1354.</li>

<li>Amendment of Schedule to Defence Act, 4101.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>REYNEKE, Mr. J. P. A. (Boksburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1154.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1503; (C.), 2085.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2403.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime</li>

<li>Minister, 4465; Labour, 4941; Transport, 5516; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6413; Public Works, 6705; Community Development, 6767; Justice and Prisons, 7494.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>ROSSOUW, Mr. W. J. C. (Stilfontein)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2422.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime</li>

<li>Minister, 4447; Labour, 4964; National Education, 6320; Justice and Prisons, 7463.</li>

<li>Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works (A.) (2R.), 5883.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Labour Situation in South Africa, 1195.</li>

<li>Business Activities Amongst Urban Bantu, 1834.</li>

<li>Utilization of Mineral Resources, 2697.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 5974.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHOEMAN, the Hon. H. (Delmas)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Agriculture</i>]&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Agricultural Produce Agency Sales (2R.), 1341, 1458.</li>

<li>Animal Slaughter, Meat and Animal Products Hygiene (A.) (2R.), 1461, 1474; (C.), 1562, 1564, 1566.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1721, 1747.</li>

<li>Groot Constantia State Estate Control (2R.), 1758, 1772.</li>

<li>Co-operative Societies (A.) (2R.), 3084, 3595; (C.), 4136, 4141; (3R.), 4175.</li>

<li>Marketing (A.) (2R.), 3597, 3600.</li>

<li>Lake Areas Development (2R.), 4143, 4158; (C.), 4178, 4181, 4184&#x2013;8.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7198, 7200, 7202&#x2013;4, 7209, 7211.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 7738, 7838.</li>

<li>Expropriation (2R.), 7853, 7874; (C.), 7881, 7883, 7886, 7888&#x2013;9, 7892, 7895, 7900, 7902; (3R.), 7904.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Agricultural Land and Industrial Development, 583.</li>

<li>Supply of Food and Raw Materials, 798.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCHOEMAN, Mr. J. C. B. (Witwatersberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2204; (C.), 2516.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I23" refersTo="page_1403"/><b>SCHWARZ, Mr. H. H. (Yeoville)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1097.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (2R.), 1688; (C.), 1694&#x2013;5, 1698&#x2013;1700, 1715&#x2013;7, 1725&#x2013;6, 1738, 1741, 1746, 1755&#x2013;6.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.) (2R.), 2017.</li>

<li>Trade Practices (2R.), 2879, 3205.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (1R.), 3014; (2R.), 3339; (3R.), 4067.</li>

<li>Co-operative Societies (A.) (2R.), 3100; (C.), 4125, 4140.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3679; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4342, 4405; Defence, 4596; Foreign Affairs, 4754; Bantu Administration and Development, 5325; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5795, 5854; National Education, 6354; Justice and Prisons, 7408, 7434; Finance, 8116; Economic Affairs, 8325, 8375, 8377; (3R.), 8582.</li>

<li>Lake Areas Development (C.), 4182, 4183, 4184.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 4665; (C.), 5911, 5921, 6200-2, 6205-6, 6212, 6226, 6230; (3R.), 6232.</li>

<li>Regulation of Monopolistic Conditions (A.) (2R.), 4874; (3R.), 4878.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (A.) (2R.), 6483.</li>

<li>Land Bank (A.) (2R.), 6489; (C.), 6512, 6516, 6521; (3R.), 6874.</li>

<li>Public Accountants&#x2019; and Auditors&#x2019; (A.) (2R.), 6540; (C.), 6551; Senate A, 7602.</li>

<li>Exchequer and Audit (C.), 7582, 7591, 7595, 7597, 7608; (3R.), 7641.</li>

<li>Copyright (A.) (2R.), 7663; (C.), 7667, 7669.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8732; (C.), 8753-5; (3R.), 8773.</li>

<li>Finance (2R.), 8802; (C.), 8806, 8808.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence. 330.</li>

<li>Defence of Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean, 1377.</li>

<li>Business Activities Amongst Urban Bantu, 1830.</li>

<li>Commission of Inquiry into Universities, 2132.</li>

<li>Address to the State President, 3714, 4470.</li>

<li>Adjournment of House (Appointment of Judicial Commission on Disclosure of Budget) (Notice), 4062; (Incidents at Israeli Consulate in Johannesburg), 5185.</li>

<li>Amendment of Schedule to Defence Act, 4101.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6002.</li>

<li>S.C. on Public Accounts (First Report of), 6234.

<ul>

<li>Personal Explanation, 8753.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SCOTT, Mr. D. B. (Winburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3750; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 7810.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SLABBERT, Dr. F. van Z. (Rondebosch)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (C.), 749.</li>

<li>Agricultural Agency Produce Sales (2R.), 1456.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1722.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (1R.), 3015; (2R.), 3376, 3423; (C.), 3531, 3563.</li>

<li>Co-operative Societies (A.) (C.), 4131.</li>

<li>Human Sciences Research (A.) (2R.), 4165.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4431; Defence, 4569, 4586; Bantu Administration and Development, 5295; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5816; National Education, 6312; Community Development, 6789, 6810; Justice and Prisons, 7391; (3R.), 8613.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7191, 7193.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li><span class="col_I24" refersTo="page_1404"/>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 347.</li>

<li>Defence of Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean, 1369.</li>

<li>Commission of Inquiry into Universities, 2121.</li>

<li>Merit Selection of Sportsmen, 3172.</li>

<li>Amendment of Schedule to Defence Act, 4101.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6100.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SMIT, the Hon. H. H. (Stellenbosch)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Deputy Minister of Social Welfare and Pensions and of Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1727.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3467.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5784; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6459.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (A.) (2R.), 6474, 6485; (C.), 6554, 6559.</li>

<li>Pensions (Supplementary) (2R.), 8822; (C.), 8824.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SNYMAN, Dr. W. J. (Pietersburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3868; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Health, 5759.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 4282.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>STEYN, Mr. D. W. (Wonderboom)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1111.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2438.</li>

<li>Trade Practices (2R.), 2868.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 2999.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Interior, 5163; Transport, 5534; Economic Affairs, 8340.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>STEYN, the Hon. S. J. M. (Turffontein)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Indian Affairs and of Tourism</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1754, 1755.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3845; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Justice and Prisons, 7396; Indian Affairs, 8160, 8217; Tourism, 8279.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>STREICHER, Mr. D. M. (Newton Park)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1080.</li>

<li>Agricultural Agency Produce Sales (2R.), 1343.</li>

<li>Animal Slaughter, Meat and Animal Products Hygiene (A.) (2R.), 1465; (C.), 1563.</li>

<li>Land Titles (Division of George) Adjustment (A.) (2R.), 1478.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1747.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2285.</li>

<li>Wine and Spirit Control (A.) (2R.), 2736.</li>

<li>Co-operative Societies (A.) (2R.), 3084; (C.), 4118, 4138; (3R.), 4173.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (C.), 3528.</li>

<li>Marketing (A.) (2R.), 3599.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3966; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 7675; (3R.), 8655.</li>

<li>Lake Areas Development (2R.), 4147.</li>

<li>Land Bank (A.) (2R.), 6239; (C.), 6526; (3R.), 6860.</li>

<li>Expropriation (C.), 7889; (3R.), 7903.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 298.</li>

<li>Agricultural Land and Industrial Development, 555.</li>

<li>Supply of Food and Raw Materials, 765, 806.</li>

<li>Decentralization of Industries. 1647.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I25" refersTo="page_1405"/><b>SUTTON, Mr. W. M. (Mooi River)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1720, 1721, 1754.</li>

<li>Forest (A.) (2R.), 1883; (3R.), 4209.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2497.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (C.), 3544.</li>

<li>Co-operative Societies (A.) (2R.), 3593.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3697; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4348; Bantu Administration and Development, 5376; Water Affairs, 5572; Forestry, 5654; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6651; Justice and Prisons, 7377; Agriculture, 7781; Immigration, 8001; Indian Affairs, 8211; (3R.), 8634.</li>

<li>Water Research (A.) (2R.), 4213.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 92.</li>

<li>Agricultural Land and Industrial Development, 563.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6113.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SUZMAN, Mrs. H. (Houghton)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 490; (C.), 738, 757, 858, 866, 874, 888&#x2013;97; (3R.), 934.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1523; (C.), 2768, 2774.</li>

<li>Criminal Procedure (A.) (2R.), 2044; (C.), 2343, 2344, 2347, 2570, 2581.</li>

<li>Architects&#x2019; (A.) (C.), 2726.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (1R.), 3020.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3856; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5252; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6453; Justice and Prisons, 7336, 7490; Police, 7548; (3R.), 8640.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.), (2R.), 4269.</li>

<li>Second Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7119.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (2R.), 7142.</li>

<li>Transkei Constitution (A.) (2R.), 7319; (C.), 7571, 7574.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Adjournment of House (Condolence&#x2014;ex-Ministers P. C. Pelser and P. V. G. van der Byl), 13; (Retirement of Mr. A. J. Classen), 8992.</li>

<li>Adjournment of House (Persons presently being detained under the Terrorism Act without trial), 2350.</li>

<li>No confidence, 185.</li>

<li>Legal Disabilities of Women, 954.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 5977.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>SWIEGERS, Mr. J. G. (Uitenhage)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Community Development, 6773.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>TERBLANCHE. Mr. G. P. D. (Bloemfontein North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1088, 1093.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (3R.), 2605.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4776; Information, 5029; National Education, 6347; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6678; Economic Affairs, 8318; (3R.), 8514.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>TREURNICHT, Dr. A. P. (Waterberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1174.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3347; (3R.), 3999.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4818; (3R.), 8626.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Programmes Presented by the S.A.B.C. on Radio and Television, 2641.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 5990.</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I26" refersTo="page_1406"/><b>TREURNICHT, Mr. N. F. (Piketberg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3313.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4475; Community Development, 6818; (3R.), 8528.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>UNGERER, Mr. J. H. B. (Sasolburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1134.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4614; Bantu Education, 5495; Agriculture, 7787.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>UYS, Mr. C. (Barberton)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Mineral Laws Supplementary (2R.), 925.</li>

<li>Forest (A.) (2R.), 1900.</li>

<li>Co-operative Societies (A.) (C.), 4130.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Education, 5502; Water Affairs, 5619.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Legal Disabilities of Women, 989.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN BREDA, Mr. A. (Tygervallei)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1783; (C.), 2079.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2494.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5322; Transport, 5513; Public Works, 6699; Community Development, 6738.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN COLLER, Mr. C. A. (South Coast)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Animal Slaughter, Meat and Animal Products Hygiene (A.) (C.), 1565.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2525.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 2921; (C.), 3004.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4553; Labour, 4961, 4970; Water Affairs, 5621; Forestry, 5690; National Education, 6303; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6409; Agriculture, 7790; Immigration, 7984; Sport and Recreation, 8050.</li>

<li>Pension Laws (A.) (C.), 6559.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8917; (C.), 8948.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Education and Training of Bantu Workers, 1623.</li>

<li>Training and Utilization of Manpower, 3139.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DEN BERG, Mr. J. C. (Ladybrand)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4631; Bantu Administration and Development, 5366; Agriculture, 7694.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DEN HEEVER, Mr. S. A. (King William&#x2019;s Town)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 4948; Bantu Administration and Development, 5402; Agriculture, 7762; Economic Affairs, 8314.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER MERWE, Dr. C. V. (Fauresmith)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 486; (C.), 745.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 4252.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4345; Water Affairs, 5580; Health, 5721; Agriculture, 7756; Sport and Recreation, 8023, 8072; Tourism, 8243.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Merit Selection of Sportsmen, 3157.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I27" refersTo="page_1407"/><b>VAN DER MERWE, Mr. H. D. K. (Rissik)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2013;

<ul>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3460.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4434; Interior, 5113; Bantu Education, 5445; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5847; National Education, 6299; Indian Affairs, 8167, 8198.</li>

<li>University of Pretoria (Private A.) (2R.), 7672, 7674.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Education and Training of Bantu Workers, 1602.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER MERWE, Dr. P. S. (Middelland)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 7796.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER MERWE, Dr. the Hon. S. W. (Gordonia)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Health and of Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 471, 719; (C.), 751, 761, 870, 878, 889, 891&#x2013;97; (3R.), 938.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1748, 1749.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (2R.), 3298, 3491; (C.), 3523, 3549, 3561, 3564; (3R.), 4074.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 4233, 4289; (C.) 4702&#x2013;3, 4706, 4709, 4712&#x2013;4; (3R.), 4717.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Health, 5762; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5856.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>No confidence, 307.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER MERWE, Mr. W. L. (Meyer</b>ton)&#x2014;</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3805; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 4986; Bantu Administration and Development, 5381; Water Affairs, 5587.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER SPUY, Senator the Hon. J. P.</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of National Education and of Social Welfare and Pensions</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1723&#x2013;6.</li>

<li>National Education Policy (A.) (2R.), 2744, 2748; (C.), 2750.</li>

<li>Human Sciences Research (A.) (2R.), 4161, 4166; (C.), 4168.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;National Education, 6323, 6377, 6383; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6401.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7172, 7174, 7176&#x2013;7, 7189.</li>

<li>Universities (A.) (2R.), 8824, 8839; (C.), 8844&#x2013;7.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Commission of Inquiry into Universities, 2139.</li>

<li>Programmes Presented by the S.A.B.C. on Radio and Television, 2662.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER SPUY, Mr. S. J. H. (Somerset East)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2449.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Information, 5069; Water Affairs, 5639; Forestry, 5687; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6658; Agriculture, 7717; Tourism, 8266.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN DER WALT, Mr. H. J. D. (Schweizer-Reneke)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 442; (C.), 526, 594.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4392; Bantu Administration and Development, 5282; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6655; Justice and Prisons, 7380; (3R.), 8476.</li>

<li><span class="col_I28" refersTo="page_1408"/>Law Societies (2R.), 4887.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8887.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6142.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN ECK, Mr. H. J. (Benoni)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Forest (A.) (2R.), 1890; (C.). 4201, 4204.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Water Affairs, 5602; National Education, 6371; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6683; Agriculture, 7813.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8870; (C.), 8949, 8962.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Agricultural Land and Industrial Development, 576.</li>

<li>Defence of Southern Africa and the Indian Ocean, 1365.</li>

<li>Utilization of Mineral Resources, 2701.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN HEERDEN, Mr. R. F. (De Aar)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2324.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4566; Water Affairs, 5599; National Education, 6310.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN HOOGSTRATEN, Mr. H. A., E.D. (Cape Town Gardens)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 655.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1023; (3R.), 1442.</li>

<li>Fishing industry Development (A.) (2R.), 1337.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1750.</li>

<li>Groot Constantia State Estate Control (2R.), 1766.</li>

<li>Forest (A.) (2R.), 1897.</li>

<li>Trade Metrology (A.) (2R.), 3512; (C.), 3571, 3573.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3619; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4610; Forestry, 5698; Economic Affairs, 8294.</li>

<li>Explosives (A.) (2R.), 4171.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 4513.</li>

<li>Industrial Development (A.) (2R.), 4721; (3R.), 4868.</li>

<li>Regulation of Monopolistic Conditions (A.) (2R.), 4870.</li>

<li>National Supplies Procurement (A.) (2R.), 6917.</li>

<li>Copyright (A.) (2R.), 7660.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN RENSBURG, Mr. H. E. J. (Bryanston)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 694.</li>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1144.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2326; (C.), 2477; (3R.), 2601.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (1R.), 3018; (2R.), 3437; (C.), 3524, 3559.</li>

<li>National Institute for Metallurgy (A.) (2R.), 3067.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3874; (C) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5288; Bantu Education, 5492; National Education, 6289; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6642; Justice and Prisons, 7383; (3R.), 8536.</li>

<li>Lake Areas Development (2R.), 4155.</li>

<li>Occupational Diseases in Mines and Works (A.) (2R.), 5895.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7190.</li>

<li>Second Wine and Spirit Control (A.) (2R.), 7653.</li>

<li>Expropriation (2R.), 7870; (C.), 7875, 7877, 7878, 7882, 7883, 7885, 7888-9, 7896.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8880.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Legal Disabilities of Women, 996.</li>

<li><span class="col_I29" refersTo="page_1409"/>Bantu Education and Training of Bantu Workers, 1621.</li>

<li>Utilization of Mineral Resources, 2691.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6125.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN RENSBURG, Dr. H. M. J. (Mossel Bay)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Rents (A.), 1575.</li>

<li>Community Development (A.) (2R.), 2024.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2510.</li>

<li>Coloured Persons Representative Council (A.) (3R.), 3983.</li>

<li>Lake Areas Development (2R.), 4148.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4829; Interior, 5171; Water Affairs, 5633; Police, 7557; Tourism, 8276; Economic Affairs, 8379.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN TONDER, Mr. J. A. (Germiston District)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 2910.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Community Development, 6814; Economic Affairs, 8321.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN WYK, Mr. A. C. (Maraisburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Social Welfare and Pensions, 6433; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6635; Community Development, 6827.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VAN ZYL, Mr. J. J. B. (Sunnyside)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1032.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2470.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 2893.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3628; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Information, 5012; Finance, 8120; (3R.), 8505.</li>

<li>Exchequer and Audit (2R.), 7220; (C.), 7581.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8719.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VENTER, Mr. A. A. (Klerksdorp)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Mineral Laws Supplementary (2R.), 917; (C.), 945.</li>

<li>Trade Practices (2R.), 2797.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 4536; (C.), 6195.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5344; Planning and the Environment and Statistics, 6614; Justice and Prisons, 7449.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8709.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VILJOEN, the Hon. M. (Alberton)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Minister of Labour and of Posts and Telecommunications</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 2802, 2951; (C.), 2985, 3005; (3R.), 3048.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Labour, 4952, 5003; (3R.), 8426.</li>

<li>Unemployment Insurance (A.) (2R.), 7305, 7311; (C.), 7313.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Training and Utilization of Manpower, 3142.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Statement&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Business of the House, 3102, 4370, 7602.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VILJOEN, Dr. P. J. van B. (Newcastle)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 639.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Foreign Affairs, 4774; Health, 5730; Indian Affairs, 8174, 8215.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7081.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><span class="col_I30" refersTo="page_1410"/><b>VILONEL, Dr. J. J. (Krugersdorp)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 519, 600.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2446.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Health, 5743; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6435, 6443; Public Works, 6715; Community Development, 6761; Mines, 7948; Sport and Recreation, 8047; Indian Affairs, 8181.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VLOK, Mr. A. J. (Verwoerdburg)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Criminal Procedure (A.) (2R.), 2040; (C.), 2567, 2582.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C), 2487.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4621; Interior, 5168; Police, 7532; Economic Affairs, 8352.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8690.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VOLKER, Mr. V. A. (Klip River)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1102.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2307.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4326; Agriculture, 7793; Indian Affairs, 8206.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6036.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VON KEYSERLINGK, Brig. C. C. (Umlazi)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 604.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2513.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 2976.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Interior, 5166; Bantu Administration and Development, 5383; Health, 5756; Social Welfare and Pensions, 6446.</li>

<li>Second Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7128.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VORSTER, the Hon. B. J. (Nigel)&#x2014;</b></p>

<p>[<i>Prime Minister</i>.]</p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1694.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4307, 4310, 4370, 4492, 4511.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Adjournment of House (Condolence&#x2014;ex-Ministers P. C. Pelser and P. V. G. van der Byl), 11.</li>

<li>No confidence, 374.</li>

<li>Address to the State President, 3711, 4469.</li>

<li>Adjournment of House (Incidents at the Israeli Consulate in Johannesburg), 5185.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Statements&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>On Official Visit to Liberia, 845.</li>

<li>Bringing into Operation of Pilot Uranium Enrichment Plant at Valindaba, 3601.</li>

<li>Incidents at the Israeli Consulate in Johannesburg, 4973, 4975.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>VOSLOO, Dr. W. L. (Brentwood)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 502.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 4266; (C.), 4704, 4711.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Prime Minister, 4352; Foreign Affairs, 4763.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Training and Utilization of Manpower, 3131.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WADDELL, Mr. G. H. (Johannesburg North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.), 447; (C.), 534, 543, 597.</li>

<li>South West Africa Diamond Industry Protection (A.) (2R.), 905.</li>

<li>Mineral Laws Supplementary (2R.), 920; (C.), 940, 944, 949.</li>

<li><span class="col_I31" refersTo="page_1411"/>Part Appropriation (2R.), 1043.</li>

<li>Rents (A.) (2R.), 1583, 1781; (C.), 2087, 2762, 2768.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1714, 1745. 1752.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2299.</li>

<li>Trade Practices (2R.), 2872.</li>

<li>National Institute for Metallurgy (A.) (C.), 3073.</li>

<li>Gold Mines Assistance (A.) (2R.), 3078.</li>

<li>Trade Metrology (A.) (2R.), 3518; (C.), 3572.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3638; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Mines, 7933, 7942, 7951; Sport and Recreation, 8033, 8066;</li>

<li>Finance, 8124; Economic Affairs, 8302; (3R.), 8499.</li>

<li>Sale of Land on Instalments (A.) (2R.), 4520; (C.), 5917, 6197, 6221, 6229.</li>

<li>Industrial Development (A.) (2R.), 4724.</li>

<li>Regulation of Monopolistic Conditions (A.) (2R.), 4871.</li>

<li>Land Bank (A.) (2R.), 6255; (C.), 6523, 6530, 6538; (3R.), 6869.</li>

<li>Public Accountants&#x2019; and Auditors&#x2019; (A.) (2R.), 6544.</li>

<li>National Supplies Procurement (A.) (2R.), 6920; (C.), 6975, 6994, 7013; (3R.), 7046.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 6956; (C.), 7161, 7165, 7169; (3R.), 7263.</li>

<li>Prescribed Rate of Interest (2R.), 7106; (C.), 7108.</li>

<li>Exchequer and Audit (2R.), 7152, 7212; (C.), 7581, 7584, 7596, 7606, 7622&#x2013;3; (3R.), 7638.</li>

<li>Copyright (A.) (2R.), 7662; (C.), 7666.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8711; (3R.), 8770.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Decentralization of Industries, 1655.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WAINWRIGHT, Mr. C. J. S. (East London North)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 713.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C ), 2531.</li>

<li>Appropriation (2R.), 3809; (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Administration and Development, 5390; Water Affairs, 5585; Forestry, 5658.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Merit Selection of Sportsmen, 3188.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WEBBER, Mr. W. T. (Pietermaritzburg South)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Laws (A.) (2R.). 435; (C.), 522, 541, 592, 599; (3R.), 851.</li>

<li>Animal Slaughter, Meat and Animal Products Hygiene (A.) (2R.), 1470.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1695, 1696, 1710, 1711, 1721&#x2013;2.</li>

<li>Architects (A.) (2R.), 2003.</li>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (C.), 2452.</li>

<li>Trade Practices (2R.), 2801, 2860.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (2R.), 2936; (3R.), 3047.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Public Works, 6695; Agriculture, 7727, 7752; Sport and Recreation, 8074; Indian Affairs, 8194; Tourism, 8239.</li>

<li>National Supplies Procurement (A.) (C.), 6996, 7008; (3R.), 7046.</li>

<li>Liquor (A.) (2R.), 7059. </li>

<li>Second Liquor (A.) (C.), 7134.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7194, 7196, 7199, 7201&#x2013;5, 7209, 7210.</li>

<li>Exchequer and Audit (2R ), 7287; (C.), 7580, 7592, 7603, 7615, 7619&#x2013;20, 7627, 7629; (3R.), 7639; Senate A., 8820.</li>

<li><span class="col_I32" refersTo="page_1412"/>Unemployment Insurance (A.) (C.), 7312&#x2013;3.</li>

<li>Expropriation (C.), 7893.</li>

<li>Income Tax (2R.), 8704; (C.), 8759.</li>

<li>Finance (C.), 8817&#x2013;9.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Reserves (A.) (2R.), 8928; (C.), 8951, 8968, 8973, 8980&#x2013;1; (3R.), 8988.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motions&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Business Activities amongst Urban Bantu, 1837.</li>

<li>Merit Selection of Sportsmen, 3177.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>S.C. on Bantu Affairs (First Report of), 6086.</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WENTZEL, Mr. J. J. G. (Bethal)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Animal Slaughter, Meat and Animal Products Hygiene (A.) (2R.), 1466, 1469.</li>

<li>Co-operative Societies (A.) (2R.), 3088.</li>

<li>Land Bank (A.) (2R.), 6251; (3R.), 6872.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Agriculture, 7704.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (2R.), 8909.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Agricultural Land and Industrial Development, 549, 589.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WILEY, Mr. J. W. E. (Simonstown)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Railways and Harbours Appropriation (2R.), 2315.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Defence, 4617; Sport and Recreation, 8056; Tourism, 8268.</li>

<li>General Law (A.) (C.), 7207.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

<p><b>WOOD, Mr. L. F. (Berea)&#x2014;</b></p>

<ul>

<li>Bills&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Abortion and Sterilization (2R.), 509.</li>

<li>Additional Appropriation (C.), 1724, 1749.</li>

<li>Post Office Appropriation (C.), 2982.</li>

<li>Trade Practices (2R.), 3207.</li>

<li>Medical Schemes (A.) (2R.), 4258; (C.), 4707&#x2013;10.</li>

<li>Appropriation (C.) <i>Votes</i>&#x2014;Bantu Education, 5485; Health, 5726; Coloured, Rehoboth and Nama Relations, 5824; Community Development, 6764; Indian Affairs, 8178.</li>

<li>Physical Planning and Utilization of Resources (A.) (C.), 8976, 8979.</li>

</ul>

</li>

<li>Motion&#x2014;

<ul>

<li>Bantu Education and Training of Bantu Workers, 1618.</li>

</ul>

</li>

</ul>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

</debateBody>

</debate>

</akomaNtoso>
