---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol1 - FRIDAY 29 FEBRUARY 1924'
layout: debate
year: 1924
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 29th FEBRUARY, 1924.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1924-02-29T14:25:00">2.25 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#select_committee_on_working_of_miners&#x2019;_phthisis_act_1919">

<heading>SELECT COMMITTEE ON WORKING OF MINERS&#x2019; PHTHISIS ACT, 1919.<br/>GEKOZEN KOMITEE OP WERKING VAN MIJNTERING WET, 1919.</heading>

<p>Mr. WEBBER brought up a Special Report of the Select Committee on Working of Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Act, 1919, as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Your Committee begs specially to report to the House as follows&#x2014;</block>

<block name="quote">At the first sitting of the Select Committee, Mr. Munnik raised an objection to Mr. O&#x2019;Brien sitting on the Committee on the ground that he was a director of several companies which were carrying on gold mining on the Witwatersrand and contributed towards the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Fund established under Act No. 40 of 1919. The Chairman asked that Mr. Munnik would draw his objection in writing after which he would obtain a memorandum from Mr. O&#x2019;Brien and submitted this for Mr. Speaker&#x2019;s ruling. The Chairman further stated that he himself was a director of a company which, although not a mining company, was largely interested in several gold mining companies on the Witwatersrand which were contributors to the said Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Fund. He would submit his position also for Mr. Speaker&#x2019;s ruling.</block>

<block name="quote">These documents (appended hereto) were submitted by the Chairman to Mr. Speaker and the latter&#x2019;s ruling obtained. After these had been read to the Select Committee, the members expressed a desire that this Honourable House should have an opportunity of considering the questions raised by the ruling of Mr. Speaker.</block>

<p>The following are the points which were submitted and Mr. Speaker&#x2019;s ruling thereon, viz.:&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Whether Mr. W. J. O&#x2019;Brien, O.B.E., M.L.A., who has been appointed a member of the Select Committee upon the Administration and Working of the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Act, 1919, is competent to take part in and vote upon such Committee in terms of Standing Order No. 119 (2), in that he is the Chairman of the City and Suburban Gold Mining Company, Limited, and is also a director of the City Deep Gold Mining Company, Limited, and of the Nigel Gold Mining Company, Limited, each of these companies being a contributor to the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Compensation Fund established under Sections 9, 10 and 12 of the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Act 1919, the consideration of which has been referred to this Committee, and by which the profits of the before-mentioned companies may be materially affected.</block>

<p>(Sgd.) J. H. Munnik.</p>

<p>Memorandum for Mr. Speaker:</p>

<p>Objection has been taken by Mr. Munnik, M.L.A. for Vredefort, under Rule 119 of Standing Rules and Orders, to my acting as a member of the Select Committee appointed by the House of Assembly to consider the working of the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Act (1919), in respect of my connection with certain mining companies.</p>

<p>The specific companies mentioned by Mr. Munnik are:</p>

<block name="quote">The City and Suburban Estate and Gold Mining Company, of which the mining property was disposed of some four years ago.</block>

<block name="quote">The Nigel Gold Mining Company, whose property has been shut down for several years.</block>

<block name="quote">The City Deep, Limited.</block>

<p>My connection with mining companies is as follows:</p>

<block name="quote">Chairman, City and Suburban Gold Mining and Estate Company, Limited.</block>

<block name="quote">Director, Nigel Gold Mining Company, Limited; City Deep, Limited; Brakpan Mines, Limited; Anglo-American Corporation, Limited, a company interested in mining properties.</block>

<p>I desire to state that I have no direct pecuniary interest in those concerns except:</p>

<ol>

<li>1. As a shareholder.</li>

<li>2. Director, from which I receive payment for services rendered.</li>

</ol>

<p>I beg to submit that the rule in question does not apply to my position as a member of the Select Committee.</p>

<p>Should it be held that the rule does affect me and prevent my sitting as a member of the Select Committee, I would point out that it will be found difficult, if not impossible, for Members of Parliament engaged in various kinds of business and possessing intimate knowledge thereof to serve on Commissions or Committees when such experience would be of the utmost value in respect of the special matters under consideration.</p>

<p>I may state that I have sat as a member of the last Select Committee on Miners&#x2019; Phthisis set up by the House, and was a member of the Commission on the subject presided over by the Hon. Justice de Villiers, whose report has been submitted to Parliament.</p>

<p>(Sgd.) W. J. O&#x2019;Brien.</p>

<p>House of Assembly,</p>

<p>21st February, 1924.</p>

<p><span class="col_542" refersTo="page_0623"/>The Clerk of the House.</p>

<p>I have the honour to submit the enclosed question raised by Mr. Munnik, a member of the Select Committee appointed to enquire into and report upon the Administration and Working of the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Act, as to the right of Mr. O&#x2019;Brien, another member of the Select Committee, to sit on that Select Committee. I also enclose a memorandum by Mr. O&#x2019;Brien.</p>

<p>In submitting this question for the favour of Mr. Speaker&#x2019;s ruling, I beg also to submit the facts relating to toy own position. I am a director of the Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Company, Limited. This company is not a mining company, but it holds large numbers of shares of several companies which carry on gold mining and are contributors to the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Compensation Fund. The Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Company, Limited, has also the secretarial and administrative management of many such companies under its charge. I am also a shareholder of some of the gold mining companies which are contributories to the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Compensation Fund.</p>

<p>I request the ruling of Mr. Speaker on my position as a member of the Select Committee.</p>

<p>(Sgd.) Walter Webber,</p>

<p>Chairman, Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Committee.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker: The Chairman of the Select Committee on the Working of the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Act of 1919 (Mr. Webber), in submitting the Resolution of the Committee asking for my ruling on the point as to whether Mr. O&#x2019;Brien is not precluded from taking part in and voting on the proceedings of the Committee in terms of Standing Order No. 119, he being a director of several mining companies, also submitted certain facts relating to his own position. A statement by Mr. O&#x2019;Brien describing his position was also attached. The position with regard to these two gentlemen may be briefly stated here.</p>

<p>Mr. O&#x2019;Brien&#x2019;s connection with mining companies is as follows:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) He is Chairman of the City and Suburban Gold Mining and Estate Company, Limited, of which the mining property, it is stated, was disposed of some four years ago.</li>

<li>(2) He is a director of the Nigel Gold Mining Company, Limited, whose property, it is stated, has been shut down for several years.</li>

<li>(3) He is a director of the City Deep, Limited, of the Brakpan Mines, Limited, and of the Anglo-American Corporation, Limited, the latter being a company intrested in mining properties.</li>

</ol>

<p>Mr. Webber&#x2019;s position is that of a director of the Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Company, Limited, not a mining company, but a company which holds large numbers of shares in several companies which carry on gold mining, and which are contributors to the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Compensation Fund.</p>

<p>Both these gentlemen are also shareholders in gold mining companies which are contributors to the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Compensation Fund.</p>

<p>The Order of Reference in this case is very wide, and empowers the Committee to enquire into the working and administration of the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Act, 1919, in relation to all gold mines.</p>

<p>Standing Order No. 119, which was framed in accordance with the provision of Section 11 of the Powers and Privileges of Parliament Act, 1911, describes what pecuniary interest would debar a member from taking part in or voting upon a matter in which he has a direct pecuniary interest.</p>

<p>Dealing first with the question of shareholders in companies, I must at once say that these members, as shareholders, are not precluded from taking part in the deliberations of the Committee on the enquiry, for the simple reason that whatever interest they may have in the question before the Committee, is an interest in common with the public generally, as contemplated in sub-section (3) of Section 11 of the Act.</p>

<p>With regard, however, to a director, his position is different from that of a shareholder. He is the governing influence and he directs the policy of the company of which he is director. Moreover, as a paid official of the company he is in a special sense the representative of the company. It would be difficult to conceive the position of a director of a company voting against the interests of the company of which he is a director. Mr. Speaker Abbot explained the rule thus: &#x201C;This interest must be a direct pecuniary interest, and separately belonging to the persons whose votes were questioned, and not in common with the rest of His Majesty&#x2019;s subjects, or on a matter of State policy&#x201D;. Broadly speaking, therefore, there is no doubt that a director should abstain from taking part in or voting upon questions in which his company may derive any pecuniary interest or benefit.</p>

<p>Coming now to the question on which my ruling is asked, I must first of all eliminate from consideration the City and Suburban Estate and Gold Mining Company, for the reason that it has disposed of its mining property, and the Nigel Gold Mining Company, which has been closed down for several years.</p>

<p>Had the remaining companies above-mentioned been the only companies liable for Contribution to the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Fund under <span class="col_543" refersTo="page_0624"/>the Act, the working of which is being enquired into by the Committee, I would unhesitatingly have ruled that both Mr. Webber and Mr. O&#x2019;Brien are debarred from sitting on the Committees as members thereof. But this is not the case. The Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Act deals with a question of public policy, and compels all gold mining companies to contribute. The fact that these two gentlemen are directors or chairmen of a few mining companies does not on that account debar them from discussing and deliberating matters in connection with other mines or on questions of policy only, affecting all mines.</p>

<p>To disqualify, it has always been held that there must be a direct pecuniary interest of a private and particular, and not of a public and general, nature, and where the question before the House is of a public and general nature, and incidentally involves pecuniary interests of a class which includes members of the House, they are not prevented from voting. &#x201C;If it were otherwise&#x201D;, it was remarked by Mr. Speaker Gully, upon a General Rating Public Bill, &#x201C;it is obvious that on any proposal for altering the law of rating, anyone who was either a landlord or ratepayer, might be prevented from voting&#x201D;.</p>

<p>I would add that if it were otherwise, it would render Parliamentary Government in this country unworkable. Having considered this question fully in all its bearings, I am of opinion, and must rule, that neither of the honourable members in question are debarred from deliberating and voting on the question referred to the Committee.</p>

<p>Should, however, in the course of the discussion an issue arise affecting for the time being only the interest of the particular companies of which they are directors or chairmen, I shall be prepared to give a further ruling thereon, if required to do so.</p>

<p>Your Committee accordingly submits the matter to the House.</p>

<p>(Sgd.) Walter Webber,</p>

<p>Chairman.</p>

<p>Committee Rooms,</p>

<p>House of Assembly,</p>

<p>28th February, 1924.</p>

<p>Report to be considered on 3rd March.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.<br/>VRAGEN.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Collection of Excise Duty.<br/>Inning Van Aksijns Belasting.</heading>

<question by="#ballantine" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Maj. BALLANTINE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance what was the amount of excise duty collected during the following periods, viz., the six months ending 1st April, 1922, 1st October, 1922, 1st April, 1923, and 1st October, 1923, respectively, in the districts of East London, Kingwilliamstown, Queenstown and the Transkeian territories?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#ballantine">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>Separate records are not kept of excise duties collected in different districts of the Union, and to obtain it would entail an examination of several thousands of documents. In view of the amount of time and labour which would be involved if such an examination were carried out, I hope the hon. member will not press for the information he requires being furnished.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Tobacco For Europe.<br/>Tabak Voor Europa.</heading>

<question by="#ballantine" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Maj. BALLANTINE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the position as regards the Government purchase of tobacco which was sent to Europe for disposal;</li>

<li>(2) whether it has all been disposed of; and</li>

<li>(3) what is the total loss, if any?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#ballantine">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) and</li>

<li>(2) The tobacco has entirely been disposed of.</li>

<li>(3) The total loss is not yet known. Final statements of accounts are now awaited from the Commissioner of Commerce for the Union on the Continent.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Duty on Oxide of Iron.<br/>Belasting Op Ijzeroxyde.</heading>

<question by="#ballantine" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Maj. BALLANTINE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware that certain shipments of oxide of iron, otherwise known as &#x201C;Kaffir Ochre,&#x201D; which have been imported into the Union and which consisted of natural oxide of iron consigned by the same manufacturer to the same consignee on a standing order, have in some cases been charged a duty of 22 per cent., while others of exactly similar nature and quality have been admitted free of duty;</li>

<li>(2) whether he will state the reason for this diversity of practice by the customs authority;</li>

<li>(3) whether he will lay upon the Table a return of the shipments of natural oxide of iron which during the past six months (<i>a</i>) have been subjected to duty and (<i>b</i>) have been admitted duty free;</li>

<li>(4) whether he will state if, and in what cases, rebate of duty has been allowed in previous shipments; and</li>

<li>(5) whether a reply has been sent to the Chamber of Commerce, Kingwilliamstown, to their communication in regard to this matter dated the 10th January, 1924, and addressed to the Commissioner of Customs, Pretoria; and, if not, why not?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#ballantine">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Iron oxide (ferric oxide) is admitted at the 3 per cent. free rate of duty. Certain importers of what is known as &#x201C;Kaffir ochre&#x201D; claimed to have it admitted at the above rate and not at the 25-22 per cent. rate as a colour, on the ground that it is iron oxide. Samples <span class="col_544" refersTo="page_0625"/>of each shipment were accordingly sent to the Government analyst, and those he reported as being pure iron oxide were admitted at the lower rate, and those found to be iron oxide loaded, naturally or artificially, with inert, coloured material, at the higher rate. The Government analyst advised me that the substance known in commerce as oxide of iron should contain not less than 96 per cent. of ferric oxide, whereas some of the importation refused entry at the lower rate contained as little as 7.2 per cent. and others 38.4 per cent. of ferric oxide. Iron oxide was admitted at the lower rate of duty in order to assist the paint-making industry in the Union, and as the tariff stands the Department cannot admit an article that is not the iron oxide of commerce.</li>

<li>(2) There is no diversity of practice as the rate of duty payable is determined in every instance by an actual analysis.</li>

<li>(3) Separate records are not kept, and to obtain the information would mean the examination of a large number of documents.</li>

<li>(4) No rebates of duty are allowed, but of course if analysis shows that a shipment is entitled to be entered at the lower rate of duty, any duty paid in excess is refunded.</li>

<li>(5) The communication in question did not seem to call for a reply. The Commissioner of Customs had fully explained the position to the Chamber of Commerce in a letter dated the 24th December, and given that body an assurance that every shipment is submitted to the Government analyst, and that it is on his report alone that the classification is made. The letter referred to by the hon. member is mainly a re-assertion, in somewhat discourteous terms, of the Chamber&#x2019;s previous communication, and contains statements which are not in accordance with fact.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Owners of Surface Rights.<br/>Eigenaars Van Oppervlakte Rechten.</heading>

<question by="#papenfus" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. PAPENFUS (for Mr. R. H. Henderson)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What steps, if any, it is proposed to take to deal with the position where the surface owners hold surface rights, without any rights to work minerals, because the Government hold the mineral rights, without any rights to use the surface of the land, as in the case of farm Buffels-doorn No. 660, Potchefstroom, held by Mr. J. W. Gaudie and others; and</li>

<li>(2) if no other means will relieve the position, whether the Minister will introduce a Bill at an early date to remove the difficulties which stand in the way of the development of such farms?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#papenfus">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>A Bill has been prepared dealing with the rights to minerals on farms which have been alienated by the Crown in order to encourage prospecting and development, and I hope it will be possible to introduce it during the present session.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Accidents at Goodwood Station.<br/>Ongelukken Op Station Goodwood.</heading>

<question by="#pearce" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. PEARCE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Minister is aware that a number of fatal accidents have occurred at Goodwood Station, due to the absence of an overhead bridge; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he will consider the necessity of having an overhead bridge erected at Goodwood Station?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#pearce">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The only serious accident that has accurred at Goodwood for a number of years past, took place on the 28th December last when two ladies were killed as the result of their trespassing on the line at the South end of the station, instead of making use of a properly laid sleeper pathway across the metals at the North end.</li>

<li>(2) The desirability of providing overhead bridges where the facility is justified is recognized, but such facilities can only be provided gradually as funds are available. Goodwood will receive consideration with other stations of equal importance in due course. I may mention, however, that when a bridge is provided at Goodwood it will be placed a long distance from the scene of the accident referred to, and judging from experience at other stations it will not prevent intending passengers from crossing the line by a short cut as in the case under notice.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#pearce" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. PEARCE</from>

<p>Arising out of this question, I would like to ask the Minister of Railways how people can be prevented from trespassing on the line when there is no bridge?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#pearce">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>There is a properly prepared crossing which they did not take advantage of. If they had taken advantage of that crossing the accident would not have occurred.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Cattle for Boiling Down Plant.<br/>Rundvee Voor Verwerkingsfabriek.</heading>

<question by="#hunt" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Maj. HUNT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture whether the Government will introduce legislation during this session of Parliament of such a nature as will ensure that cattle which have been bought in neighbouring territories of the Union under agreement or undertaking that such cattle are, or the meat thereof is, to be exported overseas, but which cattle are, or the meat thereof is, after entering the Union, found to be unfit for export and therefore rejected, or which the exporters for other reasons may decide not to export, must be treated at a boiling down plant, or in such other manner as will exclude such cattle from being sold in the markets of the Union and such meat from being sold in the markets and shops or from finding its way into the compounds of the Union as fresh, chilled or frozen meat?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#hunt">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>The legal position is receiving attention.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_545" refersTo="page_0626"/>Cattle from Rhodesia and Bechuanaland.<br/>Rundvee Uit Rhodesie En Bechuanaland.</heading>

<question by="#hunt" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Maj. HUNT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the agreement arrived at in Pretoria towards the end of last year between representatives of the Rhodesian Government, of the Bechuanaland Protectorate Administration, and of the Union Government, in regard to the importation of cattle into the Union, which agreement was published by the Union Agricultural Department recently as coming into operation on the 1st March, 1924, has been ratified (<i>a</i>) by the Rhodesian Government, (<i>b</i>) by the Administration of the Bechuanaland Protectorate, and (c) by the Union Government; and, if not,</li>

<li>(2) what are the points in dispute?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#hunt">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>As stated by me in the House on the 25th instant, the restriction on cattle from neighbouring territories, published by the Department of Agriculture as coming into operation on the 1st of March next, has been agreed to by the Government of Southern Rhodesia and the Administration of Bechuanaland Protectorate.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>&#x201C;Drought&#x201D; Rate for Fodder.<br/>&#x201C;Droogte&#x201D; Tarief Voor Voer.</heading>

<question by="#brand_wessels" to="#minister_van_spoorwegen_en_havens">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>De hr. BRAND WESSELS (voor de hr. Obermeyer)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Spoorwegen en Havens of, in verband met het verzoek van de Potchefstroom Kamer van Koophandel van 24 Januarie 1924 om een speciaal &#x201C;droogte&#x201D; tarief voor voer in balen wegens de vermagerde konditie van vee in dat deel van het land, en zijn antwoord daarop, hij nu in staat is een idee te geven van de herziening van tarieven en te zeggen wanneer ze in working treden zullen?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_spoorwegen_en_havens" to="#brand_wessels">

<from>De MINISTER VAN SPOORWEGEN EN HAVENS:</from>

<p>Ik wens het edele lid te verwijzen naar mijn antwoord op de vraag gedaan door het edele lid voor Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers) op 22 dezer. Vanaf 25 dezer werd een vermindering van 50 persent toegestaan voor voer verzonden naar streken die als droogte geteisterde streken verklaard zijn voor het voeden van vee op plaatsen waar de droogte heerst.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN</from>

<p>Arising out of this question, may I ask the hon. the Minister if it is a rebate of 50 per cent. all round?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#van_heerden">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS HARBOURS:</from>

<p>No. On the regular rate.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN</from>

<p>Yes, but it was reduced to 10s. per ton a year ago.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#van_heerden">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS HARBOURS:</from>

<p>That was on the export rate.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN</from>

<p>Is it a reduction now of another 10s.?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#van_heerden">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS HARBOURS:</from>

<p>No, a reduction on the export rates.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Agreement with Imperial Cold Storage Co.<br/>Overeenkomst Met Imperiale Koelkamers Mij.</heading>

<question by="#hunt" to="#prime_minister">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Maj. HUNT</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Government will print the agreement between the South-West Africa Administration and the Imperial Cold Storage and Supply Co., Ltd., dated 21st October, 1922, granting to the said company a monopoly on the export of live stock from that country overseas, in order that members may have an opportunity of studying this in view of the debate promised thereon by the Prime Minister when his vote is before the House; and</li>

<li>(2) whether the Prime Minister will lay upon the Table a copy of the South-West Africa Proclamation bringing into effect the above-mentioned agreement?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#hunt">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The agreement was laid on the Table on the 12th February, 1924, and the main points and general provisions of the agreement were also fully set out in the Administrator&#x2019;s Annual Report for 1922, laid upon the Table of the House on the 7th June, 1923. Under the circumstances I do not consider it necessary to have the agreement specially printed.</li>

<li>(2) Proclamation No. 3 of 1923, dated 18th January, 1923, giving effect to the agreement, in respect of the export of live stock, was published in the <i>Official Gazette</i> of South-West Africa, No. 101, dated 15th January, 1923, which was laid on the Table of this House on 5th February, 1923.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railway from Windhoek to Ondekaremba.<br/>Spoorlijn Van Windhoek Naar Ondekaremba.</heading>

<question by="#hunt" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Maj. HUNT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the reason of the delay in the completion of the railway line from Windhoek to Ondekaremba.</li>

<li>(2) when will this section be open for public use; and</li>

<li>(3) whether, in view of the very low costs as compared with the relief it would give, at which the line to Gobabis could be completed, the Administration will proceed with the building of this line in order to bring relief to a large number of settlers settled there and who are faced with ruination through lack of transport for their produce?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#hunt">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) (<i>a</i>) Heavy earthworks and certain delay in receipt of permanent way material; and (<i>b</i>) progress of earthworks in early stages as relief work for Europeans was slow.</li>

<li>(2) It is anticipated the line will be opened for conveyance of traffic by construction trains in May next.</li>

<li><span class="col_546" refersTo="page_0627"/>(3) The extension of this line will receive consideration in conjunction with other proposals for new railway construction when the Government is in a position to introduce a general Railway Construction Bill.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Simultaneous Dipping.<br/>Gelijktijdig Dippen.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_van_landbouw">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>De hr. SWART</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Landbouw of hij van plan is om dit jaar gelijktijdig dippen van schapen voor bestrijding van de schaapluis te laten uitvoeren?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_landbouw" to="#swart">

<from>De MINISTER VAN LANDBOUW:</from>

<p>De Regering is niet gemachtigd om dit te doen.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Lectures, Etc., By Staff of Glen Agricultural School.<br/>Lezingen, Enz., Door Personeel Van Landbouwschool Te Glen.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_van_landbouw">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>De hr. SWART</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Landbouw:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Hoeveel leden van de staf van de Glen Landbouwschool bezochten in 1923 verschillende delen van de Oranje Vrijstaat om lezingen te houden, boerewerk bij te wonen en demonstraties te houden in het belang van de landbouw nijverheid; en</li>

<li>(2) hoeveel zulke (<i>a</i>) lezingen en (<i>b</i>) demonstraties werden in de Oranje Vrijstaat gegeven door leden van de Glen Landbouwschool staf?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_landbouw" to="#swart">

<from>De MINISTER VAN LANDBOUW:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Negen.</li>

<li>(2) 131 Lezingen en 60 demonstraties.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Lecturers, Etc., and Students at Glen Agricultural School.<br/>Docenten, Enz., En Studenten Aan Landbouwschool Te Glen.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_van_landbouw">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>De hr. SWART (voor de hr. Mostert)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Landbouw:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Wat is het totaal aantal (<i>a</i>) docenten, (<i>b</i>) praktiese instrukteurs, (c) klerkelike staf, en (<i>d</i>) algemene staf in dienst aan het Glen Landbouwkollege; en</li>

<li>(2) wat is het totaal aantal permanente studenten die inwoning hebben aan het kollege gedurende het lopende jaar?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_landbouw" to="#swart">

<from>De MINISTER VAN LANDBOUW:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) (<i>a</i>) 13; (<i>b</i>) 9; (<i>c</i>) 4 en (<i>d</i>) 4.</li>

<li>(2) 30.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Report on Precious Stones Bill.<br/>Verslag Over Edelgesteenten Wetsontwerp.</heading>

<question by="#abe_bailey" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>Sir ABE BAILEY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries whether he is able to inform the House when the consolidating <i>Precious Stones Bill</i>, now before a Select Committee, will be reported to the House; and whether he will undertake to use every endeavour to pass this Bill into law during the course of this session?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#abe_bailey">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>The Select Committee is sitting three times a week, and it is hoped that it will finish its examination of the Bill before long, but it is naturally impossible to give a date. I have every hope that the report will be received in time to enable the Bill to be dealt with during this session.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Duty on Toy Cinema Films.<br/>Invoerrcht Op Speelgoed Rolprenten.</heading>

<question by="#strachan" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. STRACHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Minister is aware that the customs authorities are levying a similar duty on toy cinema films as on the films imported for public exhibition;</li>

<li>(2) whether it was the intention of the Minister, when introducing the proposal to impose the tariff, that no discrimination should be made between toy and commercial films; and, if not,</li>

<li>(3) whether he is prepared to issue instructions for the relief of toy films from the extra duty?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#strachan">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes. Item 22 of the Customs Tariff&#x2014;First Schedule to Act 26 of 1914&#x2014;provides for &#x201C;films for bioscope and cinematographs<i>&#x201D;,</i> but makes no distinction between those for toys and those for public exhibition.</li>

<li>(2) Yes. It would be next to impossible to distinguish between the so-called toy and commercial film in certain cases. Further, the duty on films is 5s. per 100 ft., or 20 per cent. <i>ad valorem,</i> and the latter rate is applicable to toys of all kinds.</li>

<li>(3) No. Any such instruction would be <i>ultra vires.</i></li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Control of Wireless Broadcasting.<br/>Kontrôle Over Draadloze Verspreiding.</heading>

<question by="#harry_graumann" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Sir HARRY GRAUMANN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs whether, in view of the desirability of placing the control of the wireless broadcasting area embracing Johannesburg and the Transvaal generally in the hands of municipal authorities, and with a view to affording the Johannesburg municipality further time to consider this question, he will extend the time during which objections may be lodged?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#harry_graumann">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>The Johannesburg municipality has had over six months in which to consider this matter, for the regulations regarding the issue of broadcasting licences were published in August last. In these circumstances, I am not prepared further to extend the period.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Mealies Gone Astray at Point.<br/>Mielies Weggeraakt Te Point.</heading>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_van_spoorwegen">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>De hr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Spoorwegen en Havens:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Of het feit feit is dat 11,000 zak mielies weggraakten op Durban Punt;</li>

<li>(2) wat de oorzaak hiervan is; en</li>

<li>(3) wat hij van plan is te doen om die ongezonde toestand van zaken te veranderen?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#van_heerden">

<from><span class="col_547" refersTo="page_0628"/>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>A quantity of mealies has been reported to be missing from Point, Durban, and the matter is forming the subject of enquiry.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_van_spoorwegen">

<from>Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN</from>

<p>Arising out of that question, may I ask the Minister if it is possible for mealies to be lost to that extent?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#van_heerden">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I will enquire into the matter.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Locust Officers.<br/>Sprinkhaan Ambtenaren.</heading>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_van_landbouw">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>De hr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Landbouw:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Hoeveel sprinkhaan ambtenaren aangesteld werden gedurende het afgelopen jaar;</li>

<li>(2) hoeveel van hen hoofdambtenaren, en hoeveel onder-ambtenaren zijn;</li>

<li>(3) werden zij aangesteld volgens hun bevoegdheid;</li>

<li>(4) wat is het loon per dag;</li>

<li>(5) wat is de toelage per mijl voor motorvervoer en was daar een maksimum vastgesteld; en</li>

<li>(6) wil hij een schedule van lonen en toelagen betaald op de Tafel van het Huis leggen:</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_landbouw" to="#van_heerden">

<from>De MINISTER VAN LANDBOUW:</from>

<p>Ek sal blij wees as die edele lid sal vergun dat hierdie vraag oorstaan.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#girls&#x2019;_and_mentally_defective_women&#x2019;s_protection_act_1916_amendment_bill">

<heading>GIRLS&#x2019; AND MENTALLY DEFECTIVE WOMEN&#x2019;S PROTECTION ACT, 1916, AMENDMENT BILL.<br/>MEISJES EN GEESTELIK GEKRENKTE VROUWEN BESCHERMINGS WET, 1916, WIJZIGINGS WETSONTWERP.</heading>

<p>First Order read: Second reading, <i>Girls&#x2019; and Mentally Defective Women&#x2019;s Protection Act</i>, 1916, <i>Amendment Bill.</i></p>

<speech by="#close">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>He said: As on the last occasion on which I introduced a similar Bill, I take it that one is in order in drawing attention to the unsavoury nature of the discussion that may happen to ensue, so that any of those who are present and may not be aware of the nature of the discussion bound to take place may have the opportunity of going if they wish. Of course this is a subject on which a very frank discussion will have to take place and many present may not be aware of the nature of the discussion. This Bill refers to Section 3 of the Act of 1916, and the House will remember that the object of that Act was to give protection to girls up to the age of 16 by making intercourse with such girls a criminal offence. Provision was made in Section 2 of the Act that a man charged with an offence of this nature might plead in his defence two things; he might plead that the girl was a prostitute or he might also plead that at the time the offence took place he was under the age of 16 years. When I introduced the Bill two years ago I brought forward a motion for the removal of both of these, hut after a discussion it became quite apparent that if any portion of the Bill was to succeed it was that portion which eliminate the defence as to the character of the girl from the Act. As to the defence regarding prostitutes when the matter came up last year, it seemed to me that the argument was very strong indeed, and that whatever might be said about retaining the other defence, this abominable portion of the Act should be abolished by this Parliament as soon as possible. The last time the Bill came before the House the second reading was rejected by a majority&#x2014;I think the voting was 44 to 36&#x2014;but I have ventured in spite of that to reintroduce the Bill because it is an attempt to remove what I consider is a serious blot on our legislation, and because those who originally asked me to introduce this Bill are still more concerned by experience of the necessity of having alterations made in the law. Resolutions have been taken by representative bodies, particularly at women&#x2019;s gatherings, expressing their deep grief that Parliament had not acceded to this principle, and their fervent hope that it would this year. Representations of such bodies of people are a sufficient justification for me to introduce the Bill, and I have ventured a third time to take the decision of this House whether we would leave this provision on the statute book or not. The merits of the Bill it self, I think, will appeal to everyone who has considered the matter in its broadest aspects. The principle of the Act as it stood was to give protection to girls under the age of 16. On what ground? That under the age of 16 they were not, in fact, capable of giving consent to the commissions of the acts which are prohibited by that Act; but by an extraordinary anomaly, girls who are unable to give their consent to the commission of such acts are themselves found to be capable of leading a life of crime which it has been the policy of the law, in every other respect, to prevent. What are the main objections which were made last year to this particular Bill? The objections came largely from the hon. member for Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog), and the points he took were that the Bill is not an improvement, and is not due to women because the object of the Act of 1916 was not to protect the chastity and honour of those who had lost their chastity and honour. I think I am correctly quoting the hon. member for Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog). The next point he took was that it might lead to a considerable amount of hardship, more particularly in regard to young people just over the age of 16, and in connection with that he took the third point that there might be great danger of blackmail. I would like to deal with these points, because they are serious, and have to be met. In the first place, he points out that the Bill was not out to protect the chastity and honour of those who had lost that chastity and honour. But that is not the position under the Act at all. Under the Act the protection is given irrespective of character altogether. Under the Act of 1916 it does not matter what a girl&#x2019;s character is; it does not matter whether she has lost her chastity or honour, she is equally protected by the law against the act which is dependent upon her consent, and the <span class="col_548" refersTo="page_0629"/>only case in which the defence is given, is that of a prostitute. Now, the hon. member knows perfectly well that, under those legal definitions of prostitutes which are recognized here, prostitution means &#x201C;an indiscriminate consorting with men for gain.&#x201D; That is what it comes to, and the courts have laid it down definitely that the mere fact that a girl is of an immoral character, that a girl does consort with two or three men even for gain, does not in itself constitute prostitution. The re suits are that girls of that class who do not come under the definition of prostitutes are themselves protected under this very Act which shows conclusively that the Act of 1916 was not, as the hon. member says, to protect the chastity and honour of those who had lost it, but to protect a girl because of her age, on the theoretical assumption that, because of her age, she was not capable of giving her consent. That is precisely the position taken up by the old common law of this country, the old Roman Dutch law, which makes an offence in connection with a girl under the age of 12 absolute rape. No matter what her character is, or whether she gives consent, the law is clear that, with a girl under the age of 12, an act of contorting is in itself rape, whether or not she gives her consent. The principle also applies to a boy under the age of 14. He cannot be held in law to have committed rape under the age of 14. My point is that under the common law, and under the statute of 1916, the line has been drawn on the age limit so that certain acts under that age limit are criminal and certain acts over that age are not criminal. But when you start looking for anomalies you will find them, wherever you fix the age limit, you will find cases of precocious boys or girls under the ages of 12, 14 or 16 who are wicked at that age, and know what they are doing, and yet by law are absolutely protected, not because of their character, but because of their age. Accepting as we do the principle that for a certain class of offence the age limit at 12 or 16 has been taken, then it does not help the question in any way if we produce possible cases of hardship, because that is definitely the law. The law had to lay down some lines. It does so, hard and fast, within the age of 12, 14 or 16, irrespective of the character of the boy or girl concerned, and so this question of cases of possible hardship which one hears a good deal about, was also heard of in connection with the old Cape Act. Everyone of those arguments was also applied against the passing of the Act which is now the accepted law of the land, and so those cases of possible hardship do not seem to me to affect the question at all once you accept the principle. Now, take the third point of the hon. member for Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog), and that was the case of a possible blackmail. I would like the House to bear this one point in mind, we are dealing with what is set up in this Act as a defence. In other words, when a man raises his defence he is admitting his guilt, and he only seeks the way out which the law gives to him. He admits he has contravened the Act by having carnal connection with a child under the age of 15, and then he sets up this defence. It seems to me an extraordinary argument to use, that a man would be liable to blackmail because of this defence; he would be liable to blackmail because of the act, in regard to which the defence is pleaded, not because of the defence, but once the principle of the Act is accepted, when it says that a man who commits the offence is liable to prosecution. Here you have the possibility of blackmail. This was set up as an objection to the passing of the Acts voted in the Cape and in the Union. But the principle of the Act has been accepted, and when you come to the position that a man sets up a defence that a girl is a prostitute he is, <i>ipso facto</i>, admitting that the thing he can be accused of by way of blackmail is true. That is what takes place, and so I really fail to see, with all due respect, how those arguments can be held to be sound arguments against the amendment to the law which I am suggesting, granting that you accept the principle of the law which has been in force in the Union since 1916 and for many years previously in the Cape of Good Hope. Then I come to the question of what arguments there are for the Bill. I have dealt with those arguments against it, In the first place I do submit this, that it is a monstrous thing that we have on our statute book anything which gives a statutory colour to the idea that there is recognition of child prostitution. Whether it exists or not is another thing, but to make it a defence seems to me not only cruel but something contradictory to the very spirit of the Act itself. Cruel, because we know how easily that defence can be set up. The defence is set up by a man who, <i>ipso facto,</i> admits that he is guilty under the Act. If a man can stoop to that crime, I ask whether it is difficult to imagine that that man will also stoop to making this charge without sound grounds and also to getting the evidence which could support it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mackeurtan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MACKEURTAN</person>:</from>

<p>Supposing he does not know her age.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>There may be doubt about her age, and it may be only when she comes into court that a decision has to be arrived at; but what difference does it make? Under the statute it is a question of fact, not of his knowledge, and that question has to be decided by the court. If a man voluntarily does these things and chooses to take the risk, he cannot complain if the court decides the age against him. Here is a question of fact; is the child 16 or not? And if a man takes the risk he must also take the consequences. I suggest the defence is a cruel one because in addition to the dreadful calamity the girl has suffered through the act done, there is the stigma which is put upon her by the defence in question which is difficult to remove, even if the defence fails; the publicity is sufficient to damage the girl for years even if she is able to disprove it to the satisfaction of the magistrate. In addition to that, it seems an illogical thing to have in the law, considering the efforts this Parliament made in the Act of 1913 to give every possible protection for children, and to give every safeguard to make it impossible for a child under <span class="col_549" refersTo="page_0630"/>16 to lead an immoral life. I refer to Act 25 of 1913, sections 6, 7 and 8, in which is laid down a careful and sound policy in regard to children under the age of 16. It lays down that anyone allowing children to be seduced, or even encouraging the seduction, abduction or prostitution of any children, is guilty of very serious offences and is liable to a very heavy penalty under the Act. Under section 8 the law goes so far as to say that&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;When it is shown to the satisfaction of the magistrate&#x2019;s court, on the complaint of any person, that a girl under the age of 16 is, with or without the knowledge of her parent or guardian, exposed to the risk of seduction or prostitution, or living a life of prostitution, the court may, if it thinks fit, having regard to all the circumstances, adjudge her parent or guardian to enter his own recognizance, with or without sureties, in such amount as the court thinks fit, that he shall exercise due care and supervision in respect of the girl, and may order the parent or guardian to be imprisoned until such recognizances, with sureties, if so directed, are entered into.&#x201D;</block>

<p>This does show the policy of the law in regard to young children. To have this provision which we are dealing with here remaining on the statute book seems a contradiction and an injustice. I do not wish to take up the time of the House, but in moving the motion, I believe I am asking for fair and absolute equality in regard to the young of both sexes. Under the clause, boys under the age of 16 get absolute protection and immunity from criminal prosecution because of their age. I ask that the girls should be put in the same category, and be protected on the same grounds as the boy is protected. A boy is protected simply because he is under the age of 16, and I ask that we go as far in regard to girls, and that they should be protected by the strong arm of the law from the evils which the law considers their age exposes them to. One feels very strongly about this, and there is a strong feeling amongst people outside, not only amongst the women, but amongst men who do social work in connection with this sort of thing. I hope the House will give tardy justice to the weaker elements of the young people in this country, and I accordingly beg to move the second reading.</p>

<p>Motion put, and the House divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;40.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bezuidenhout, W. W. J. J.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Buchanan, W. P.</p>

<p>Cilliers, P. S.</p>

<p>Claassen, G. M.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coetzee, J. P.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Malan, F. S.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Nel, T. J.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Nixon, C. E.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Oliver, H. A.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Purcell, I.</p>

<p>Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Saunders, E. G. A.</p>

<p>Scholtz, P. E.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Stuart, W. H.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, C. A.</p>

<p>Werth, A. J.</p>

<p>Wilcocks, C. T. M.</p>

<p>Tellers: Naudé, J. F.; Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;43.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Barlow, A. G.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brown, D. M.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>Dreyer, T. F. J.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Enslin, J. M.</p>

<p>Fourie, J. C.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Graumann, H.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Jordaan, P. J.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>King, J. G.</p>

<p>Lemmer, L. A. S.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Mackeurtan, H. G.</p>

<p>Malan, C. W.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Rooth, E.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J.</p>

<p>W. Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Van Aardt, F. J.</p>

<p>Van Eeden, J. W.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, B. I. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Venter, J. A.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Tellers: Brand Wessels, J. H.; De Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly negatived.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#public_holidays_act_1910_amendment_bill">

<heading>PUBLIC HOLIDAYS ACT, 1910, AMENDMENT BILL.<br/>OPENBARE FEESTDAGEN WET, 1910, WIJZIGINGS WETSONTWERP.</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Pietermaritzburg (North) (Mr. Strachan) has a motion on the Order Paper which he must formally move before the Second Order is read.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#strachan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRACHAN</person>:</from>

<p>On this day last week, and just about the same time, a very acceptable holiday was arranged for the members of this hon. House&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>By whom? [An Hon. Member: &#x201C;Why not do it again?&#x201D;]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#strachan">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRACHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I propose that, as members of the House, we now take the first step to arrange a more acceptable schedule of holidays for the members of the general public. For some considerable time great dissatisfaction has been expressed with the present arrangement with regard to our one-day public holiday. The existing order of things, it will be said, has held good for the past fourteen years, but that is no argument that some alterations should not now be made. I have heard it stated that when any member makes an attempt in this House to alter existing arrangement he is, shall I put it, in for trouble. There are so many members here who are worshippers of &#x201C;The God of Things as They are.&#x201D; I wish, however, that consideration shall be given to an alteration of the existing schedule in regard to public holidays. It would not, <span class="col_550" refersTo="page_0631"/>of course, be possible to put forward a schedule of holidays which would meet with the approval of every one. But I am prepared to move in the direction that whatever schedule may ultimately be presented to the House, it will at least meet with the support of the majority of members. I have not approached the Minister of the Interior in connection with this matter at all.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I understood that the hon. member was going to move formally the motion that is standing in his name. He is now discussing the second reading. I think the Clerk had better read the Second Order.</p>

<p>Second order read: Second reading, <i>Public Holidays Act, 1910, Amendment Bill.</i></p>

</speech>

<speech by="#strachan">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRACHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I was saying that I had not approached the Minister of the Interior in connection with this subject, and shall leave the fate of the Bill entirely in the hands of the members of the House. Last session, however, I put questions to the Minister of the Interior with regard to the inconvenient dates on which certain public holidays fall to be celebrated, and the Minister replied that the Government was aware of the inconvenient dates on which these holidays fell in the month of May, but did not contemplate making any change. Here we have an admission that the holidays, in so far as May month is concerned, are inconvenient for the public. It is proposed in this Bill to reduce the number in May to two instead of four and make the holidays fall at the week-end instead of anywhere in the week as at present. For instance, Victoria Day is to be celebrated on the last Saturday in May, and not as now on the 24th, and it is also proposed to observe Union Day on the following Monday, the first Monday in June. What better arrangements could you have than an Empire Saturday and a Union Monday&#x2014;celebrated together? I would think that there should be very little opposition to these slight changes, because, after all, the sentiment lies in the celebration and not in the particular day on which the celebration takes place. We celebrate the King&#x2019;s birthday on the first Monday in August, but I understand that the actual date is the third of June. It is also desired in this Bill to have a clear Easter break of four days by making the Saturday between Good Friday and Easter Monday a public holiday in lieu of Ascension Day. Very little business is transacted on that particular Saturday, because of the holiday before and after, and many workers who wish to travel afield at Eastertime obtain leave to be absent on that day. A further proposal is to set aside the first Monday in May as Labour Day. The Government has already sanctioned the keeping of May Day as a sort of half-hearted holiday by the public servants, and I cannot understand why there should be any serious objection to going the whole way and making May Day a public holiday. For the information of hon. members who may be opposed to a holiday on May Day because it is called Labour Day, I want to point out that May Day is not a trade union day; it is not a Labour party day; it is essentially a workers&#x2019; day, and therefore it is Labour Day&#x2014;international&#x2014;and it is time we followed the example of other countries and held holiday on May Day. Finally, the Bill proposes to move forward the celebration of Dingaan&#x2019;s Day from the 16th of December to the first Monday in the same month. The proposal is not to do away with Dingaan&#x2019;s Day. It is simply to move it forward in order that it may be taken away somewhat from the nearness of the celebration of Christmas.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#swart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SWART</person>:</from>

<p>Why not shift Christmas?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUART</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, and have all birthdays on the first of each month.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>And have the hon. member&#x2019;s on the 1st April.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#strachan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRACHAN</person>:</from>

<p>It is said that any attempt to alter the celebration of Dingaan&#x2019;s Day from the 16th December is likely to shake the Nationalist-Labour compact to its very foundations.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUART</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, one can believe that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#strachan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRACHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I want to make it clear that there is no intention at all to do away with Dingaan&#x2019;s Day. I submit to the House that the fixing of Dingaan&#x2019;s Day for the first Monday in December will not interfere with the solemn commemoration of that historic incident in the early history of Natal, when the murder of gallant Piet Retief was avenged and the hardy voortrekkers smashed once and for all the powers of the Zulu chief at the battle of Blood River. It is not proposed to increase the number of public holidays. It is merely a re-arrangement to make the holidays of more use and benefit to the general public. And in order that the schedule may be amended perhaps more to the satisfaction of the House, I do not intend to move for the second reading now, but I move as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Order for the second reading be discharged and that the subject-matter of the Bill be referred to a Select Committee for consideration and report.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#boydell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BOYDELL</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuart">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUART</person>:</from>

<p>This fascinating little Bill is really quite amusing, because, if it does nothing else, it does show that the hon. member for Pietermaritzburg (North) (Mr. Strachan) is entirely devoid of all the happy little sentiments and feelings of this world which amount to history. The Bill is simplicity itself I do not know whether it was introduced as a sort of peg on which to bang the introduction of May Day. I do not want to say anything about that because I understand that members in the right-hand corner had a good deal of sentiment about that, but what I object to is not that they should have that sentiment, but their complete lack of respect for the sentiment of other people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>It is a private Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUART</person>:</from>

<p>Well, this regrettable private mistake seems first of all to attack the religious communities. They are first of all singled out. The first really serious alteration&#x2014;because the Good Friday one is just a question of rearrangement of Saturday&#x2014;but the first serious one to which I take exception is <span class="col_551" refersTo="page_0632"/>the scrapping of Ascension Day. Now we have had no case whatever put for a rearrangement of holidays at all. There has been no case put for the rearrangement of holidays. What has actually happened is this, that the hon. member introduced a Bill which is so brimful of incident, so painful to many of us and to many members of the community, that it has possibly been pointed out to him in the Lobbies, so that he is now trying to side-step it by trying to refer it to a Select Committee, and that at a time when the House is just as busy, and the Select Committees are just as busy, as they can possibly be.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member must respect what occurs in the lobbies.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUART</person>:</from>

<p>Respecting what happens in the Lobbies is one thing, and respecting what might have happened is another thing. Apart from the question of Ascension Day being dropped for no particular reason&#x2014;dropped, presumably, because it does not stir the memories of men&#x2014;it has not the same vast appeal to the world&#x2014;it has not the same meaning to European civilization as Labour Day has to my hon. friend over there&#x2014;it is dropped in a calculated way; but, apart from that, the hon. member has managed, entirely unnecessarily, to attempt&#x2014;and it is only attempt&#x2014;and a fatuous attempt at that, but he has attempted to outrage the feelings of anyone who has á sentiment for Empire Day. He goes on then and he tries to remove Dingaan&#x2019;s Day to an earlier date. Dingaans Day has a tremendous appeal to the people of this country. The hon. member doesn&#x2019;t understand that kind of sentiment, but I can only assume this, and I take it that I assume it rightly, that Dingaans Day mean to the Dutch South Africans that on a certain day, celebrated in history among all South Africans, a certain great historic event occurred. It means something tremendous, something definite and positive, and on that day great events took place of far-reaching importance to South Africa. So tremendous is the importance of that day to the young people, that no man in his sane and sober senses would interfere with it. There is no getting away from it whatever. I say that this Bill should not be sent to a Select Committee. First of all, the Bill is far too fatuous to be sent to a Select Committee; secondly, there is no general appeal, no general need; and, thirdly, this House is fully occupied by Select Committees. It is notorious that Select Committee after Select Committee has to sit in the mornings without a full attendance of members, because they have to attend other committees; and the result is that members have to carry on the work of the country the best they can. Quorums are difficult to get. If the hon. member sat in a Select Committee of one, one would know what we could expect, therefore, because the hon. member&#x2019;s proposal is an unnecessary insult&#x2014;I am not speaking in any political or party sense, but because it is an insult to the people to whom the keeping of Ascension Day means the recognition of one of the fundamentals of religion, life and history&#x2014;because it is an unnecessary insult to alter the date of Empire Day; because there is an unnecessary insult in the alteration of Dingaan&#x2019;s Day; because of these three reasons, I hope the House will reject the motion to have it referred to a Select Committee and to refuse its going to a second reading, and that in no circumstances whatsoever will the Bill be allowed to go further. My attention has been called to the fact that there are already five other notices on the paper for Select Committees, and one or two of them are matters of considerable importance&#x2014;surely they are entitled to priority on the services of the House. Members are hard worked, and I hope this matter will not go further.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#dreyer">

<from>†Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DREYER</person>:</from>

<p>Ek het spyt dat die edele lid vir Pietermaritzburg (Noord) (de hr. Strachan) met die mosie voor die Huis gekom het, want dit raak ons feesdaë, en as een van die opkomende geslag van die ou voortrekkers is ek verplig om teen die verandering van die feesdaë te protesteer. Men hoort so menigmaal, veral in tye van eleksie, van heilige beginsels en as daar één heilige beginsel is, dan is dit die vasstelling van die sestiende Desember as feesdag. Want toe is die belofte gesluit met die heilige God dat die voortrekkers dié dag en dié datum feesdag sou vier en die opkomende geslag sou vra om daarin te deel. Nou kom die edele lid vir Pietermaritzburg (Noord) (de hr. Strachan) met &#x2019;n voorstel om die dag uit te skei uit die ry van feeste. Sestien December is as &#x2019;t ware &#x2019;n mylpaal in die geskiedenis van Suid-Afrika en ek glo nie dat daar een edele lid van die platteland is, wat daarvoor sal stem om sestien December as &#x2019;n publieke feesdag af te shaf nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to point out to the hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuart) that it is precisely for almost similar reasons that the mover has suggested this matter should be referred to a Select Committee before the second reading. It is not the intention to interfere with Dingaan&#x2019;s Day or any such days. If it were, I would vote against it. The object is to ask the House, through the Select Committee, to enquire whether, without hurting the deep sentiment of the Dutch or English as to certain dates, whether it is not possible to re-arrange the public holidays so as to benefit the working classes of this country. I think that is a reasonable request. Hon. members do not appreciate the position of numbers of men who only receive public holidays during the year and perhaps these holidays could be so arranged that they could get the benefit of them at the week end. I wish to make it perfectly clear to every member of the House, by taking this course they would help the men to get, the fullest benefit of the holidays without any sort of inconvenience and without hurting religious sentiment in connection with such day as Ascension Day, or the traditions connected with Dingaan&#x2019;s Day. The hon. member suggests that this should be sent to a Select Committee so that the Committee will enquire as to what public holidays could <span class="col_552" refersTo="page_0633"/>be so shifted as to fall on Monday, so as to combine the day with the week-end, and so give a longer holiday to those who have only a stated number in the year.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">B. I. J. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Ek stel voor dat die wet heden over ses maanden gelezen worde.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mnr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Vandag word die wet nie vir die twede keer gelees nie. Dus kan die edele lid nie voorstel om die twede lesing van die wet oor ses maande te laat plaasvind nie. Die voorstel is om die Wet na &#x2019;n Gekose Komitee te verwys.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">B. I. J. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Dan stel ek voor&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Dat die debat verdaag word.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hertzog">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HERTZOG</person>:</from>

<p>Ek dink die edele lede verstaan die posiesie nie goed nie. Hier is nie die vraag om enige van die besondere feesdaë aan te raak nie. Nie die minste nie, maar al wat voorgestel is deur die edele lid vir Pietermaritzburg (Noord) (de hr. Strachan) is dat ons die saak &#x2019;n bietjie terug refereer na die Selekt Komitee om te sien om ons tegemoet te kom, om sê nou Dingaansdag te laat val op Sondag of Maandag of Vrydag, sodat dit gemaklik vir ons gemaak word om ons vakansiedaë te geniet. Ons vier Dingaansdag nou ook nie altyd op die sestiende December nie. Laaste keer was dit nie op die sestiende nie omdat dit &#x2019;n Sondag was en dit gaan nie alleen om Dingaansdag nie, maar om, glo ek, vyf dae. Al wat voorgestel is, is om te sien of daar nie sekere veranderinge gemaak kan word nie en wat ookal daaroor besluit word, ek dink dis &#x2019;n baie redelike versoek&#x2014;as dit kan gedoen word&#x2014;om die feesdaë meer gerieflik te maak vir die algemene publiek en wat dit betref behoor ons die geleentheid te gee om dit te laat ondersoek deur &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee [&#x2019;n Edele Lid: &#x201C;Gaan die edele lid vir Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) dit steun?&#x201D;] Of ek dit gaan steun om die saak na &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee te verwys? Ja, natuurlik.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#dreyer">

<from>Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DREYER</person>:</from>

<p>Maar wat omtrent die beginsel?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hertzog">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HERTZOG</person>:</from>

<p>Al wat ons nou gevra word is, dat die Wetsontwerp terug gaan na die Selekt Komitee, om die Komitee die kans te gee om te oorweeg en te sê: &#x201C;kyk, dit sou van belang wees om die of die vakansiedag te laat val op &#x2019;n Saterdag of op &#x2019;n Maandag.&#x201D; Ek weet nie wat die gerieflikste is nie. Ek dink dis heeltemal die beste om dit te laat ondersoek deur &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee. As die teen veranderinge is, dan kan ons later die saak verder behandel. Maar al wat nou gevra word is, laat ons in Selekt Komitee bymekaar kom en uitpluis en sien of ons nie iets kan doen nie. Natuurlik gaan ek ondersteun die voorstel om dit te verwys na &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee, om te sien of iets gedoen kan word.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. W. GROBLER</person>:</from>

<p>Ek weet nie of die Huis die voorstel gaan aanneem om die wetsvoorstel te verwys na &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee, maar as die Huis dit doen, dan wil ek daarop wys dat wat twee feesdaë betref, nl., Hemelsvaartsdag en Dingaansdag, daar by my die grootste beswaar bestaan teen verandering. Hemelvaartsdag is &#x2019;n ou kristelike feesdag en ek self sal nooit daarvoor stem om die te verander nie. En dan wat betref die ander dag, Dingaansdag, ons kan nie somar sê dat ons vir die gemak van die publiek dit gaan verander nie. Ons voorouers het die belofte gedoen om elke jaar op die dag en die datum die fees te vier en ons kan dit nie verskuif nie. Dan verbreek ons die belofte wat ons voorvaders gedoen het. Daarom sal ek nooit vir &#x2019;n verandering van die dag stem nie. As die wetsvoorstel verwys word na &#x2019;n Gekose Komitee, dan hoop ek dat wat die dag betref geen verandering gemaak word nie, want dit sou bepaald &#x2019;n diepgevoelde skok gee deur die hele volk van Suid-Afrika.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>Ek kan verstaan, dat die edele lede wat die werkers verteenwoordig van die myne en spoorweë, ens., verlangend is, die feesdaë soveel moontlik aan mekaar te kry. Maar ek is ook heeltemal teen &#x2019;n verandering van Hemelvaartsdag en Dingaansdag. Die twee daë moet bly soos die is, maar hier het ons b.v. A, waaronder hulle voorstel dat Goeievrydag, die volgende Saterdag en Maandag feesdaë word, dus dat die tussenliggende Saterdag&#x2014;tussen Goeievrydag en Sondag&#x2014;ook &#x2019;n feesdag word, sodat daar in geheel vier daë aanmekaar kom. Ek is dan ook daarvoor, dat die saak verwys word na &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee en hulle kan daaroor oordeel en sien wat die beste is. Maar ek hoop, dat die Selekt Komitee die besondere wens omtrent Goeievrydag en Dingaansdag in rekening sal neem, want die twee daë moet beskerm word. Ek glo ook nie, dat daar een edele lid in die Huis is wat die twee daë wil verskuif of afskaf nie, maar soos ek gesê het deur die voorstel A, is daar kans om vier vakansiedaë aaneen te kry en ek dink daar is veel voor te sê.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">B. I. J. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Ek het die verdaging van die debat voorgestel. Ek weet nie of Mr. Speaker my wel goed verstaan het nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mnr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Ek had verstaan, dat die edele lid vir Ventersdorp (Lt.-Kol. B. I. J. van Heerden) voorstel dat die debat verdaag sal word tot hede oor ses maande?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">B. I. J. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Ek het eers dit voorgestel Mnr. Speaker, maar tans stel ek voor om somar die bespreking te verdaag.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Really, I hope the hon. member for Ventersdorp (Lt.-Col. B. I. J. van Heerden) will not take that course. It has been made as clear as possible that my hon. friend does not wish in this proposal to run counter to any strong sentiment, but merely to ascertain whether, consistent with the observance of the deep-rooted sentiments attaching to certain days, alterations can be made.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR</person>:</from>

<p>I think this debate has perhaps shown the hon. member that this Bill is not quite ripe for the discussion of a Select Committee. I would object <span class="col_553" refersTo="page_0634"/>to this motion, in the first place, because we have too many Select Committees sitting now. It is the greatest difficulty, I can assure the hon. member, to get a quorum on some of the Select Committees I am concerned with, and we have motions on the paper for no less than four Select Committees, in addition to the one the hon. member is now moving for. I say that without any reflection on the motives of the hon. member in bringing this forward, or on the reasonableness of his motion, because I admit&#x2014;I think everybody admits&#x2014;that the arrangement of the public holidays we have is not convenient from the general public point of view, but the difficulty that the Government has met, when they have been asked from time to time to change these things, is exactly the difficulty we see in the House today. The sentiment on one side or the other of people who are so much attached to one or other day, makes it impossible to bring about a change without deeply hurting sentiments which one feels bound to respect. I was somewhat surprised to hear the hon. member for Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) say he had no objection to Dingaans Day being on the 15th of December.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hertzog">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HERTZOG</person>:</from>

<p>I mentioned Dingaan&#x2019;s Day simply as an instance.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR</person>:</from>

<p>But we immediately found hon. members on the same side of the House taking up an attitude strongly differing from that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>They kept it on the 17th last year.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>Because it was a Sunday.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR</person>:</from>

<p>I will leave the hon. member for Bloemfontein (North) (Mr. Barlow) to interpret the speeches of those hon. members; he is quite capable of doing it. But we see that the sentiments of a great many hon. members are strongly moved by any attempt to move that holiday from the day on which it is now kept, and, therefore, I would suggest to the hon. member that the time is not yet ripe for bringing in his motion to ask a Select Committee to sit and discuss a general rearrangement of the public holidays of the Union. That Committee will find itself in exactly the same difficulties we have in the House now. I think the hon. member should confine himself to the first part of the motion, that the order be discharged, and leave out the second part, that it be referred to a Select Committee. I do not accuse the hon. member of trying to hurt anybody&#x2019;s feelings, but I assure him that, though the present arrangement of public holidays is not as convenient as it may be, still I would ask him to realize that feelings and sentiments are too strongly attached to certain days to allow any rearrangement of these days to be made.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. S. GROBLER</person>:</from>

<p>Ek wil net &#x2019;n paar woorde sê oor die saak voor die Huis en wel dat ek teleurgestel is met die voorstel om die saak te verwys na &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee en dat lede aan die oorkant dit steun. Wat is die bedoeling van so&#x2019;n Selekt Komitee? Natuurlik om van die feesdaë te verlê, en ek dink nie dat dit heeltemal reg is nie. Een edele lid aan die anderkant het my ander dag beskuldig dat ek dom is, maar hier is bepaald onkunde in die spel.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#beyers">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BEYERS</person>:</from>

<p>Maar die edele lid is regtig swak van begrip.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. S. GROBLER</person>:</from>

<p>Ek kan dit as niks anders beskou nie dan as onkunde; want daar is jou kristelike feesdaë eenmaal vasgelê. Daar is Dingaansdag wat op &#x2019;n bepaalde datum val en daar is die Sondag, nou wil die vriende daar oorkant dit terwille van die arbeiders verleg, maar waarom dan nie liewer op Sondag nie, vra hulle?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>Maar gee hulle dan die Vrydag en Saterdag tussenin.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. S. GROBLER</person>:</from>

<p>Ek is daarop teen uit beginsel. Die nuwe voorstelle kom van die mense, wat nie altyd die godsdienstige opvattings van andere eerbiedig nie, en ek is verbaas daaroor, dat die edele lid vir Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) soiets kan voorstel, dog ek gaat saam met die edele lid vir Rustenburg (de hr. P. G. W. Grobler) dat ons nooit Hemelvaartsdag, Dingaansdag of ander kristelike of nasionale feesdaë sal verander nie. Ek vertrou daarom dat ons nie die kristelike fondament onder daardie dae sal uitneem nie. Die Kerk sal in &#x2019;n moeilikheid kom.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#keyter">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KEYTER</person>:</from>

<p>Ek het geen beswaar as lede die saak na &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee wil verwys nie, maar ag dit my plig om patlangs te sê hoe ek oor die saak dink. Ek sal nooit my stem daarvoor gee om Hemelvaartsdag of Dingaansdag te verander nie, want daardeur word onse hele geskiedenis uit verband geruk. En 31 Mei is die geskiedkundige dag waarop ons vrede gemaak bet en ook waarop later die Unie tot stand gekom het&#x2014;om dit op &#x2019;n ander dag te plaas, sou die geskiedenis uit verband ruk. Uniedag is juis daargestel op so&#x2019;n manier, dat die sou saam val met vereniging. Neem Dingaansdag. Sarel Cilliers het die belofte afgelê dat die sestiende December sal as &#x2019;n Sabbat gevier word in onse geskiedenis; en nou word voorgestel dat ons dit op &#x2019;n ander dag moet bepaal of skrap, waar bly op die manier die geskiedenis? Dit spyt my erg dat die edele lid vir Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) daarvoor sou wees om dit op &#x2019;n Maandag te vier, as die sestiende op &#x2019;n Sondag val. In my deel van die wereld word die sestiende nog steeds godsdienstig gevier, al word Saterdag en Maandag vrolikheid gehou, maar die sestiende is &#x2019;n godsdianstige dag. Ek sal in geen geval stem vir enige verandering van die drie feesdaë nie, t.w. Hemelvaartsdag, Dingaansdag of Uniedag, want dan verander ons onse geskiedenis.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry that the hon. member for Bethal (Lt.-Col. H. S. Grobler) has caused this discussion to take place. He says that the principle coming from this side of the House&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Lt.-Col. H. S. GROBLER <i>dissented.</i></block>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>Let me tell the hon. member I was born a republican. My father was one <span class="col_554" refersTo="page_0635"/>of the first Englishmen in the Free State only a few years, twelve years, after the voortrekkers. My family is an older family than that of any of those hon. members sitting in front of me, in the Free State, and I would be the last man on earth to support my hon. friend or anybody else against Dingaan&#x2019;s Day. I do not know whether my hon. friend belongs to the Transvaal&#x2014;I think he was born in the Cape&#x2014;but I was not, I was born amongst the old voortrekker people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>What a fall from grace was there!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>It is not a fair argument that is being used. My hon. friend forgets that there are thousands of Dutch-speaking men in the Labour Party and the Labour Party is not against Dingaan&#x2019;s Day. All my hon. friend wanted was to get the holidays better arranged, and if we are going to talk so much about Dingaan&#x2019;s Day, and I respect it, let us keep it better than we are keeping it now. From what I can see to-day, Dingaan&#x2019;s Day is becoming a day for races, and sports, and cricket, and things like that, instead of a day when people should go to church and pray&#x2014;a day of thanksgiving. Do not let us forget that Dingaan&#x2019;s Day was not kept on Dingaan&#x2019;s Day last year but the day after, because the law says if it falls on a Sunday it should be kept on a Monday, and I think that Dingaan&#x2019;s Day of all days should be kept on a Sunday. I agree with the hon. the Minister of the Interior, but I think it is impossible in a Parliament like this to bring Bills of that sort before the House where sentiment is so strong. Here we have my hon. friend the member for Tembuland (Mr. Stuart) representing purely a native constituency, where every native is against Dingaan&#x2019;s Day&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUART</person>:</from>

<p>I am not ashamed of it either.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>No, but the sentiment is so strong. We also have one standing up for Empire Day and another standing up for Dingaan&#x2019;s Day, and so on. We cannot get these Bills through because it is impossible, and I would advise my hon. friend to withdraw it. It is only going to cause trouble amongst people where there should be no trouble. No Englishman, of English-speaking man, cares much about Dingaan&#x2019;s Day, and no Dutch-speaking man about Empire Day when you get up and start fishing in troubled waters. He wants to point out that the hon. member for Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) is against Dingaan&#x2019;s Day. It is not correct. The hon. member for Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) has shown what he can do for his people on many a stricken field; he has even been driven out of his party for showing what he can do for his people. This will not go down with the English, that sort of talk, and I am certain it will not go down with the decent Dutch. I ask my hon. friend to withdraw it and let us go on with the work. It is only going to mean party feelings and passions, and we do not want them to be aroused. Let me say that the Labour Party has nothing whatever to do with the Bill. It is a private member&#x2019;s Bill which my hon. friend has thought fit to introduce. As far as the Labour Party is concerned, we think as much of Dingaan&#x2019;s Day, and reverence it, as much as anybody else in the House, and it is an unfair statement to say we come from overseas and do not think about this great sentiment. It is unfair, unjust, and untruthful.</p>

<p>Motion for the adjournment of the debate, with leave withdrawn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fourie">

<from>Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. C. FOURIE</person>:</from>

<p>Ek het daarvoor gewaarsku dat dit tot twis sou lei en dit is onnodig. Die edele lid vir Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) het m.i. &#x2019;n fout gemaak, maar dit kom iedereen soms oor. Ek moet verklaar teleurgestel te wees met sy houding, deur daardie voorstel te steun en wel omdat hy een van die leiers is, is ek teleurgestel. Hy is wel nie my leier nie, maar ek siet teen hom op net soseer as teen een van my eige kant se leiers en ek was teleurgestel om te hoor, dat hy bereid bevonde sou word om Dingaansdag te verskuif. Nou verklaar hy en die ander voorstanders wel, dat hulle die dag nie wegneem nie, dog enkel verskuif. Maar net sodra mens dit verskuif, is dit nie meer dieselfde dag nie; dit spreek tog vanself, want sodra as ek my of &#x2019;n familielied se geboortedag verskuif, dan eer ek nie meer daardie familielid se verjaarsdag nie en net so is dit met &#x2019;n historiese of kristelike feesdag. Wat ons voorstanders van behoud van daardie dage bedoel is is om vas te hou aan die tradisie, en die gelofte van die vadere was om die dag te vier as &#x2019;n rusdag. Laat dit nie by ons &#x2019;n beswaar wees as dit Sondag is nie, want as ons dit verander, dan vervals ons die feesdag. Ek gaan met die lid vir Bloemfontein (Noord) (de hr. Barlow) saam, dat dit beter sal wees, as die voorstel teruggetrek word, liewer as dat die bespreking aanleiding gee tot bitterheid.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cilliers">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. A. CILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>Ek weet nie waarom voorgestel word die saak na &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee te verwys nie, want geen ander dae sal aangeneem word nie, maar miskien sal die edele lid, wat die voorstel ingedien het, nadat hy die argument oor en weer gehoor het, bereid bevonde word om die voorstel terug te trek. Ons voel sterk op sekere punte en ek persoonlik sal niks toegee nie en ek neem die waarskynlikheid aan, dat daar mense aan die ander kant is, wat omtrent sekere andere dage net so sterk voel as ous op sekere andere&#x2014;dit is &#x2019;n kwessie van sentiment en dit kan nie verwag word, dat mens daarop sal toegee nie. Ek kan nie nalaat nie om hier protes aan te teken teen die opvatting van sommige, dat Dingaansdag laaste jaar nie op die bepaalde dag gevier is nie. Dingaansdag is vir &#x2019;n bepaalde doel in die geskiedenis opsy geset en ek sal my stem daar nooit voor gee om dit te verander nie. Dit is m.i. hopeloos om dit na &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee te verwys en ek denk die voorsteller moet dit liewer terugtrek.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naudé">

<from>†De <person refersTo="hansard_za">hr. NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>Ek wens graag te antwoord bp wat die edele lede vir Bethal (Lt.-Kol. H. S. Grobler) en die edele lid vir Barberton (Lt.-Kol. J. C. Fourie) verklaar het en wens met een te sê <span class="col_555" refersTo="page_0636"/>dat die here totaal onder &#x2019;n verkeerde indruk is as hulle meen dat die edele lid vir Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) voorgestel het om Dingaansdag se datum te verander. Hulle het hom dan helemaal verkeerd verstaan. En ek neem die edele lid dit dan gladnie kwalik nie as hy die edele lid vir Bethel (Lt.-Kol. H. S. Grobler) van swakheid en onkunde beskuldig as die edele lid sy woorde so &#x2019;n mening kon gee. Die edele lid vir Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) keur nie sekere dae goed of af nie, maar keur alleen goed dat die hele kwessie van ons vakansie dae na &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee verwese sal word. Hulle kan dan alle punte noukeuriglik na gaan en voorstelle optrek omtrent welke die geskikste daë sal wees. As iemand ten gunste van die verwysing na &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee is, dan volg daaruit volstrek nog nie dat hy voor die aanbevelings van so &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee moet wees. Verder het die edele lid vir Bethal (Lt.-Kol. H. S. Grobler) die edele lid vir Witbank (de hr. de Villiers) beskuldig dat hy die arbeiders ondersteun om Goeie Vrydag en Paasmaandag af te skaf; maar nog die arbeiders nog die edele lid het ooit soiets voorgestel; die voorstel is om albei die dae te behou en om daarby nog die Saterdag wat tussen in val ook as &#x2019;n vakansie dag te vier. Lede moet nie dinge so verdraai nie, bly by die waarheid. Nog die edele lid vir Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) nog die edele lid vir Bloemfontein (Noord) (de hr. Barlow) het beweer dat Dingaansdag moet verander word, nog het die lid vir Witbank (de hr. de Villiers) beweer dat Goeie Vrydag of Paasmaandag afgeskaf moet word. Ek hoop daar sal &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee aangestel word en dat daar dan voorsiening deur hulle gemaak sal word vir die viering van &#x2019;n spesifieke Afrikaner Dag.&#x201D; Ons het &#x2019;n Unie Dag, seifs &#x2019;n Empire Dag waarop ons vrinde wat die Empire so lief het die roem van die Empire kan sing, maar ons het geen Afrikaner Dag nie. Ons wil ook &#x2019;n dag he waarop ons onsself op die bors kan slaan en met trots kan uitroep &#x201C;ek is trots om &#x2019;n Afrikaner te wees.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nixon">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NIXON</person>:</from>

<p>Wat van Dingaansdag?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naudé">

<from>De <person refersTo="hansard_za">hr. NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>My vriend daar, die edele lid vir Denver (de hr. Nixon) verstaan nie die betekenis van Dingaansdag nie, dat dit &#x2019;n dag is spesiaal toegewijd om &#x2019;n sekere belofte na te kom, en hy sal so iets nooit kan begryp nie. Ons wil &#x2019;n dag hê waarop ons met trots kan wys op sulke gebeurtenisse b.v. as die driejarige Boere oorlog toe Ons die magtigste ryk ter wereld met &#x2019;n handje vol Boere vir drie jare trotseer het. So &#x2019;n dag as die Engelsman vind in Trafalgar Dag, en die Amerikaner in sy Onafhankelykheids Dag. Ek hoop dus dat ons so &#x2019;n Afrikaner Dag sal toegesê word, en wil aan die hand gee dat &#x2019;n geskikte dag sou wees die 10de October, die geboortedag van die groot Afrikaner Paul Kruger. Ons sal op so &#x2019;n dag dan die selfde trots kan voel as ons Engelse landgenote op hulle Empire dae en Trafalgar dae.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>It is regrettable that a question affecting public holidays should arouse so much passion. To make a party question of a matter of this kind is a pretty poor thing. I believe that the discussion has shown, as the Minister rightly said, that the time for the Bill is not ripe, and that an enquiry should be established before the Bill is framed. The hon. member will find that because of strong religious and historical traditions it will be impossible to interfere with certain days without wounding the susceptibilities of a very large number of people in this country. But there are other days which could easily be arranged, and when we are in Select Committee, away from all these recriminations and passions, we should be able to find those days the changing of which will not interfere with strong religious and historical sentiment. This Bill will have to come forward in a new form, and I would suggest to my hon. friend that he should table a motion early next session to the effect that the question of public holidays be referred to a Select Committee, and no doubt something could be done. There can be no question with regard to certain of these days that, as the hon. member proposes, they can be shifted for a day or two, so long as the days themselves are observed. Probably that idea will be supported from all quarters of the House, but I think that Ascension Day and Dingaans Day should be left where they are.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#strachan">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRACHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I wish briefly to say that in introducing this Bill I had no intention whatsoever to offend the susceptibilities, religious or otherwise, of any member of this House, or any member of the public outside this House. As I made it perfectly clear when introducing this motion, the intention was to make the present one-day public holidays, especially those in the month of May, fall at the end of the week or on a Monday, in order that they would be of more value to working class people. Many hon. members in this House have a life, which it seems to me, is one long holiday, and they fail to realize that one-day holidays are the only breaks many working men get. The Minister of the Interior has said that the time is inopportune for considering this matter at all. Well, whatever may be the opinion inside this House, the opinion outside the House is that it is very opportune. I have had letters from nearly every part of the Union in support for some of the alterations I have suggested. However, I am prepared now to consider, and consider favourably, the suggestion made by the hon. member for Cape Town (Castle) (Mr. Alexander). Next session, if I am spared, and nothing takes place in the political world during the recess, and we have all come back&#x2014;there are many hon. members over there who have good reason to fear that, for I feel that this corner will not hold my party by any means&#x2014;I will move that the whole question of public holidays be sent to a Select Committee for consideration and report. I hope it is now clear that there has been no intention whatsoever to offend anyone. My desire, as I say, has been to meet the wishes of a considerable section of the people of this country who are dissatisfied with the inconvenient dates upon which many of the public holidays fall.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from><span class="col_556" refersTo="page_0637"/>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I do not suppose anybody in this House enjoys a holiday more than I do. Many of us are deeply grateful to the hon. member for Stamford Hill (Mr. Creswell) for the holiday we had this day week, but those of us who were in the House when the 1910 Bill was introduced will remember that it was then thought that there were too many holidays already. The hon. member, by this little Bill, endeavours to get more holidays. He tries to get, for instance, the Saturday between Good Friday and Easter Monday. Nobody has so far spoken on behalf of the employers who will have to bear the expense of an extra holiday on the Saturday. I did not rise with the object of prolonging the debate, but to move an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To delete all the words after the word &#x201C;discharged&#x201D; to the end of the motion.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#lemmer">

<from>Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEMMER</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Amendment to omit all the words after discharged&#x201D; to the end of the motion, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Motion, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#cape_of_good_hope_savings_bank_society_amendment_bill">

<heading>CAPE OF GOOD HOPE SAVINGS BANK SOCIETY AMENDMENT BILL.<br/>KAAP DE GOEDE HOOP SPAARBANK GENOOTSCHAP WIJZIGINGS WETSONTWERP.</heading>

<p>Third Order read: Second reading, <i>Cape of Good Hope Savings Bank Society Amendment Bill.</i></p>

<speech by="#bisset">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BISSET</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>This is a very modest little Bill and I hope it will not excite any angry little passions. Its object is merely to provide more adequate remuneration for the directors of a society, which has grown far beyond the original expectations when it was established. Perhaps I may be allowed to give a brief review of the history of that bank. This bank was established as the result of a public meeting of the inhabitants of the Cape Colony, held in Cape Town on the 23rd of November, 1830. In those days it was still possible to have meetings of the inhabitants of the Cape Colony at Cape Town. It was decided at this meeting to establish a bank for the purpose of receiving deposits from benevolent and charitable societies, tradesmen, mechanics, labourers, servants, children and others, and a number of persons were elected to form the society and as managers of that society. Provision was made that the persons who were then elected to be the managers and all such householders residing in Cape Town or within eight miles thereof, as should from time to time thereafter be elected as managers, were to carry on the business of the bank. Originally the president and members were not entitled to receive any salary at all, but a subsequent Ordinance (No. 10 of 1848) provided that an allowance would be made, not exceeding £500, for the directors of the society. The proposal now is that that amount should be increased to £1,500, and the reason for asking that is that the business of this society has grown to such a large extent. Even during the last twenty years there has been an enormous growth in the business. In 1894 there was an amount standing to the credit of depositors of £87,000. In 1923 £633,000. In 1914 £84,000 were invested in bonds, in 1923 that amount had increased to £699,000, and what is known as the protecting fund, to protect the depositors, had increased from £74,000 to £130,000. During the last twenty years there has been an enormous growth in the operations and business of this bank, which has been carried on in the most prudent and sound manner, and at the recent meeting of the members of the society, the directors were authorized to take the necessary step to provide for an increase of their remuneration, and the only way that can be done is by Act of Parliament. There are nine directors, and the proposal is that £1,500 should be set aside for the nine directors as their remuneration.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#boydell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BOYDELL</person>:</from>

<p>Not £1,500 each.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bisset">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BISSET</person>:</from>

<p>No. £1,500 for the nine. Then there is another provision. In the old Ordinance establishing this society it was decided that two managers of the society shall attend daily at the office of the bank to receive and pay out on the deposits of people who do business with the society. That has been observed ever since the institution of the bank and is observed to-day. And it was decided that the two managers who did that should receive remuneration of 5s. each. This provides that the amount shall be increased to 10s. per day each&#x2014;a very modest amount, my hon. friend the member for Durban (Greyville) (Mr. Boydell) will agree.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a second time; House to go into Committee now.</p>

<p>House in Committee.</p>

<p>Clauses and Title put and agreed to.</p>

<p>House Resumed.</p>

<p>Bill reported without amendment and read a third time.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#importation_of_slaughter_stock">

<heading>IMPORTATION OF SLAUGHTER STOCK.<br/>INVOER VAN SLACHTVEE.</heading>

<p>Fourth Order read: Adjourned debate on motion on importation of slaughter stock, to be resumed.</p>

<p>Debate (adjourned on 26th February) resumed.</p>

<speech by="#naudé">

<from><span class="col_557" refersTo="page_0638"/>†De <person refersTo="hansard_za">hr. NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>Toe die debat laaste keer verdaag werd, was ek besig te bespreek die invoer van beeste uit Rhodesië en aan te toon, dat dit eientlik die groot moeilikheid is en waarom die Nasionale Party laaste jaar voor &#x2019;n invoerverbod van vee was en ook nou weer dit voor die Huis bring. Tot tyd en wyle dit geskied, sal daar geen verbetering kom vir ons veeboerdery nie. Verlede jaar was die mosie heeltemaal onaannemelik vir die Regering en die edele die Eerste Minister het hom daarteen verklaar. Van jaar kom dieselfde mosie voor die Huis en vanjaar is die wel aannemelik. Waarom? Ek begryp dit gladnie. Maar nou in verband met die reëling wat intusse gemaak is in verband met beeste van minder as 800 pond wat nie ingevoer mag word nie, wil ek sê, dat die gewig veels te lig is. Beeste van 800 pond gros gewig soos die Wet hier sê beteken beeste van 400 pond netto gewig. Dis baie klein beeste. Dit sal nie veel help nie. Ons wil &#x2019;n algehele verbod sien, maar as daar &#x2019;n maatreël geneem word in verband met gewig, dan moet verbied word om beeste in te voer van nie minder as 1,000 pond of meer. Dan sou dit in sekere mate die boer kan help. Die edele lid vir Wodehouse (de hr. Venter) het gesê en natuurlik is dit ook aangehaal deur die edele die Minister van Landbouw, dat de Regering nie soiets mag doen teen Rhodesië nie, want dat Rhodesië baie meer invoer van die Unie as wat ons invoer van Rhodesië. Maar hulle vergeet, dat die posiesie met Rhodesië so is, dat wat hulle van die Unie kry, is wat hulle nie sonder kan klaar kom nie en hulle koop dit op die goedkoopste markt. Dis nie liefde vir die Unie nie. Dis goed wat Rhodesië absoluut nodig het en nie sonder kan klaar kom nie en daarom kom koop in die Unie. Maar met die beeste is dat so, dat ons daar sonder nie alleen kan klaarkom nie, maar dat die invoer daarvan ons ook groot nadeel besorg. Maar dit help nie om daaroor te argumenteer en veel woorde te gebruik. Daar moet iets gedoen word om die boer te help. Wat Rhodesië kry van die Unie het hulle absoluut broodnodig. En die beste bewys is, dat Rhodesië nie protesteer teen die maatreël wat nou deur die Regering geneem is nie, omdat dit die belang van Rhodesië nie skaad nie. Dan kan die nie veel wees in die belang van die Unie nie. Die edelagbare die Minister het gesê, dat Rhodesië tevrede is met die reëling. Natuurlik, die gaat hulle geen kwaad doen nie en dit kan dus seker nie veel beteken in belang vir die boer in die Unie nie. Verlede jaar is daar gesê, dat volgens die handelsooreenkoms kennis van enige verandering moet word gegee zes maande van te vore, maar ons het nog nooit gehoor dat die kennisgeving gegee is nie. Waarom was die kennisgeving nie nodig nie? En tog is daar nou n verandering in die ooreenkoms aangebring sonder die minste kennisgeving, want ons het nooit verneem dat daar &#x2019;n kennisgeving gegee is van hierdie verandering in die ooreenkoms omtrent die bepaling dat geen beeste van minder as 800 pond mag word ingevoer nie. Dus vind ons dat die ooreenkoms met Rhodesië gebreek is en dan word gesê, dat Rhodesië so grootmoedig gewees het om daarin toe te stem, sonder iets daarvoor te kry. Ek kan my goed voorstel, dat edele lede anderkant die Huis werkelik glo, dat Rhodesië van iets van waarde afstand sou doen, sonder die minste vergoeding want hulle glo alles wat die Minister sê, maar ons aan dit kant kan dit nie aanneem nie. Nee, ons moet hulle laat verstaan, dat ons eie belang by ons die eerste weeg en dat selfbehoud die eerste en grootste belang is vir die Unie. Dan sal daar geen kwessie van wryving wees nie. Hulle sal self insien dat dit so is en dat hulle as hulle in die posiesie was gewees, dieselfde gedoen sou het. [Een Edele Lid: Hulle kan teen-maatreëls neem.] Hulle sal vind, dat hulle sonder die goed van Suid-Afrika nie klaar kom nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_van_mijnwezen_en_nijverheid">

<from>De <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER VAN MIJNWEZEN EN NIJVERHEID</person>:</from>

<p>Hulle kan die goedere op ander plekke ook kry.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naudé">

<from>De <person refersTo="hansard_za">hr. NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>Hulle koop op die goedkoopste markte. En ek wil in verband met die reëling nog iets onder die aandag bring, wat my baie eienaardig voorkom en dit is Artiekel F. wat sê&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;Dat beeste, afgesien van hulle gewig, toegelaat sal word vir invoer in die Unie, op voorwaarde dat sodanige beeste tot bypro dukte in extrakt fabrieke verwerk word.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Dus dis &#x2019;n bepaling waaronder beeste van Rhodesië ingevoer kan word van enige gewig om in fabrieke, wat hier nog gestig mag word, te word gebruik vir byprodukte. En die eienaardige is, dat net toe die ooreenkoms getref is, die Imperiale Koelkamers &#x2019;n fabriek het opgesit in Messina. Ons het weer gedink dat ons nou &#x2019;n fabriek gaan kry waar minderwaardige klasse van beeste verwerk kan word en toe vind ons, dat die beeste voornamelik sal kom van Rhodesië. Daar is seifs &#x2019;n brug gebou oor die rivier by Messina om makkeliker beeste te kan kry van Rhodesië. Waarom nie heengegaan en die beeste wat ons nie kan verkoop nie, waar geen mark voor is nie, alleen te laat verwerk in die fabriek? Waarom moet daardie voorsiening gemaak word uitdrukkelik vir beeste wat ingevoer word om te word verwerk in fabrieke wat ewentueel sal word opgerig? Daar word so baie gesê, dat &#x2019;n beter klas beeste moet geproduseer word. Ek stem daarmee heeltemaal saam, maar ons het die swakker klas beeste en juis die boere wat die klas vee het is in die grootste ellende en dis die boere wat gered moet word in die eerste plaas. Hulle is besig om te verdrink. Ek stem saam, dat &#x2019;n betere klas vee moet geteel word, maar die edelagbare die Minister sal insien, dat die boere wat in die ellende verkeer dit onmoontlik kan doen. Die Minister sal moet sorg, dat hulle goeie bulle kry op koste van die Regering en hulle laat betaal vir die gebruik daarvan. Maar die arm boer kan nie &#x2019;n goeie bul koop nie. Die Regering moet vir hom help om &#x2019;n goeie bul in hande te kry. Dan dink ek ook aan die buite-distrikte waar baie bulle rondloop, kaffer-bulle, wat heeltemaal ongeskik is. Alle bulle behoor geregistreer <span class="col_558" refersTo="page_0639"/>te word, sodat nie bulle gebruik kan word, wat ongeskik is nie. Dan sal ons &#x2019;n beter klas vee kry. Daar word gesê, dat in die ou tyd die boere nie altoos om hulp tot die Regering gekom het nie. Maar, daar word vergeet by te sê, dat in die ou daë jy nie die Regering gehad het, wat ons nou het, wat alleen daar op uit skyn te wees om die boer te belas. As dit nie is die beestebelasting, dan is dit tabaksbelasting, of belasting op medisyne ens., almaal belastings wat die boer voornamelik tref. As daar &#x2019;n plek was waar hulle heen kon vlug, dan kan ek die edelagbare die Minister die versekering gee, dan sou hulle vlug om die teenwoordige Regering te ontkom. Ongelukkig is daar nie plek waar hulle heen kan gaan nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_van_mijnwezen_en_nijverheid">

<from>De <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER VAN MIJNWEZEN EN NIJVERHEID</person>:</from>

<p>Baie het naar die Protektoraat, naar Suid-West, gegaan en weer terug gekom.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naudé">

<from>De <person refersTo="hansard_za">hr. NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>Omdat die Unie Regering daar ook gekom het. As die Regering daar nie sou gekom het, sou hulle daar gebly het. Die toestand van die beesboere is ongelukkig, baie kritiek en ek is seker die edelagbare die Minister besef nie heeltemaal hoe ernstig die toestand is nie, vooral van die boere in die Noordelike Transvaal wat voornamelik afhankelik is van beesboerdery. Daar is baie wat nie eens bankrot kan gaan nie, omdat hulle absoluut niks besit nie waarop hulle bankrot kan gaan. En dis die klas van mense wat die Regering moet probeer om te red. Ons stem hier jaar na jaar duisende van ponde vir nedersettinge om te probeer mense op gronde te kry. Laat ons liewer geld beskikbaar stel, al word daar ok op verloor, om die boere te red. Hulle is sonder hulle skuld in die toestand. Daar is nie die minste bewys, dat hulle swak boere gewees het nie. Hulle het in die verlede hardwerkende boere gewees en daar behoor poginge aangewend te word om hulle op die grond te behou. Daar is duisende, of laat ek sê honderde, van goewernementsplase, waarop boere is geset om alleen met beeste te boer en hulle vind uit, dat hulle nou nie kan bestaan nie. Daar word duisende gespandeer om boere op die grond te kry, maar ons moet probeer om hulle daar te hou. En een van die voornaamste middele is, die mosie voorgestel deur die edele lid vir Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) om die invoer van beeste te belet.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cilliers">

<from>†Kapt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. S. CILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>Dit kom my voor dat die laaste spreker besiel is met die gees van alles te neem, niks te gee. Hy sê, Rhodesië kan nie sonder dit of dat klaar kom, wat van hier daarheen uitgevoer word. Ek vra of die gees is wat moet heers met bertekking tot naburige State. Ek wil dit sê, dat dit baie gevaarlik is wanneer jy daardie beginsel inneem, waar jy te doen het met invoer en uitvoer. Ek wens te herinner aan wat jare terug gebeur het, toe Oudtshoorn en ander distrikte gekom het voor die ou Kaapse Regering, met voorstelle om belasting te hef op Transvaalse tabak. Hulle het solank aangehou, tot die Regering gevolg daaraan gegee het en toe is daar &#x2019;n belasting van 1s. per pond op Transvaal tabak gehef. Wat was die gevolg? President Kruger het sy Raad bymekaar geroep en gesê: &#x201C;Kyk, dit is nou die houding wat die Kaapprovinsie aanneem teenoor &#x2019;n suster-Staat. Ons moet ook ons stem laat hoor,&#x201D; en toe het hulle heen gegaan en &#x2019;n belasting van £1 op elke bees, perd, esel, donkie en vark, en &#x2019;n belasting van 1s. op elke skaap of bok gehef, wat ingevoer werd uit die Kaapprovinsie. Die gevolg was, dat die Kaapprovinsie met die hoed in die hand na Transvaal moes kom om die belasting herroep te kry. Rhodesië kan produkte ook van andere plekke kry. Ek het gedink dat my edele vriend &#x2019;n bietjie meer weet van suiker. Ons kry, namelik die suiker, hier in Suid-Afrika en ook in Portugese gebied, vanwaar Rhodesië dit net so goed sou kan kry. Rhodesië importeer lewensbehoeftes, soos meel ens., tot &#x2019;n waarde van oor die £50,000 elke jaar van de Unie. En hulle het hulle eie hawens en kan sekere goedere baie goedkoper van Australia en andere landen kry as van Suid-Afrika.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naudé">

<from>De <person refersTo="hansard_za">hr. NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>Hoekom koop hulle dit dan hier?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cilliers">

<from>Kapt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. S. CILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>Hulle is nie besiel met die gees van die edele lid vir Pietersburg (de hr. Naudé) nie. Hulle verstaan besigheid. Hulle behandel &#x2019;n buurman nie as &#x2019;n uitlander nie, maar as &#x2019;n buurman. Dit is die posiesie, maar die edele lid wil alles neem en niks gee nie. Mnr. Speaker, die mosie werd ingelei deur die leier van die Opposiesie en hy het gesê, dat dit &#x2019;n ernstige saak is. Ek betwyfel of hy ernstig is. Waar is die inleier van die voorstel nou? Hy het met die mosie voor die Huis gekom, &#x2019;n speech gehou en uit die Huis gegaan en nie weer ingekom nie vir meer as vyf minute. Ek dink die edele lede daar anderkant moet hulle leier op sy plig wys, dat hy hier moet wees om te volg wat aangaan. Ja, die leier van die Opposisie is eigenlik leier van leiers aan sy kant en ook leier van die edele lid vir Lichtenberg (de hr. T. J. Roos), die edele lid vir Calvinia (Dr. D. F. Malan) en die edele lid vir Stamford Hill (de hr. Creswell) en as hy werkelik belang gestel had in die saak voor die Huis, dan sou hy hier aanwesig gewees het, laats Dinsdag en cok vandag, want dit is wat van hom verlang word. Die edele lid vir Frankfort (de hr. J. B. Wessels) het verklaar, dat daar geen praktiese wenke van ons kant af kom nie, maar die wenke en voorstelle moet kom van sy kant en van sy leier, wat die mosie ingedien het. [Een Edele. Lid: &#x201C;Waar is die leier?&#x201D;] Dit is die plig van daardie kant van die Huis om &#x2019;n oplossing aan die hand te doen. Dit leg nie op die weg van &#x2019;n leier om net te praat oor die saak nie; ons weet, dat die leier van die Opposisie is &#x2019;n leier van leiers en die groot leier van daardie gekombineerde partye en dit is hulle, wat in die Transvaal &#x2019;n belasting opgeleg het op ons vee, en ander produkte wat na Johannesburg se mark gaan, en die Kaap Provinsie loop gebuk onder daardie belastings. Ek denk in hierdie verband aan die <i>Burger</i> spotprent van die bobbejaan aan die paal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mnr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Die edele lid moet hom bepaal tot die mosie voor die Huis.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cilliers">

<from>Kapt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. S. CILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>Ek wens daaraan te herinner dat in die Provinsiale Raad van <span class="col_559" refersTo="page_0640"/>Transvaal het die nasionaliste en arbeiders die meerderheid, en die genoemde belasting is hulle werk. Die feit is daar, dat die mag berus in die hande van die leier en dat as hy net die woord wil gee, dan sal die kombinasie van die twee partye gehoorsaam om die belastings terug te trek. As mens die meeste sake nagaan, sal blyk, dat dit die leier van die Opposisie nie erns is nie. Met welke doel b.v. dien hy hier &#x2019;n mosie in en is dan nie op sy plek om dieselwe uiteen te set nie? Daar word geseg, dat die ander provinsies sodanig swaar belas is, maar die Vrystaters, wat sy grootste ondersteuners is, moet net so swaar betaal aan dieselfde belasting. Waar kom die Unie in, as die een provinsie so die andereen kan belas? Hier word aangehaal, dat Rbodesië vee hierheen uitvoer en dit is wel waar, dat vanjaar dubbel soveel ingevoer werd daarvandaan as verlede. As ons egter aan die anderkant neem die uitvoer van vee en produkte, wat uit die Unie na Rhodesië uitgevoer word, dan blyk, dat vir die agt maande van die jaar, totsover £160,000 meer uitgevoer is as verlede jaar. Dan is daar nog die vraag of &#x2019;n groot deel van die vee, wat daarvandaan hierheen gaat nie weer verder uitgevoer word nie. Ek wil egter aanneem, dat dit alles hier verkonsumeer word, maar ons het dit, en Rhodesië koop ook baie van ons en die uitvoer daarheen is &#x2019;n ses, agt duisend pond meer. Hier in die Kaapkolonie b.v., waar die boere nie hulle muile kan verkoop nie en donkies skut toe moet jaag om daar iets voor te kry, hiervandaan is oor die ses duisend donkies na Rhodesië uitgevoer. Nou sal wel gesê word, dat Rhodesië nie sonder ons kan klaarkom nie, maar as ons sal terughou al wat hulle van ander ook sou kan kry, dan sal &#x2019;t blyk, dat hulle dit van aangrensende ander gebiede ook kan kry en net so goedkoop of nog goedkoper selfs. Dan is daar die feit, wat nie uit die oog verloor moet word nie, dat Rhodesië maak gebruik van onse spoorwege en neem b.v. negosieware en masjienerie alles oor onse spoorwege. Dit is &#x2019;n bron van grote inkomste. Ek had verwag, dat ons praktiese wenke sou kry, maar die lede aan die ander kant het net gekritiseer. Ek onthou nog verlede jaar, toe die Bounty Bill ingedoen werd en die leier van die Opposiesie verklaar dat niemand daar ebruik van gemaak het nie, en ek wil weet of ie beeste verlede jaar te klein was om uit te voer? Ek was verlede jaar in Wolmaransstad en die boere was heeldag besig om hulle beeste op te tel, wegens maerte. [Een Edele Lid: &#x201C;En die edel lid kry vir hulle nie eers jammer nie?&#x201D;] Ek sal geen notisie neem van daardie lid nie. Die Wet was nou een jaar in werking, en ek daag die lede anderkant uit om te bewys, dat een enkele bees in Transvaal en Vrystaat vet genoeg was om uit te voer. Maar daar is geen gebruik van gemaak nie. Moet ons biltong uitvoer van die aan maerte gevrekte beeste onder die Bounty Bill? Ek vertrou nogtans, dat die Regering daardie maatreël in werking sal laat; daar is goeie reens geval en daar sal miskien binnenkort baie vet beeste wees om uit te voer. Dit spyt my dat die edele lid vir Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) nie in sy setel is nie, want ek wou &#x2019;n beroep op hom doen as leier van die gekombineerde opposisie en die twee partye, wat in die Transvaal die meerderheid het in die Provinsiale Raad, dat, as hy ernstig is in die saak, om die boer te help, hy dit moet toon deur daardie mense te beweeg om die belasting van 2 persent, wat hulle hef op ingevoerde beeste uit Kaapland, af te neem. Maar op die laaste ding, wat uit die Kaap na Johannesburg toe gestuur word, bestaat belasting en iets moet gedaan word en die verpligting rus op een man en sy volgelinge en dit is die edele lid vir Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) wat dit in sy mag het om die ding in beweging te breng.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>Ons sou one beeste geluister en het sterk die indruk, dat Rhodesië hier ook &#x2019;n vertegenwoordiger hef. Ek wis nie, dat die lid vir Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers) daar vandaan kom nie, maar as mens so na sy toespraak luister, kom jy onder die indruk, dat hy daardie landstreek verteenwoordig. Hy het &#x2019;n belasting gevra, &#x2019;n leier en drywers belasting. Daar is die belasting op venduafslagers en dit is &#x2019;n doodeenvoudige manier om die beeste van Rhodesië te vang [Een Edele Lid: &#x201C;Waar kom jy daaraan?&#x201D;] om daar iets van in die hande te kry; niks anders nie. Die beeste word uit Rhodesië op onse markte verkoop en ons kry geen kans met onse eige beeste nie. Rhodesië voer kerse in en wat hulle verder nodig het, maar ons het hulle surplus beeste nie nodig nie en opdat ons kan leef, moet ons teen hulle beskerm word. Daar word geseg dat ons dit uit vriendskap moet doen, dog ons kan vriendskap onderhou en daarem ons goed beskerm teen hulle. Laat hulle kry wat hulle nodig het, maar nie hulle surplus hierheen stuur nie. Die beesboere in die Transvaal verkeer in &#x2019;n haglike toestand en daar moet iets gedaan word om hulle tegemoet te kom. Ons het voldoende aangetoon, dat die Wet geen sukses is nie, en dit sou beter wees, as beeste van 800 pond en meer wel ingevoer kon word en as dit geslag is 50 persent minder. Iedereen weet, dat elke ou koeitjie 400 pond weeg en die maatreël sal niks help nie. Ons weet, dat die beeste geskat moet word en ek het al slagters van dertig jaar ondervinding gesien, wat 100 tot 150 pond uit is op &#x2019;n bees met hulle skatting. Op Johannesburg word elke dag beeste geskat en daar maak hulle sulke foute, hoe sal dit nie gaan op die grens, waar sommer &#x2019;n ambtenaar aangestel word, wat miskien geen ondervinding het nie? Hy kan maklik beeste van 400 pond op 800 pond skat, wie van ons is daarby om hom te kontrôleer? Die persoon word aangestel as skatter, en hy gaat beeste van 600 en 700 pond skat op 800 en 900 pond. Wat sal dergelike beeste wees, as hulle afgeslag is? Hy kan verklaar 400 pond, wie sal met hom stry? Ek denk dat dit &#x2019;n hopelose toestand is en die Regering moet meer doen om onse land se mense tegemoet te kom. Dit is nou drie jaar, dat ons gedurig daarvoor pleit, dat die beesboer tegemoet gekom sal word en daar word ook elke jaar iets gedaan, maar &#x2019;t help niks nie. Hier word ook weer iets voorgestel, maar dit sal ook nie help nie. Ek verklaar beslis, dat hierdie Wet niks sal help <span class="col_560" refersTo="page_0641"/>nie, maar al wat sal help, is &#x2019;n totale verbod van die invoer van beeste uit Rhodesië. Dit sal die kwessie nie totaal oplos nie, maar het sal veel help. Ons hoor van fabrieke vir bewerking van die minderwaardige vleissoorte en dag dat dit nou die boer sou help, maar tans blyk, dat die fabrieke in Messina, Soutpansberg, geplaas sal word, dus ook weer om Rhodesië te help. Soas een edele lid geseg het, dit is net &#x2019;n brug oor die Limpopo.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_van_mijnwezen_en_nijverheid">

<from>De <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER VAN MIJNWEZEN EN NIJVERHEID</person>:</from>

<p>Hou hulle uit onse markte.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>Ons sou ons beeste kan uitvoer, maar ons moet ons beeste verbeter. Intussen is die Afrikaner goed en sy vleis is goed, maar daar ontbreek, dat die Regering liewer die arme boer moet help, maar daar word niks gedaan nie. Ons vra net en kan niks meer doen nie. Welke voorstel daar ook aangeneem word, dit sal die boer niks help nie. Die edele lid vir Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers) reken, dat die leier van die Opposisie die saak kan oplos deur die belasting in Transvaal af te trek. Nee, ek verwag van die Regering, dat hulle prakties sal optree, want in al die jare het die Regering nog nie met praktiese maatreëls voor die dag gekom nie. Verlede jaar het die Eerste Minister verklaar, dat die Bounty Bill sou help en ek het daarom daarvoor gestem, maar is teleurgesteld uitgekom. Ek dag, dat ek te dom is en dit daarom sou oorlaat aan die verstandige mense en hier kom hulle nou weer met &#x2019;n ander ding, maar ek reken nog, dat hulle op die verkeerde weg is&#x2014;ander jaar sal die toestand geen haar beter wees nie. Dit is jammer, dat die edelagbare die Minister vir Landbou nie in sy plek is nie want anderdag het hy gemaak of die Boerekongres &#x2019;n besluit geneem het teen die invoer van beeste uit Rhodesië. Dit is &#x2019;n verkeerde indruk; hulle was almaal daarvoor om die invoer te stop, maar nadat die Eerste Minister gepraat had en verklaar, dat hy niks sou doen om dit te stop nie en die Minister van Landbou dieselfde gedaan had, het hulle &#x2019;n kommissie benoem om ander planne te beraam. Die Regering het hulle feitelik gedwing en daaruit spruit dit voort, dat ons nou &#x2019;n gewig stelsel kry. Ek is egter seker daarvan, dat ons daar geen voordeel uit gaat haal nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fourie">

<from>†Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. C. FOURIE</person>:</from>

<p>Ek het vandag gevoel, dat die debat te ver gaat en aanstootlik word, en dit is uiters jammer, dat hier dinge geseg word wat nie waar is nie en ook onnodig. As &#x2019;n mens van jou eige uitinge notisie neem, moet jy dit ook doen ten aansien van die van ander. Laat die kritisie erken, dat die Wet van verlede jaar, wat so &#x2019;n mislukking was, aangeneem werd omdat hulle op die herhaalde uitnodiging van die Eerste Minister om iets beters aan die hand te gee, die nie kon doen nie. Sij edelagbare het verklaar: &#x201C;Die Wet sal nie vanjaar al help nie, maar gee julle iets beters aan die hand.&#x201D; Die Opposisie het verklaar, dat hulle daarvoor sou stem, omdat hulle nie aan iets beters kon denk nie en nou veroordeel hulle die maatreël sodanig. Dit is nie eerlik nie. Iemand het verklaar, dat die Transvaalse vendutiebelasting sou help, maar die mense gaan eenvoudig oor die lyn en koop daardie beeste en breng dit in by duisende. En as die doel van die belasting bereik word waarom sal ons dan nie belasting aan Transvaal gun? Daar word sodanig gehamer op Rhodesië en vergeet wordt dat daar ander gebiede ook is, van waar uit beeste by grote getale ingevoer word. Uit Swasiland, b.v. 8,500 en uit Betsjoeanaland 35,600, uit Zuid West Afrika 30,000, en dan uit Rhodesië 20,000. Trek deze daarvan af dan blyf daar 74,000 wat nie uit Rhodesië afkomstig is nie, dat is een aansienlike getal. Daardie ander gebiede koop niks van ons nie en Rhodesië koop tog baie dinge van ons. Maar is dit nie molik nie, dat Rhodesië &#x2019;n ander deur sal kry, as ons toemaak nie? Dit kom my voor of die regulasies nie veel sal help nie, omdat dit beperk word tot beeste van 800 pond lewende gewig, en dit is bekend dat dit een klein beest is, beeste van Rhodesië van 3 en 4 jaar oud sal maklik 800 pond lewendige gewig haal, en as hulle skoongemaak is, ongeveer 400 pond. Een edele lid sê dit kom daar nie op aan nie, maar Rhodesië sal die mark hou. Ek reken, dat die minimum gewig gestel moet word op 1,200 pond en so nodig nog hoër. Ek herinner my b.v., duidelik, dat as ons daar in my kiesafdeling &#x2019;n aasvool-skyfskiet hou die ou koeitjie, wat uitgeskiet word en sommer so ordinair lyk op die oog, sommer 400 skoon weeg, nadat sy doodgemaak is. Na my oordeel sal dit niks help om &#x2019;n beperking te set net op Rhodesië nie. Dit staat eenmaal vas, dat Rhodesië makliker beeste produseer as baie dele van die Unie, want hulle het, die warm hogeveld, wat daarvoor goed geskik is. As onse bees 600 pond haal, dan haal die bees van Rhodesië van deselfde klas en ouderdom 800. Ons kan eenmaal nie daarvan af wegkom nie, dat dit by uitstek &#x2019;n beeswereld is, terwyl groot streke van die Unie nie daardie veld besit nie. Daarom sal die beperking van 800 pond niks uitwerk nie. Die stap is in die regie rigting, maar gaat nie ver genoeg nie. Ek weet nie welke oorwegings by die Regering voorsit nie, maar dit weet ek dat as die gewig hoër gestel word, dan sal dit die toestroming van beeste uit Rhodesië en ander aangrensende streke beperk. Daar sal altoos genoeg wees om uit te kies buitekant onse grense, sodra die Unie &#x2019;n tekoet aan slagbeeste mag aanwys. Op die oomblik is die hek te groot oopgemaak en &#x2019;n minimum van 1,200 of seifs 1,600 pond sou beter die beoogde doel bevorder, 1.600 is nog beter, want &#x2019;n volgroeide os in Rhodesië, wat nie getrek het nie, en die is daar baie, weeg sommer maklik 1,600 pond. Wel, &#x2019;n bees wat &#x2019;n goeie oog maak, weeg maklik 800 pond, maar ek denk, dat sommige lede die lewendige en dooie gewigte met makaar verwar. Ek denk dat die beste sal wees, as die Regering die getal beeste beperk of die gewig verhoog. Ek vertrou, dat die Regering die saak sodanig sal aanpak, dat die instroming in die Unie van beeste uit die ander deur my genoemde streke ook beperk word. Dit moet geskiede, want die invoer van beeste uit Rhodesië en ander aan die Unie grensende gebiede is dodelik vir die beesboere van die Unie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heyns">

<from><span class="col_561" refersTo="page_0642"/>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEYNS</person>:</from>

<p>Ek moet die lid vir Barberton (Lt.-Kol. J. C. Fourie) gelukwens, dat hy nog &#x2019;n voorstander is van die verbodsbepaling op die invoer van beeste uit Rhodesie en Protektorate waar verlede jaar al die boere lede van die Regerings kan gepleit het vir die invoer verbodbepaling, pleit hulle nou vir die vry invoer. Hulle het toe presies so gepleit as ons, en dieselfde dinge gesê as ons; ek het toe nog verklaar, dat dit &#x2019;n geluk is, dat van daardie kant ook eenmaal gepleit word vir die belange van die boer en te hoop, dat hulle so ook sou stem. Die edele lid vir Bethal (Lt.-Kol. H. S. Grobler) het toe nog kwaad geword en verklaar, dat hy self weet hoe hy moet stem. Van dag praat hy nie meer van stem nie, maar van verhoogde gewigte. Waar kom dit vandaan? Eenvoudig daarvandaan, dat die Minister van Landbou &#x2019;n verbasende invloed het op die lede van die Regeringskant en ook op &#x2019;n sekere gedeelte van die volk en nou kom hy ons hier vertel van die besluite van die landbou unie. Maar die edelagbare die Minister vergeet om daarby te sê, dat hy eers die lede ingeprint het, dat hulle goeie vriende moet bly met Rhodesië, want dat Rhodesië baie meer goed van de Unie importeer as wat ons uit Rhodesië invoer. En die stomme lede aan die inderkant lê hulle daarby neer en gryp dan na die eerste strooihalm wat hulle kan gryp en soek na die beste plan wat oorbly. Ons word nou deur die anderkant geblameer, dat ons met modder gooi. Hulle sê dat die arbeiders en nasionaliste in Transvaal belasting op die beeste gelê het. Hulle het dit nie uit weelde gedoen nie en nie om die boer teen te gaan nie. Die Prowinsiale Raad van die Transvaal het die geld broodnodig gehad vir opvoeding van die kinders. Hulle is baie verontwaardig dat die kombinasie van arbeiders en nasionaliste die 2 persent belasting ook op alle grote vendusies en op die Johannesburgse veemark gelê het, maar as jy belas, dan moet jy almal belas. En waarom dan nie die beeste belas wat ingevoer word en wat op die oomblik ons markte beheers? Nou word gesê die kombinasie het die vreeslike misdaad gepleeg om boere te belas, maar hulle kon nie anders nie. Die geld was nodig vir opvoeding. Dis nie hulle skuld nie, maar die fout van die Parlement dat hulle die geld nie het nie. Die Parlement het hulle toelaë hier verminder en daar is nie een van die edele lede aan die anderkant, wat kan sê wat ons moet belas. As goud belas word, skreeu hulle dat jy nie die arme goudmagnate moet doodmaak nie. Toe die boer belas werd, skreeu hulle nog harder. Ons mag nie die boere belas, nie die goud belas, nie die beeste belas. Wat moet ons dan belas? Op watter manier moet ons dan ons kinders in die Transvaal opvoed en ons Administrasie voer? En dan kom die edele lid vir Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers), die agent van Rhodesië&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mnr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Die edele lid moenie daardie opmerkinge maak nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heyns">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEYNS</person>:</from>

<p>Nou ja, ek het maar net antwoord wil gee, want die edele lid vir Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers), het byna met trane in die oë gepleit vir Rhodesië. Hy moet wel &#x2019;n baie sagte plek het vir Rhodesië. Ek sal baie bly wees as die dag aanbreek wanneer hy soveel sal voel vir Suid-Afrika, vir sy eië boere. Daar bestaan &#x2019;n gesegde &#x201C;liefde begin by die huis,&#x201D; en dit weet die edele lid vir Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers) net so goed as ek. As daar superfosfaat in die land ingevoer word en die paar magnate, wat fabrieke het, kom daarteen protesteer, dan is ons gou genoeg om die dumpingwet toe te pas. Ons kan ons beeste nie verkoop nie en die handel word gedump van alle Protektorate en van Rhodesië. Daarom sê ek die nywerheid behoort beskerm te word. Waarom nie die beesboer beskerm nie; net so goed as die fabrieke beskerm word teen dumping? Dit is baie duurder vir ons boere om vee hier te teel as dit in Rhodesië is. En moenie eers met jou simpatie na Rhoedsië gaan en dan na SuidAfrika kom.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cilliers">

<from>Kapt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. S. CILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>Ons voer viermaal soveel aan waarde uit.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heyns">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEYNS</person>:</from>

<p>Ja, Rhodesië wil die goed van ons kry. Ek dink Rhodesië behoort baie dankbaar te wees dat ons hulle voorsien van goed. Maar, ons moet ons op die besigheidsvoeting plaas. Dis heeltemal iets anders, of mense hulp nodig het en nie sonder die hulp kan klaar kom nie. Maar die groot ding is, ons moet van Rhodesië ontvang wat ons nie nodig het nie en waar ons markte mee vol gestop word. Nou het edelagbare Ministers en lede van die anderkant gesê, dat daar &#x2019;n tolverbond bestaat en dat dit onmoontlik is om die invoer van beeste te belet. Ek weet nie of daar werklik soveel moeilikhede bestaan wat dit betref nie, want daar is voortdurend aan die verbond getorring. Eers is belet om bulle en aanteelbeeste in te voer, nou word die invoer van osse belet wat onder 800 pond lewe gewig is en ek dink as jy die ding goed beskou, dan is dit heeltemal moontlik om alle invoer te belet. Want as jy kan sê, osse onder 800 pond lewe gewig mag nie ingevoer word nie, dan kan jy ook net so goed sê, osse onder 1,600 pond mag nie ingevoer word nie. Dit sal die edele lid vir Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers) met my eens wees. Ons het al die arme boere in die Unie en hulle kan niks in die wêreld maak nie. Die koste om beeste te teel in die Unie is drie, vier maal so duur as wat dit vir Rhodesië kos om beeste groot te bring en hiernatoe te stuur. En ons moet dan kompeteer. Maar dis onmoontlik. Daar moet iets gedoen word vir die arme boere in die land, want die posiesie, veral van die beesboere in Transvaal, is baie kritiek. Hulle kan swaarlik die mielies verkoop, moeilik die beeste verkoop, hulle kan niks maak nie. Daar moet iets gedoen word. Dit help nie om so baie te praat nie. Ons vra die lede anderkant om ons te help en hulle spot met ons. Hulle vra waar die voorsteller van die mosie is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. W. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>Waar is die Minister van Landbou en die Eerste Minister?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heyns">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEYNS</person>:</from>

<p>Die edele lid vir Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) het hier genoeg volgelinge <span class="col_562" refersTo="page_0643"/>om die saak te behartig. Hy kan nie altyd hier wees nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cilliers">

<from>Kapt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. S. CILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>Sy plig is in die Huis.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heyns">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEYNS</person>:</from>

<p>Ons praat oor landbousake. Waar is nou die edele Minister vir Landbou? Dis sy plig om daar op die banke te sit om te luister na die klagte, wat gemaak word en behoorlik notiesie daarvan te neem.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_van_mijnwezen_en_nijverheid">

<from>De <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER VAN MIJNWEZEN EN NIJVERHEID</person>:</from>

<p>Dis nie sy mosie nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heyns">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEYNS</person>:</from>

<p>Wanneer daar &#x2019;n LandbouUnie bymekaar kom, dan is daar die edelagbare die Minister van Landbou teen woordig, maar as ons hierdie sake be pleit, dan sit daar die edelagbare Minister vir Mynwese en Nijverheid. Nou laat ons tog sover kom dat ons iets doen vir die arme sinkende boerebevolking. Daar is baie wat hulp nodig het. In my kiesafdeling is seker 75 persent van die boere magteloos en sinkende. Die voorstel om die invoer van beeste onder 800 pond te belet is net gemaak om ons hier tevrede te stel op hulle manier. Dis net kamoflage. Dit sal &#x2019;n groote uitsondering wees dat &#x2019;n boer die moeite neem en dat dit sal betaal om beeste van minder as 800 pond gewig na die Johanuesburgse mark te bring en die boere uit Rhodesië sal dit seker nie betaal nie om die klein beeste van onder die 800 pond hiernatoe te stuur nie. Die maatreël sal ons niks in die wêreld help nie. As die Regering iets wil doen, maak dit dan 1,200 of 1,500, sodat hulle alleen &#x201C;prime&#x201D; beeste hiernatoe stuur. Dit sal ons help. Daar word gekla, dat die boere die vleis duur wil maak. Die edelagbare die Minister van Mynwese en Nyverheid knik van ja. Dis nie die boer nie, maar die middelman wat die vleis duur maak. Ons betaal in die kleinhandel dieselfde prys vir die vleis as wat ons betaal het vóór die oorlog, toe die boere goeie pryse vir hulle vee gekry het. Ons het die hele laaste jaar in Selekt Komitee gesit en ons kon nie sover kom om die verskil te kry nie. Ons het gesoek om die verskil te vind, maar dit bly maar altyd so dat die boere £3, £4, £5 kry vir hulle osse en ons betaal tien, twaaf dubbeltjies vir die pond vleis. Moenie die skuld by die boere soek nie. Die verskil sal bly solank daar nie &#x2019;n betere kontrôle is oor die handel.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_van_mijnwezen_en_nijverheid">

<from>De <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER VAN MIJNWEZEN EN NIJVERHEID</person>:</from>

<p>Stig ko-öperasies.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heyns">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEYNS</person>:</from>

<p>Ja, maar dis ook &#x2019;n moeilike ding. Die tyd skyn nog nie ryp daarvoor te wees nie. Ons is darem goed op weg, maar in die tussetyd moet maatreëls geneem word om te voorkom dat die boere geruineer word. Moenie meer liefde vir Rhodesië hê nie as vir SuidAfrika. Ons Staatskas moet gevoed word uit die Unie van Suid-Afrika. Moenie dit vergeet nie. Die mense moet in staat gestel word om belasting te betaal en die wat nie belastingbetalers is nie, moet gehelp word om dit te word. Ons word gedump van alle kante en daar moet die Regering ingryp en help.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bezuidenhout">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BEZUIDENHOUT</person>:</from>

<p>Ek dink dat in sommige gevalle dinge baie verkeerd voorgestel word. Toe laaste jaar die mosie voor die Huis was is daar gesê, ons moet die Wet na &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee stuur, wat die sake kan uitpluis en ons moet sien wat hulle aan die hand gee om te help. Nou die Konsept is gestuur na &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee en die rapport het terug gekom en nou sê edele lede van die anderkant dat ons weier om iets te doen. Nou ek dink die kwessie is in die lig verkeerd voorgestel. Ek glo seker dat die maatreëls wat verlede jaar geneem is om die vleisuitvoer te bevorder, die regte ding is en ek is seker daarvan dat as nie deur omstandighede, wat Suid-Afrika deurgegaan het, as sware droogte ens., waardeur die vee in die Unie nie so geskik vir uitvoer was nie&#x2014;as dit nie die geval gewees was laaste jaar nie, dan sou die uitvoer &#x2019;n baie groter sukses gewees het. Dan sou jy gehad het uitvoer van vleis na sekere lande en daar sou markte gestig wees, wat van betekenis sou bly vir Suid-Afrika. Ek het voor my die rapport van ons Kommissaris op die kontinent, waarin hy sê, dat die vleisuitvoer na Europa &#x2019;n skone toekoms beloof te hê. Ek dink dis nie die regte ding om te argumenteer nie soos die edele lid vir Middelburg (de hr. Heyns) gedoen het, om die hele blaam te wil werp op hierdie kant van die Huis nie, en te se dat ons niks wil doen nie om te help. Dit is verkeerd. Ons het nou voor die Huis dieselfde mosie as laaste jaar. Die Regering deur die edelagbare die Minister van Landbou het duidelik verklaar wat die houding van die Regering in die rigting is en ek dink die houding wat hulle nou aanneem is weer die regte houding. Ek wil nie daaroor argumenteer of die gewig te klein is nie, maar ek dink dat dit die regte ding was vir die Regering om met Rhodesië te onderhandel en die bepaling te maak, sonder dat ons met ons nabure twis. Dit is die regte ding. Daar is in die Huis gesê, dat die boer sy vee mishandel deur hulle nie goed te voer nie. Dis aangehaal deur die edele lid vir Hospitaal (de hr. Papenfus). Ek glo die edele lid is &#x2019;n baie goeie advokaat, maar ek glo nie dat hy een goeie boer is nie. As hy wis watter sware droogte daar gewees het&#x2014;ek spreek nou vernaamlik van die Transvaal&#x2014;en watter grote veestapels die boere het om te voer, dan dink ek sou hy seker die onmoontlikheid verstaan vir die boere om die vee te voer soos hulle dit sou wou doen. Ek dink dis heeltemaal verkeerd om die boere te beskuldig dat hulle hul vee mishandel. In normale tye dink ek sorg die boer baie goed vir sy vee, maar die boer is magteloos waar sulke toestande in die land heers. Nee, ek dink die Regering het die bes moontlike maatreëls geneem.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Ek voel van een ding oortuig en dit is, dat as die Regering nie onmiddellike stappe neem nie om die beesboere in die Unie van Suid-Afrika te beskerm nie, dan gaat hulle na die maan. Ek is nou nie van plan om modder te gooi nie, maar ek is oortuig van een ding, dat as ons toesprake hoor soos die van die edele lid vir Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers) dat jy die reg het om te vra &#x201C;wat kom die mense hier in die Parlement maak?&#x201D; Die edele lid kom met die <span class="col_563" refersTo="page_0644"/>belaglike argument van die gevolge om drifte te sluit en deur die lede anderkant word gesê, dat ons nie &#x2019;n invoerverbod op vee kan lê nie. Miskien weet die edele lid vir Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers) nie, dat die Amerikaanse Regering &#x2019;n embargo gelê het op wol, op die invoer van wol, toe die wolprodusente geprotesteer teen die invoer van wol. Hulle het gesê, dis onmoontlik vir ons om wol te kan verkoop, as julle ons nie beskerm nie. Weet die edele lid vir Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers) dat daar &#x2019;n embargo gele is op die invoer van beeste van Kanada na Engeland? Ons het die berigte gesien in die koerante. Daar is hewig geprotesteer, maar dit het geen afbreuk gedoen aan die relasies tussen Engeland en Kanada nie. En ons het die reg om ons bevolking te beskerm teen dumping van Rhodesië en al die andere Protektorate. As die Regering maar net wou handel volgens die Kongresbesluite, wat geneem is in al die dele van die land. Al die besluite was vir &#x2019;n embargo behalwe die een wat in Pretoria geneem is. Maar hulle het die besluit pas geneem nadat die Regering hulle gesê het, die embargo gaan julle nie kry nie en nadat hulle beloof is dat die Regering sou onderhandel om te sien wat gedoen kon word. Na die belofte het hulle hul besluite geneem. Daar moet embargo gelê word en ek gaan sover om te sê dat, tensy &#x2019;n embargo gelê word, en &#x2019;n baie strenge embargo, gaan die boere ten onder. Ek sê die aanval wat die edele lid vir Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers) gemaak het op my geagte vriende hier is &#x2019;n laë aanval. Dit laat my dink aan die aanval wat die geagte lid gemaak het op &#x2019;n dame wat op &#x2019;n publieke platform probeer het te klim.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cilliers">

<from>Kapt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. S. CILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>Op &#x2019;n punt van orde, wil ek sê, dat dit heeltemal onjuis is dat ek ooit &#x2019;n aanval op &#x2019;n dame gemaak het.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mnr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Orde, die edele lid moet sy toespraak rig tot die Stoel en nie tot lede nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Dit maak my net daaraan dink. Die edele lid vir Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers) het gesê, dat Rhodesië die goedere wat hulle nodig het goedkoper kan kry van andere lande. Hoe belaglik. Is dit &#x2019;n gevoel van patriotisme vir Rhodesië? Nee, dis onmoontlik vir ons om te kompeteer met Rhodesië en met ander dele van die ander Protektorate Ons weet vir watter laë pryse die Chartered Company grond gekoop het, terwyl ons boere hoë pryse vir hulle grond moet betaal. En ons diensbodes kos ons tienkeer soveel as wat die kos in Rhodesië. Daarom sê ek dis onmoontlik vir ons om te kompeteer en ons moet &#x2019;n embargo lê op die invoer van vee. As daar &#x2019;n referendum gehou sou word onder boere, onder praktiese boere wat ervaring het, dan sou seker 75 per sent boere in die land vir &#x2019;n embargo stem wat betref die invoer van vee uit Rhodesië. Dergelike maatreëls word geneem in alle lande van die wereld.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#scholtz">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SCHOLTZ</person>:</from>

<p>Die debat het nou ontaard in moddergooi, in plaas van die onderwerp te behandel op sy eie meriete. Almal sal met my saamstem, dat die onderwerp van die grootste belang vir die Unie is en ek sal probeer om my te onthou van die euwel om met modder te werp. En as ek soms &#x2019;n bietjie terug slaan, dan is dit nie om die voetstappe te volg van lede, wat hulle skuldig gemaak het aan die misdaad nie, maar dan is dit omdat ek myself en die Regering moet verdedig. Ek wil net vir &#x2019;n wyle in die geskiedenis van die vleeskwessie ingaan. Ons sal herinner dat laaste jaar die kwessie onder bespreking was, as gevolg van die mosie van die edele lid vir Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog). Vanjaar het ons voor die Huis &#x2019;n mosie van omtrent dieselfde gehalte en aard as die mosie van laaste jaar. En ons sal ons ook herinner die antwoord wat die edelagbare die Eerste Minister gegee het op die mosie. Dit lyk vir my of dit baie lede aan die anderkant van die Huis outgaan is wat die antwoord was. Die Eerste Minister het toe uitgelê, dat omdat daar &#x2019;n ooreenkomst tussen Suid-Afrika en Rhodesië en ander Protektorate bestaan, dit nie moontlik was nie om vir die rede die mosie aan te neem nie, daar dit nie dadelik die nodige resultate al hê nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Is die toestand dan nou verander?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#scholtz">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SCHOLTZ</person>:</from>

<p>Ja; want daar is sedert onderhandel geword. Een van die bepalinge van die tolverbond tussen die verskillende Protektorate en die Unie is, dat daar geen verandering kan kom in die bepalinge sonder dat vooraf &#x2019;n kennisgewing van ses maande gegee is en dat eers agtien maande na &#x2019;n kennisgewing daar &#x2019;n verandering van die terme van die tolverbond kan kom ten aansien van die invoer: daaroor bestaan nie die minste twyfel nie. Dit het so oortuigend gewees, dat nie alleen lede van hierdie kant van die Huis, maar ook lede van die Opposiesie dit heeltemal ingesien het en dat die leier van die Opposiesie vóór die stemming oor sy mosie die Huis uitgestap het, en dat die vlees premie Wet zonder opposiesie aangeneem werd.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. W. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>Daar was geen stemming daaroor nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#scholtz">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SCHOLTZ</person>:</from>

<p>Daar was nie, dit is waar; maar als edele lede werkelik teen die maatregel was, kon edele lede een verdeling gevra het. Die feit dat dit nie gedaan is nie is een duidelyk bewys dat edele lede destyds vóór die Wet was, en dat edele lede niks beter aan die hand kon gee nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Daar is met modder gegooi.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#scholtz">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SCHOLTZ</person>:</from>

<p>Het edele lid voor Cradock (de hr. I. P. van Heerden) het met modder gegooi.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Edele lede moet die Speaker toespreek en nie die edele lid vir Cradock.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#scholtz">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SCHOLTZ</person>:</from>

<p>Ja, Mnr. Speaker, maar die edele lid voor Cradock (de hr. I. P. van Heerden) het my in die rede geval. Ek wys op die inkonsekwensies van lede aan die anderkant van die Huis. Toe die maatreël voor die Huis was het hulle daar nie teen gestem nie <span class="col_564" refersTo="page_0645"/>soos hulle kan doen as hulle wou; maar het hulle, sonder een verdeling te vra, stilswygend hulle goedkeuring daarin gehecht; maar nou die maatreël, wegeus die buitengewone omstandighede, wegens die droogte, nie die gewenste uitwerking gehad het nie, nou pak hulle al die schuld op die Regering! Dit is die oppositie van tyd tot tyd in die debat aangetoon; maar in plaats dat hulle dit in aanmerking geneem het, ignoreer hulle dit, en redeneer hulle as of daar nooit sulke buitengewone omstandighede bestaan het. Dit toon aan welke meesters die oppositie in &#x201C;sophistery&#x201D; (drogrede) is. Hier is beweerd geword dat die voorstel van die edele lid vir Smitheld (Gen. Hertzog) een embargo behels het. Nou ik weet nie wat men door een embargo verstaan nie, maar ikverstaan daar algehele belestel van&#x2019;invoer van de deur. Maar dit is nie wat die voorstel van die edele lid van Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) behels nie. Die voorstel spreek alleen van protektie, en dit is presies wat die Regering nou probeer om te doen onder die proklamatie in die <i>Staatskourant.</i> En toch is die oppositie nog nie te vrede nie! Voorwaar dit toon aan hoe absoluut onmogelik dit is om die oppositie te bevredig. Maar dit word geseg dat die handelwyse van die Regering onder die genoemde proklamatie in stryd is met die houding van die Regering laatste jaar door die Regering ten aansien van die kwestie aangeneem. Dit is nie so nie, want een ieder sal sig herinner, dat die edelagbare die Eerste Minister verleden jaar gesê het by die indien van die Vlees Wet, dat niettegenstaande die gemelde overeenkomst hy onderhandelinge sal aanknoop, met die doel om die invoer van vee binnen die Unie te beperk. Dit het die Regering nou gedaan, en dit is volstrekt nie in stryd met syn vorige houding. Maar die grief van die oppositie is tans helemaal overbodig daar die Minister van Landbou nou verklaar het dat hy gewillig is die tegenwoordige motie van die edele lid voor Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) te aanvaar.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#du_toit">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DU TOIT</person>:</from>

<p>Ek is bly oor die houding, deur die edele lid vir Barberton (Kol. J. C. Fourie) aangeneem en vir die skrobering, wat hy sy kollega van Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers) toegedien het en vertrou, dat dit sy uitwerking nie sal mis nie, want hy is tamelik bekend met die kuns van modder gooi. Die edele lid vir Hopetown (Kapt. P. S. Cilliers) het verklaar, dat die belasting in Transvaal van 2½ persent nadelig is vir die boere, maar ek sou graag van hom wil verneem, waarom in wanneer is hierdie belasting gehef? Dit word gedaan eenvoudig om geld te kry vir opvoeding. Die edele lid het vir dubbele belasting gestem, daarom was die Provinsiale Raad verplig om daardie bron van inkomste te open. Dit is jammer, maar hierdie Regering van ons het die reputasie, dat hulle nie die belange van die boer behartig nie teenoor die buiteland. Ho gaat dit met alles, wat van buitekant af ook ingevoer word, koring, beeste. Die ganse regeling is onhoubaar. Aan die een kant word die boor geruineer deur die droogte, soas mens uit die koerante kan sien en aan die ander kant word hy verniel deur kompetiesie van buitekant af. Ek het anderdag gesien, dat kalwers se koppe in sekere dele afgesny moet word en aan die under kant word die boer nie beskerm teen kompetiesie van buitekant af nie&#x2014;die Regering laat toe, dat die mense gereneweer word deur die beeste, wat uit Rhodesië, Swasieland en elders instroom na ons markte toe. Dan gaat die Regering nog en leg op goed surplus belasting. Dit laat denk aan die man, wat eers sy grond laat afvreet en dan ander gaat soek. Geseg word, dat Rhodesië so baie goed van ons koop en dat hulle invoer groter is as die uit voer, maar dit is nie vry nie, daar is belasting op. Soveel staat vas, dat Rhodesië niks van ons sal koop, as hulle dit nie nodig het nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>Nee, dit is uit patriotisme, dat hulle van ons koop.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#du_toit">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DU TOIT</person>:</from>

<p>Dit is in hulle belang om van ons te koop en waarom sal ons toelaat, dat hulle beeste vry hier inkom? Die Regering gevoel baie vriendskap vir Rhodesië, en daarom het hulle bepaal, dat die gewig 800 pond moet wees, en 400 aan die haak. Dit beteken niks nie, want 1,500 pond is geen buitengewone gewig vir &#x2019;n groot bees nie: &#x2019;n veldbees kan dit weeg. Ek stem met die edele lid vir Barberton (Lt.-Kol. J. C. Fourie), in, dat 800 pond te laag is as minimum. Maak dit 1,000 pond en as het molik was, liewer 1,200 pond.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. W. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>Ek stel voor, dat die bespreking uitgestel word tot aanstaande Vrydag.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#dreyer">

<from>Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DREYER</person>:</from>

<p>Daar is alreeds soveel oor die saak geseg, dat ek net dieselfde sou moet herhaal; daarom stel ek voor&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Om die debat te verdaag.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#claassen">

<from>Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLAASSEN</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>May I ask whether the hon. member for Humansdorp (Mr. C. W. Malan) has authority to move the adjournment of the debate?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. W. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>The right hon. the Minister knows nothing about it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>I am putting a point of order. Can the hon. member for Humansdorp (Mr. C. W. Malan) move the adjournment to a particular day?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-speaker">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Losberg (Lt.-Col. Dreyer) has moved the adjournment of the debate.</p>

<p>Motion for the adjournment of the debate put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-speaker">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>To what date?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. W. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>To next Friday.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>May I ask the question now? I am raising a point of order. May I ask if the hon. member for Humansdorp (Mr. C. W. Malan) is authorized by the mover to suggest a date on which the debate should be resumed?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-speaker">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>It is competent for any hon. member to move a date for the resumption of the debate, just as it is for the House to agree or not.</p>

<p>Debate adjourned; to be resumed on 7th March.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1924-02-29T17:55:00">5.55 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

