---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol1 - FRIDAY 7 MARCH 1924'
layout: debate
year: 1924
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 7th MARCH, 1924.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1924-03-07T14:24:00">2.24 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#lease_of_state_lands_to_imperial_cold_storage_co">

<heading>LEASE OF STATE LANDS TO IMPERIAL COLD STORAGE CO.<br/>HUUR VAN STAATSGROND AAN IMPERIALE KOELKAMERS MU.</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person></from>

<p>laid upon the Table&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Conditions of lease in respect of three farms leased by the South-West Africa Administration to the South-West Africa Cold Storage and Stock Farming, Limited. <i>[Vide</i> reply to Question XXIII, by Maj. Hunt, on 4th March&#x2014;page 606 of the Debates.]</block>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.<br/>VRAGEN.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Salt Traffic. Vervoer van Zout.</heading>

<question by="#cilliers" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Capt. P. S. CILLIERS (Hopetown)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours what revenue was derived by the Administration in respect of salt conveyed by rail during the six months ending the 31st December, 1923?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#cilliers">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>£32,505.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Revenue from Alluvial Diggings, Barkly West.<br/>Inkomsten uit Alluviale Delverijen, Barkly West.</heading>

<question by="#cilliers" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Capt. P. S. CILLIERS (for Mr. Scholtz) (Barkly)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the amount of revenue derived annually from the alluvial diggings in the Barkly West district from all sources for the ten years preceding the imposition of the export tax on diamonds; and</li>

<li>(2) what is the estimated amount derived from the same source since the imposition of the 10 per cent, export tax, including the latter, the two items to be shown separately?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#cilliers">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I regret that it is not possible to give the information in the precise form asked for by the hon. member. The main sources of revenue from the <span class="col_695" refersTo="page_0777"/>Barkly West alluvial diggings amounted approximately, to:&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>1912</p></td>

<td><p>£9,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1913</p></td>

<td><p>5,252</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1914</p></td>

<td><p>13,232</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1915</p></td>

<td><p>6,603</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1916</p></td>

<td><p>5,465</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1917</p></td>

<td><p>6,885</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1918</p></td>

<td><p>6,961</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>The imposition of the export duty took effect during the year 1919, since when the figures, approximately, are:&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>1919</p></td>

<td><p>£5,885</p></td>

<td><p>plus</p></td>

<td><p>£110,000</p></td>

<td><p>export duty.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1920</p></td>

<td><p>10,532</p></td>

<td><p>„</p></td>

<td><p>89,000</p></td>

<td><p>„</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1921</p></td>

<td><p>11,290</p></td>

<td><p>„</p></td>

<td><p>59,000</p></td>

<td><p>„</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1922</p></td>

<td><p>7,550</p></td>

<td><p>„</p></td>

<td><p>40,000</p></td>

<td><p>„</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1923</p></td>

<td><p>8,940</p></td>

<td><p>„</p></td>

<td><p>58,000</p></td>

<td><p>„</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>These figures do not include income-tax paid by alluvial diggers and other sundry revenue, the amount of which is negligible</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Grants for Upkeep of Roads, Barkly West.<br/>Toelagen voor Onderhoud van Wegen, Barkly West.</heading>

<question by="#cilliers" to="#minister_van_mijnwezen_en_nijverheid">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Kapt. P. S. CILLIERS (voor de hr. Scholtz) (Barkly)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Mijnwezen en Nijverheid:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Welke toelagen jaarliks vanaf tien jaren vóór de oplegging van de uitvoerbelasting op diamanten tot op heden door het Mijnwezen Departement toegekend zijn aan de afdelingsraad voor onderhoud van de hoofdwegen langs de rivierdelverijen in het distrikt Barkly West;</li>

<li>(2) of de Regering weet dat zo goed als al de inkomsten van de afdelingsraad voor de laatste 34 jaar (sedert 1889) besteed zijn aan het onderhoud van de hoofdwegen in de nabijheid van de rivierdelverijen ten einde die wegen veilig te doen zijn; dat de delvers tot de inkomsten van de raad niet bijdragen en dat wegens deze uitgaven de wegen in de buitewijken gans verwaarloosd werden;<br/>en</li>

<li>(3) of de Regering, met het oog op deze in het oog lopende ongerijmdheid, ondernemen wil om jaarlikse toelagen voor deze wegen toe te kennen, of anders, om deze wegen van de afdelingsraad over te nemen?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_mijnwezen_en_nijverheid" to="#cilliers">

<from>De MINISTER VAN MIJNWEZEN EN NIJVERHEID:</from>

<p>Ek sal bly wees as die edele lid wil vergun dat hierdie vraag oorstaan.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Regiment of Cape Town Highlanders.<br/>Regiment Kaapstadse Hooglanders.</heading>

<question by="#alexander" to="#minister_of_defence">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. ALEXANDER (Cape Town&#x2014;Castle)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the regiment of Cape Town Highlanders consists of unpaid volunteers with the exception of the Permanent Force staff-sergeant attached to the regiment; whether it is up to strength, and whether there is a waiting list of men wishing to join;</li>

<li>(2) whether, in forming the regiment, it was found difficult to obtain recruits, unless they were allowed to wear the historic regimental uniform;</li>

<li>(3) whether permission to wear this uniform was asked for and agreed to by the Government on condition that the members of the regiment paid for their uniforms themselves;</li>

<li>(4) whether in consequence, by means of organized effort and public and private subscriptions and other means, they raised a sum of £1,800, or a nett sum of £1,047 15s. after paying expenses, and provided kilts, hosetops, garters, gaiters, aprons and glengarries to the whole regiment, consisting of 350 men;</li>

<li>(5) whether the Government has now called on the regiment to increase its strength to 600 men;</li>

<li>(6) whether, under the special circumstances, and having regard to the great effort referred to above, the Government is not prepared to take into consideration the advisability of supplying the historic uniform and accessories at Government expense to the new men joining the regiment, as is done in connection with prescribed uniforms for all other regiments?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#cilliers">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The Cape Town Highlanders is one of the Active Citizen Force Regiments of the Union, and consists of citizens who have volunteered for service in that unit, and they receive no pay except when undergoing continuous training. The regiment is not up to strength. It is seventeen below the authorized establishment for other ranks. This shortage will be made good in July next by the posting of seventeen citizens who, on registration in January last, expressed a desire to undergo peace training in that unit. The number of citizens who on registration in January volunteered for service in the Cape Town Highlanders is 453.</li>

<li>(2) As far as is known, there was no difficulty in obtaining recruits when the regiment was formed in 1885.</li>

<li>(3) Originally the Highland uniform was purchased from corps fund and Government capitation grant, but since Union, when capitation ceased, Scottish regiments instead of being issued with uniforms, have been given the alternative to draw a cash allowance equivalent to the cost of ordinary Government kit. This was accepted, and they supplement the cash Government grant by private funds for the purpose set out in question (4). The Cape Town Highlanders is not the only regiment concerned.</li>

<li>(4) I understand that the sums mentioned by the hon. member have been collected for the purpose stated to supplement the Government uniform allowance.</li>

<li>(5) No, the Government has not called upon the regiment to increase its strength to 600, on the contrary, I am afraid that the financial position will not admit of any substantial increase in strength.</li>

<li><span class="col_696" refersTo="page_0778"/>(6) I am sorry that I cannot give this undertaking in view of the fact that all A.C.F. regiments are strongly urging me to allow them to increase their strength and provide them with clothing and other equipment so necessary for efficient training.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Banknotes of Reserve Bank.<br/>Banknoten van Reserve Bank.</heading>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS (for Mr. Papenfus) (Hospital)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 22 of Act No. 31 of 1920 are being observed and given effect to by the Reserve Bank; and</li>

<li>(2) whether the Minister will give particulars as to the number of notes which were soiled by excessive handling&#x201D; and which previous to re-issue by the bank were disinfected and sterilized?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nicholls">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) The bank does not re-issue notes &#x201C;soiled by excessive handling.&#x201D; Only notes in good condition after sterilization are re-issued. The numbers of notes so re-issued are: 10s. notes, nil; £1 notes, 1,615,095; £5 notes, 807,186; £20 notes, 7,890; £100 notes, 474. The total numbers of notes issued by the bank, including those re-issued after sterilization, are: 10s. notes, 3,000,000; £1 notes, 7,660,095; £5 notes, 2,053,186; £20 notes, 46,545; £100 notes, 906.</li>

</ol>

<p>I may observe that the state of the notes in circulation, which is admittedly bad, appears to be due to the fact that they are in circulation too long before they are returned to the Reserve Bank. I am taking the matter up with the Reserve Bank and the commercial banks with a view to securing an improvement.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Labourers on Government Forest Plantations.<br/>Arbeiders op Staats Bos Plantages.</heading>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_van_landbouw">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>De hr. C. W. MALAN (Humansdorp)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Landbouw:</p>

<ol>

<li>(l) Hoeveel werkers op de Staats bos-plantaties ontvangen dag-loon en hoevelen doen stukwerk;</li>

<li>(2) wat is het gemiddelde bedrag als loon per maand gedurende het tijdperk Julie-December 1923 door de werkers die stukwerk doen, ontvangen;</li>

<li>(3) hoeveel van diegenen die stukwerk doen verdienden per maand (<i>a</i>) minder dan vijf pond, (<i>b</i>) tussen vijf en zeven pond en (<i>c</i>) tussen Zeven en tien pond, en (<i>d</i>) meer dan tien pond;</li>

<li>(4) zijn de termen van de Werklieden Kompensatie Wet van toepassing gemaakt op deze werkers, en indien niet, welke bescherming genieten zij;</li>

<li>(5) wat zijn de regulaties van toepassing voor de werkers in verband met (<i>a</i>) ziekeverlof en (<i>b</i>) gewone verlof; en</li>

<li>(6) warden de zoons die lichaamlik reeds bekwaam zijn toegelaten hun vaders behulpzaam te zijn in de plantaties?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_landbouw" to="#malan">

<from>De MINISTER VAN LANDBOUW:</from>

<p>Ek wil die edele lid versoek hierdie vraag te laat oorstaan, aangesien ek besig is die inligting te verkry.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Residents on Government Forest Plantations.<br/>Inwoners van Staats Bos Plantages.</heading>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_van_landen">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>De hr. C. W. MALAN (Humansdorp)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Landen:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Wat is het getal (<i>a</i>) werkers en (<i>b</i>) zielen (met uitzondering van de ambtenaren) op de staats bos-plantaties;</li>

<li>(2) hoevele werkers zijn sedert het ontstaan van deze plantaties door de mediese ambtenaren wegens verzwakte gezondheid ongeschikt verklaard voor verdere werkzaamheden op de plantaties, en wat is met deze personen en hun huisgezinnen gedaan;</li>

<li>(3) hoevele kinderen van schoolgaande ouderdom op die plantaties (<i>a</i>) ontvangen onderwijs op &#x2019;n Staatsschool en (<i>b</i>) zijn nog buiten school;</li>

<li>(4) welke stappen zijn genomen om te verzekeren dat de inwoners van die plantaties (in vele gevallen ver van een dorp verwijderd) geestelik zullen worden bearbeid;</li>

<li>(5) hoevelen van die werkers hebben sedert het ontstaan van die plantaties hulp van enige aard ontvangen onder de Unie Wetten in verband met grond nederzetting, en wat was de aard van die hulp;</li>

<li>(6) worden de kinderen van de werkers boven achttienjarige leeftijd op de plantaties toegelaten en indien niet, welke voorziening wordt voor hen gemaakt; en</li>

<li>(7) worden de vertegenwoordigers in de Volksraad en de Provinciale Raad van de kiesafdelingen waar de plantaties gelegen zijn toegelaten publieke vergaderingen op de plantaties te houden?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_landbouw" to="#malan">

<from>De MINISTER VAN LANDBOUW:</from>

<p>Ook wil ek die edele lid vra, hierdie vraag te laat oorstaan.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#beyers" to="#minister">

<from>De hr. BEYERS:</from>

<p>Wil die Minister 14 jaar hê?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Relief of Farmers in Drought Stricken Areas.<br/>Verlichting aan Boeren in door Droogte Geteisterde Distrikten.</heading>

<question by="#alexander" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. ALEXANDER (for Maj. Hunt) (Turffontein)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he will lay upon the Table of the House the proposals made to him by the Agricultural Advisory Board in regard to relief in connection with the parlous position of farmers in the droughtstricken areas of the Union; and</li>

<li>(2) whether the Government intends to accept their advice?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#alexander">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Ordinarily the discussions or part of them which the Department has with the Agricultural <span class="col_697" refersTo="page_0779"/>Advisory Board are regarded as of a confidential nature. In view of the importance of relief to farmers in drought-stricken districts a subject which was placed by the Department on the agenda for the Board&#x2019;s meeting, and regarding which certain proposals had been under consideration, I am prepared to lay on the Table of the House the Board&#x2019;s suggestions.</li>

<li>(2) To the extent indicated in the Bill introduced on the 5th instant the Government proposes to act on the lines of the Board&#x2019;s proposals. The policy of conveying by raiL at reduced rates, fodder for animals in droughtstricken areas has been the subject of discussion between the Department of Agriculture and the Railway Administration and no doubt, the hon. member has seen the Railway Administration&#x2019;s notification of the reduction of the rate in such cases by 50 per cent. As stated in the Governor-General&#x2019;s speech at the opening of Parliament, proposals for legislation in regard to rural credit will be introduced. The remaining suggestions of the Board are receiving attention.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Spirits Produced in Cape Province.<br/>Spiritualiën Geproduceerd in Kaap Provincie.</heading>

<question by="#bisset" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. BISSET (South Peninsula)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the quantity of spirits produced in the Cape Province in the year 1922;</li>

<li>(2) what was the amount paid by way of excise duty in respect of that quantity of spirits;</li>

<li>(3) what was the quantity of spirits produced in the Natal Province in the year 1922; and</li>

<li>(4) what was the amount paid by way of excise duty in respect of that quantity of spirits?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#bisset">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 1,658,343 gallons.</li>

<li>(2) £532,451.</li>

<li>(3) 1,446,815 gallons.</li>

<li>(4) £79,856.</li>

</ol>

<p>For the information of the hon. member, I would add that the bulk of the spirit produced in Natal is consumed either as methylated spirit or used for industrial purposes or exported oversea, which explains the apparent discrepancy in the amount of revenue collected.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Prices for Cattle Exported by Imperial Cold Storage Co.<br/>Prijzen voor Vee Uitgevoerd door Imperiale Koelkamers Mij.</heading>

<question by="#alexander" to="#prime_minister">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. ALEXANDER (for Maj. Hunt) (Turffontein)</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the average price paid to farmers in South-West Africa by the Imperial Cold Storage Co. for cattle exported overseas by that company during 1923;</li>

<li>(2) what was the cost of export per head in regard to (<i>a</i>) shipping, (<i>b</i>) insurance, (<i>c</i>) other charges;</li>

<li>(3) what was the average price for which these cattle were sold on overseas markets;</li>

<li>(4) how many cattle were exported overseas from South-West Africa during 1923, and by whom were they exported;</li>

<li>(5) whether any space was available for cattle on ships plying regularly between Walvis Bay and European ports which had not been taken throughout the whole period of 1923 by the Imperial Cold Storage Co.; and</li>

<li>(6) what number of cattle were imported into the Union from South-West Africa during 1923?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#alexander">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1), (2), (3) and (5) Information not available.</li>

<li>(4) 1,175 head of cattle were exported by the Imperial Cold Storage Company Limited.</li>

</ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>(6)</p></td>

<td><p>By railway</p></td>

<td><p>34,984</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>By other roads</p></td>

<td><p>18,812</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>53,796</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Suspension of Part of Agreement with Imperial Cold Storage Co.<br/>Opschorting van gedeelte van Overeenkomst met Imperiale Koelkamers Mij.</heading>

<question by="#alexander" to="#prime_minister">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Mr. ALEXANDER (for Maj. Hunt) (Turffontein)</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is the intention of the Administrator of South-West Africa to suspend the operation of that portion of the agreement he entered into with the Imperial Cold Storage Co. on the 21st October, 1922, which deals with the export of live stock overseas for another period of twelve months; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether this <i>ipso facto</i> will extend the operations of the clause referred to to the 20th October, 1927?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#alexander">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>(1) and (2). This matter is still under consideration.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railway Tickets for Visitors to British Empire Exhibition.<br/>Spoorkaartjes voor Bezoekers naar Britse Rijkstentoonstelling.</heading>

<question by="#alexander" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Mr. ALEXANDER (for Maj. Hunt) (Turffontein)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether he will grant rail tickets from all stations on the South African Railways to the port of embarkation at single fare for the double journey to persons wishing to visit the British Empire Exhibition, irrespective of the steamship lines they may travel by, on similar conditions to those advertised for travellers on certain specified steamship lines?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#alexander">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The excursion facilities have been introduced in conjunction with steamship companies who are issuing excursion steamer tickets for the benefit of visitors to the British Empire Exhibition. The steamer excursion tickets which are issued at considerably less cost than ordinary tickets are only available <span class="col_698" refersTo="page_0780"/>for travelling by certain steamers in each direction, and have a limited availability as compared with ordinary return steamship tickets. The Administration will grant railway tickets at excursion rates, i.e., at single fare for the double journey, from all stations in conjunction with any steamship company issuing excursion tickets on similar conditions.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Parliamentary Duty, etc., at Railway Headquarters.<br/>Parlementaire Dienst, enz., op Spoorweg Hoofdkantoor.</heading>

<question by="#alexander" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>Mr. ALEXANDER (for Maj. Hunt) (Turffontein)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the number of hours of attendance of responsible clerks on evening Parliamentary duty at headquarters during the sessions of Parliament of 1922 and 1923 in the following individual departments, viz., claims, rates, general, works, estates, safety regulations, trains, and rolling stock;</li>

<li>(2) what was the number of Parliamentary telegrams received and dealt with by the clerks attending in each of these departments severally for the sessions indicated in (1); and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister will take into consideration the question of reducing the number of clerks called upon to attend such duty to a number commensurate with the duties involved?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#alexander">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Precise information is not available, but in each of the sections named, the approximate number for hours extra duty worked by all responsible clerks performing Parliamentary duty during the 1922 Session was 67, and the 1923 Session 77.</li>

<li>(2) Parliamentary telegrams are not recorded separately, but during the 1923 Session 92 telegrams were received and dealt with after 5 p.m. on days on winch clerks were engaged on evening Parliamentary duty. No record is available of telegrams received during the Session of 1922.</li>

<li>(3) The existing arrangements were introduced to avoid delay to information required by Parliament, but I am having the matter looked into with a view to seeing whether it is possible to improve the position.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Sufferer from Foot and Mouth Disease Admitted in Union.<br/>Lijder aan Mond en Klauwzeer Toegelaten IN Unie.</heading>

<question by="#smit" to="#minister_van_landbouw">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>De hr. SMIT (Klerksdorp)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Landbouw:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Of het rapport dat een zekere persoon kort geleden alhier toegelaten werd lijdende aan mond- en klauwzeer waar is; en indien zo,</li>

<li>(2) waarom de landing van zodanige persoon toegelaten werd; en</li>

<li>(3) welke voorzorgsmaatregelen genomen zijn om de verspreiding te voorkomen?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_volksgezondheid" to="#smit">

<from>De MINISTER VAN VOLKSGEZONDHEID:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Ja.</li>

<li>(2) Er bestond geen geldige reden voor de beletting van zijn landing, noch zou zodanige beletting door de wet gemachtigd geweest zijn.</li>

<li>(3) De patient werd naar het Kaapse hospitaal voor besmettelike ziekten verwijderd en daar geisoleerd totdat hij volkomen hersteld was en bevrijd van besmetting. Alle artikelen die mogelik besmetten konden, werden behoorlik ontsmet, en alle dieren aan boord het vaartuig werden zorgvuldig onderzocht door een Goevernements Veearts.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Assessment and Collection of Patent Medicine Tax.<br/>Vaststelling en Inning van Patent Medicijn Belasting.</heading>

<question by="#munnik" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. MUNNIK (Vredefort)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many assessors were appointed during the last financial year to assess and collect the patent medicine tax;</li>

<li>(2) what amount was paid to them in salaries, and what amount in motor transport; and</li>

<li>(3) what was the total revenue collected, and what did the fines amount to?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#munnik">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) None.</li>

<li>(2) The excise duty on patent and proprietary medicines is collected by officers of the Excise Department, but the staff was not increased in consequence. Motor transport was a charge incurred prior to the imposition of the above tax in connection with the supervision of excise duties on spirits and tobacco.</li>

<li>(3) The hon. member is referred to the reply given to the question asked by the hon. member for East London (Mr. Stewart) on the 26th ultimo.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#munnik" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. MUNNIK:</from>

<p>Arising out of the reply of the hon. the Minister, I would like to draw the attention to a previous reply which he gave me on a similar question. As this reply is very unsatisfactory, I intend to take the proper procedure and raise the question when the hon. the Minister&#x2019;s vote comes on. I do not think the reply is satisfactory.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>&#x201C;Nights Out&#x201D; Allowances to Railway Labourers.<br/>Nachtwerk Avonden Toelagen voor Spoorweg Arbeiders.</heading>

<question by="#alexander" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Mr. ALEXANDER (Cape Town&#x2014; Castle)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether in the Railway Transportation Department there is a differentiation between white labourers, who receive 4s. a night by way of &#x201C;nights-out&#x201D; allowances, whereas coloured and native labourers <span class="col_699" refersTo="page_0781"/>have received only 1s. a night by way of such allowances;</li>

<li>(2) whether in the &#x201C;-Local Weekly Circular&#x201D; it has been announced that as from the 1st March, 1924, the &#x201C;nights-out&#x201D; allowance to coloured and native labourers has been reduced to a maximum of 10s. per month per labourer, amounting to a reduction of about one-half of the present allowance; and</li>

<li>(3) whether this does not amount to a great hardship to these men, who are away from their homes, and whether the Administration is not prepared to withdraw the above circular and leave the allowance as at present operative?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#alexander">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) European labourers employed on maintenance receive a &#x201C;night out&#x201D; allowance of 3s. Coloured and native labourers employed with maintenance artisans receive a &#x201C;night out&#x201D; allowance up to 1s. with a maximum monthly payment of 10s.</li>

<li>(2) As from 1st March, 1924, it was found desirable to extend the payment of the &#x201C;night out&#x201D; allowance of 1s. per night to certain labourers who previously were not paid such allowance, and concurrently with this to introduce a maximum payment where no maximum had been in operation. The latter course was necessary in order to bring Division 1 into line with other divisions where a similar maximum had been in operation for some time.</li>

<li>(3) No complaint has reached the Administration from other divisions where the maximum has been in operation, and it would be invidious to differentiate in favour of native and coloured labourers on Division 1.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Overhead Bridge at Welverdiend Station.<br/>Overbrug op Station Welverdiend.</heading>

<question by="#dreyer" to="#minister_van_spoorwegen_en_havens">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Lt.-Kol. DREYER (Losberg)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Spoorwegen en Havens of, aangezien de overbrug te Welverdiend Stasie, kiesafdeling Losberg, slechts over de helft van de spoorlijn gaat en het publiek een grote omweg moet gaan om bij de stasie te komen, hij instrukties wil geven dat gezegde overbrug voltooid moet worden?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_spoorwegen_en_havens" to="#dreyer">

<from>De MINISTER VAN SPOORWEGEN EN HAVENS:</from>

<p>Neen. Om de voetbrug te verlengen, zal het nodig zijn om vier spoorwiidten te overspannen, en dit zal aanmerkelike uitgaven ten gevolge hebben die op het ogenblik niet gerechtvaardigd zijn.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Natives Registered on Voters&#x2019; Rolls, Cape Province.<br/>Naturellen Geregistreerd op Kiezerslijsten, Kaap Provincie.</heading>

<question by="#strachan" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. STRACHAN (Pietermaritzburg &#x2014;North)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior how many of the forty-one thousand odd non-Europeans registered on the voters&#x2019; rolls of the Cape Province are natives?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#strachan">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>The latest figures show the number of non Europeans as 38,165, of whom 13,704 are natives.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Harding-Port Shepstone Line.<br/>Harding-Port Shepstone Spoorlijn.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS replied to Question II, by Mr. Saunders (Natal&#x2014;Coast), standing over from 4th March.</p>

<question by="#saunders" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) What were the gross receipts for goods traffic during the last financial year on goods carried over the Port Shepstone to Harding line&#x2014;(<i>a</i>) to stations on the line between Harding and Port Shepstone, inclusive; and (<i>b</i>) to points on the main line beyond Port Shepstone, <i>i.e.,</i> emanating from the Harding&#x2014;Port Shepstone line;</li>

<li>(2) what were the gross expenditure and receipts on the transhipment of goods at Port Shepstone during the same period;</li>

<li>(3) what was the total amount of salaries paid to the transhipment staff at Port Shepstone;</li>

<li>(4) what was the expenditure (<i>a</i>) on the ordinary train service from Durban to Port Shepstone, and from Port Shepstone to Harding, and (<i>b</i>) on special goods trains from Port Shepstone to Harding;</li>

<li>(5) what were the gross receipts for passenger traffic on the Port Shepstone&#x2014;Harding line;</li>

<li>(6) what proportion of transhipment charges for goods transhipped at Port Shepstone, from (<i>a</i>) Harding to Port Shepstone, and (<i>b</i>) South Coast to Port Shepstone, is debited to the Port Shepstone&#x2014;Harding line; and</li>

<li>(7) whether, when the line was surveyed, it was surveyed for broad gauge?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#saunders">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) The figures for the financial year are not available. For the calendar year 1923: (<i>a</i>) £1,865; (<i>b</i>) £6,600.</li>

<li>(2) (<i>a</i>) Gross expenditure for 1923, £1,525. (<i>b</i>) Gross receipts are not available. Rates 1 to 6 include the transhipping charge, but rates 7 to 10 which are calculated on the throughout mileage do not include the transhipping fee.</li>

<li>(3) Cost of European labour, £391. Cost of native labour, £1.134.</li>

<li>(4) (<i>a</i>) and (<i>b</i>) Expenditure statistics for the sections mentioned are not compiled. To take out the information would entail considerable time and labour. In view of this, I hope the hon. member will not press the point.</li>

<li>(5) £11,148 for 1923.</li>

<li>(6) The cost involved in the transhipment of goods is debited to the South Coast line. The South Coast line is credited with a proportion of the revenue from traffic exchanged between the narrow gauge and broad gauge lines to cover all services rendered at Port Shepstone station.</li>

<li>(7) A full investigation was made of both 3 ft. 6 in gauge and 2 ft. 0 in gauge lines, <i>vide</i> report of the Railway Board. [U.G. 40&#x2014; &#x2019;12.]</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_700" refersTo="page_0782"/>Envelopes for Delivery of Telegrams.<br/>Briefomslagen voor Aflevering van Telegrammen.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR replied to Question XXIV., by Mr. Swart (Ladybrand), standing over from 4th March.</p>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<heading>Vraag:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Of de briefomslagen die gebruikt worden voor aflevering van telegrammen te Bloemfontein en op andere plaatsen, en waarop &#x201C;John Dickinson and Co., Ltd., London&#x201D;, gedrukt is, buiten de Unie gemaakt en bedrukt zijn; en indien zo,</li>

<li>(2) waarom het de gedragslijn van de Minister is om zulke briefomslagen buiten de Unie te laten maken en bedrukken?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#swart">

<heading>Antwoord:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Ja.</li>

<li>(2) Neen. Tenders werden in de Unie en overzee gevraagd. De aangenomen tender was 50 percent lager dan de prijsopgave in de Unie.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Re-election of &#x201C;Board of Reference and Conciliation.&#x201D;<br/>Herkiezing van &#x201C;Raad van Verwijzing en Verzoening.&#x201D;</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS replied to Question XXVII, by Mr. Snow (Salt River), standing over from 4th March.</p>

<question by="#snow" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) When &#x201C;Special Notice, No. R. 366,&#x201D; dated 16th February, containing the necessary information and nomination form for the re-election of the &#x201C;Board of Reference and Conciliation&#x201D; for a further period of one year was actually distributed to the staff at the various centres, including the territory of South-West Africa;</li>

<li>(2) whether it is correct that the closing date for nominations is March 10th;</li>

<li>(3) what is the date fixed for the election;</li>

<li>(4) whether, in view of the shortness of time allocated for the receipt of nominations, and the completion of the election, and the fact that a Bill to amend the Railways and Harbours Service Act, which provides for permanent conditions of service, is now before the House, it would not be desirable and advisable to arrange for the existing board to continue its duties until the question as to whether statutory provision should be made for the board has been discussed and decided on by Parliament?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#snow">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) The staff was notified on 15th February that a fresh election was to be held. Nomination forms were received from the printers on 21st February, and were distributed immediately.</li>

<li>(2) Yes.</li>

<li>(3) The date of election has not yet been fixed.</li>

<li>(4) The period of office of the present board expires on the 31st instant, and in accordance with the practice followed since the board came into existence, it was decided some time ago to appoint a board for a further period of 12 months. A fresh election is, therefore, necessary, and it is not desirable it should be postponed.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#snow" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. SNOW:</from>

<p>Arising out of the question I would like to ask the hon. the Minister whether he is aware that although the circular is dated the 15th February, it was only distributed at Cape Town Station on the 27th?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#snow">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I will enquire about that.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oral_questions">

<heading>ORAL QUESTION.<br/>MONDELINGE VRAAG.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Licensing Court at Aliwal North.<br/>Licentie Hof te Aliwal Noord.</heading>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. BLACKWELL (Bezuidenhout),</from>

<p>with leave, asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to a report appearing in a Cape Town newspaper yesterday to the effect that as the police report did not go to show that restriction of hours of sale tended to reduce drunkenness, the Lincensing Court of Aliwal North had decided to extend the hours of sale; and</li>

<li>(2) Whether he has made enquiries into the truth of this statement and what is the result?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR (for the Minister of Justice):</from>

<p>My attention has been called to the report mentioned, and I have made enquiries from the magistrate of Aliwal North and have received an answer by telegram, which reads as follows:&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;Police did not report to Licensing Court that restriction of hours had led to increased drunkenness, but on the contrary urged that present restriction be reimposed for 1924.&#x201D;</block>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#liquor_option_bill">

<heading>LIQUOR OPTION BILL.<br/>DRANK OPTIE WETSONTWERP.</heading>

<p>First Order read: Adjourned debate on motion for second reading, <i>Liquor Option Bill,</i> to be resumed.</p>

<p>Debate (adjourned on 7th February) resumed.</p>

<speech by="#hugo">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HUGO (Rouxville)</person>:</from>

<p>Toe die laaste keer die debat verdaag werd was ek besig om aan te toon, dat dit net skyn, asof die voorstanders van die Wetsontwerp meen, dat daar &#x2019;n groot obstruksie gevoer word, maar hulle is verkeerd. Verlede jaar het ons dieselfde Wetsontwerp onder bespreking gehad en toe het hulle die twede lesing geforseer en by die stemming is die Wetsvoorstel verwerp. Vanjaar wou hulle weer dieselfde doen. Maar dis nie so &#x2019;n kleinigheid as hulle kom met lokale opsie nie, daar is baie meer agter die kwéssie. Dis &#x2019;n groot kwessie vir die land en vir &#x2019;n groot deel van die bevolking. Die voorstahders maak net asof hulle alleen te doen het met dronkaards, <span class="col_701" refersTo="page_0783"/>wat te veel gebruik, maar hulle vergeet die ander kant, want lokale opsie is maar net die dun end van die wig, wat is, dat hulle alles wil afskaf. Die maatreel tref die wynboere en die wynindustrie. As die Wetsontwerp deurgaan, dan sal die wingerdstok afgekap moet word in die land. As ons die argumente nagaan wat die voorstanders van die Wetsontwerp aanvoer, dan is daar net twee. Die een is demokrasie en die ander is dat hulle teen dronkenskap is. Ek sou wil vra, wie nie teen dronkenskap is nie, want ek dink iedereen is daarteen. Vra die wynboer en die wynhandelaar en mens sal vind, dat hulle net so sterk daarteen is as enige ander. Die mense het getoon in hulle hele lewe van die begin af, dat daar &#x2019;n seksie van onse volk is, die wynboer, die tussen hulle woon en tog sober is. Daar is die voorstanders van afskaffing en wat sê, ons neem die geleentheid weg en wie nog nie drink nie, sal dan nie meer gaan drink nie. Ek het ondervinding ook van die wynbou en as die mense die Baxter-rapport op dronkenskap wil lees, sal hulle merk, dat wie altoos omgaat met wyn, weinig neiging vertoon om te drink. In die westelike dele, die wyndistrikte, word beweer dat baie dronklappe is en daar is mense wat weet te vertel, dat as jy een dag &#x2019;n reis maak van die Paarl na Wellington, jy meer dronklappe sien as in jou hele lewe. Die sodanige sal uitvind, dat die dronk mense daar nie met wyn groot geword het nie, maar dat dit mense is, wat van elders kom. Word die Wet aangeneem en ons sluit heeltemal b.v. die drank vir die kinders toe, sodat die kinders nooit drank sien nie, dan is die gevaar groot, dat as hulle in die latere lewe die wyn kry, hulle miskien dronklappe word, &#x2019;n Mens kan die wynboer se kinders nagaan, en sal bevind, dat nie twee persent van hulle dronklappe is nie. Die dronklappe kom uit die droë dele van die land, wat nie met drank groot word nie&#x2014;wat in die wyndistrikte groot word is nie dronklappe nie. Die doel van die Wetsontwerp is, om dronkenskap teen te gaan, maar hulle sal die doel nie bereik nie. Wat sal nou gebeur in die binneland? Die kleinste Vrystaatse dorpie het gewoonlik twee drinkplekke en nou wil hulle oor lokale opsie laat stem. Dit is waarskynlik, dat eers gestem sal word ten gunste van vermindering van die drinkgeleentheid, vermoedelike afskaffing van die één kantien. Dit beteken dan doodeenvoudig, dat die een wat oorgelaat word monopolie kry, want daar is geen kompetiesie nie. Nou besluit &#x2019;n dorp miskien om altwee die kantiene te sluit, maar die naaste dorp laat oop bly en dan ontstaat daar &#x2019;n gedurige transport van drank van die een dorp na die ander. Dit is wonderlik, dat kan gesê word, dat die plaaslike keuse &#x2019;n demokratiese beginsel is, maar dit beteken tog, dat die dorpsmense my op die plaas kan sê, of ek drank kan kry of nie. As so&#x2019;n Wet aangeneem word, dan is daar mense wat dink dat dit plaaslike keuse is, maar die edele lid vir Bezuidenhout (de hr. Blackwell) bedoel daar algehele afskaffing mee. Daar is andere wat dink, dat wetgeving van die aard baie demoraliserend sal wees, want die wetsoortreders sal daar ook wees. Ons het on langs wetgewing aangeneem om die wynboer te help op voorstel van die edelagbare die Eerste Minister, en die Huis het dit bereidwillig aangeneem en hier word alweer wetgewing in teenoorgestelde sin voorgestel.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mcalister">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">McALISTER (Germiston)</person>:</from>

<p>In view of the temperate manner in which the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) introduced this measure, I regret that I am compelled to vote against it this afternoon. I think there is a tendency, not only in this country but in all the other countries of the world, to go in for too much grandmotherly legislation. Members of elected bodies are inclined to think that immediately they are elected they must treat the citizens whom they are supposed to represent as children in many ways. Now we have evidences of this tendency towards grandmotherly legislation in this Parliament, even in this session, and I need only refer to one example of it and that is the Liquor Bill which is standing on the Order Paper to-day in the name of my hon. friend. In all these measures there is a serious danger of making new crime. We have had evidence so far as the white population of the Witwatersrand is concerned of the demoralizing effect of total prohibition. I might quote, not my own expression of opinion, or my views on the matter, but the resolution passed by a conference of missionaries of the London Missionary Society, who sat at Vryburg early last year. Referring to this they said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;We are prepared to allow that as a temporary measure, until prohibition can be secured, legislation should be introduced that kaffir beer can be brewed for private consumption.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Coming from a conference of the London Missionary Society, whom we are lead to believe look at everything from the standpoint of the welfare of those under their charge, I think it is a wonderful admission that even as a temporary measure they are prepared to allow legislation whereby kaffir beer may be brewed for private consumption. If we want another expression of opinion from ecclesiastical authority we have the impression of the Bishop of Pretoria, he says, with regard to the Durban kaffir beer question&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;He had been very much impressed by what the Durban municipality had been able to do with the revenue accruing from the sale of kaffir beer. In contrast the miserable conditions at Marabastad location at Pretoria were strikingly different&#x2014;almost, one might venture to say, as between heaven and hell.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The difference the Bishop of Pretoria finds between the conditions of the locations at Durban where kaffir beer was being brewed and that of Pretoria was as the difference between heaven and hell. &#x201C;One felt that the community in Durban had got the thing in hand, but in other towns the whole thing was one great living scandal.&#x201D; Now still further from his lordship of Pretoria&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;Are we really committed to what is rather a puritan opinion that the drinking of kaffir beer is bad in Durban? I got the impression that kaffir beer is not really an evil thing.&#x201D;</block>

<p><span class="col_702" refersTo="page_0784"/>I could give hon. members more high ecclesiastical authority, but these two are enough. We have been told during the course of this debate about the effect of prohibition in America. We are told on the one one hand that prohibition is working very efficiently and effectively, and is a great improvement on American conditions; on the other hand we are told that prohibition is a failure, and some people go so far as to say that as much strong drink is being retailed in America to-day as before prohibition was introduced. In regard to that, I have here a copy of the proceedings at the Local Option Congress, held at Cradock on the 5th and 6th of December last. This is prefaced with the statement that it is&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;the most comprehensive and convincing presentment of the drink question that has ever been written.&#x201D;</block>

<p>On page 100 we find this reference to American characteristics&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;America has always been a land of big things. There are big cities and big railroads and very big liars in America. They have the tallest buildings in the world and perhaps the tallest stories, and these stories are deliberately collected and cabled round the world through liquor agencies in London, and do considerable harm to the cause of truth. We are all apt to make general statements which, when analyzed, would be absolutely false.&#x201D;</block>

<p>That is the expression of opinion of one of the members of this conference held in December last. I dare say the gentleman who made that statement knew the Americans better than I know them, and I presume he wishes us to bear this in mind when weighing up the statements from both sides. Now that I may not be accused of quoting from liquor interests or temperance advocates, I will quote from an American whom I considered to be outside the range of these factions. Mr. Judge Powell said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;No enactment with such widespread, vicious and universally debasing effect has ever been imposed on our people. That is my calm and deliberate judgment. This is the confession of one who has repented, because he helped to draw up and pass prohibition.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Now that is a statement of a judge trained to assess results impartially, and again we had recently in the <i>Cape Times</i> extracts from the report of the Commissioner of Police in New York. He said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;A sinister result of the law is that people who, before prohibition, used liquor moderately and confined themselves to light wine or beer, are now drinking large quantities of hard liquor of a very bad quality, and the effect upon the social and moral tone of the community is anything but reassuring.&#x201D;</block>

<p>That is from New York. We are told in the early part of the debate that New York could not be taken as a fair sample of America, because the inhabitants of New York city were largely aliens. The Commissioner of Police, still dealing with New York, said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;It is considered smart by boys and girls to carry flasks of liquor, generally of very bad quality, when they go to parties, and the result is most injurious to morals and health. Distinguished men in professional life, judges, statesmen and clergymen carry their private flasks, and do not seem to think they are committing any offence against the law.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Coming to another town where the statement cannot be put forward that the population is composed mainly of aliens we have Washington, and here we are told by the Superintendent of Police that prohibition has not decreased crime. He says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;The population of Washington between 1910 and 1923 increased by 32 per cent., while arrests for serious crime increased by 107 per cent. Arrests for murder were more numerous by 271 per cent. than they were ten years earlier. Manslaughter increased by 250 per cent., crimes against morality by 800 per cent., robbery 103 per cent. and bigamy 83 per cent. For violation of the prohibition laws 13,040 persons were arrested last year, and 8,368 arrests were made for drunkenness, an increase of 121 per cent. over the arrests in 1910.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I cannot be accused of having picked out the opinions of an advocate of temperance or an advocate of the liquor industry. I quote simply to show how difficult it is for us to decide whether prohibition is proving as effective in America as it is represented. The hon. member for Three Rivers (Mr. Brown) quoted to us the effect on Scotland. He spoke particularly of the Highlands, and regretted the passing of the good old days when a blessing used to be passed on the bottle before the cork was opened. We cannot always emulate Scotland. Many good things are produced by Scotland, and many good men come from there, but unfortunately in recent years Scotland has had a habit of sending the best men away from Scotland. A writer on the state of affairs there says, referring to the Earl of Selkirk&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;He saw the wickedness of the Highland demands. He rose in anger against the eviction of these brave men who fought the wars of England, then returned to find the glens a-weeping, the crofts in flames and old women dying in the snow.&#x201D;</block>

<p>We have read more recently in the cables that this state of affairs is still going on, and that from the Highlands, Scotland&#x2019;s best is still going overseas, and those men who were cleared out in the days of the Earl of Selkirk were responsible for converting the prairie land of Canada into the granary of Europe. The hon. member said, since the restriction of facilities for drink, drunkenness had decreased in the Highlands, but there is no evidence to show that it has decreased correspondingly in Glasgow. In Glasgow there are some 400,000 Irish, and it is common knowledge that a Scotsman will drink more whisky if someone else put it up than if he paid for it himself. Is Scotland a good example to give us, as to the operation of local option? It manufactures some of the finest whisky on the market. We have other total abstinence countries which are always before us. Turkey has always been a total abstinence country, and yet it was not very long ago when we could not lift an English paper without finding some reference to the <span class="col_703" refersTo="page_0785"/>&#x201C;unspeakable Turk.&#x201D; China and India are also, by religion, prohibitionists; do we wish to emulate some of their vices? But coming to the measure itself, as it stands, there are two principles underlying this particular Bill that I think we should consider very carefully in this House before we adopt them. I attended on Wednesday the licensing court in Cape Town and one of the speakers there, on behalf of the temperance or social workers&#x2019; section, referring to this drink question, said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;Many people drink because they are poor and because they live in wretched conditions.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Not that these people were poor and in wretched conditions because they drank, but they drank because they were in poor and wretched conditions. That, to my mind, is the cause of the whole trouble. Another speaker, who is prominent in temperance circles in Cape Town, said, referring to England, that drunkenness has decreased by 40 per cent., and there is no great moral improvement amongst the community. I noticed also at the licensing court, the police recorded that during the last year there had been an increase in convictions for shebeening. It seemed to be indicated that the curtailment of reasonable legal facilities for the licence holders was responsible for the increase in shebeening in the district. There is reason to assume that if a regular holder of a licence is curtailed, and the liquor cannot be sold legally, then you are encouraging shebeens. Coming to the real principle underlying this Bill, we hear at times about a referendum, but before we agree to submit this to a modified form of referendum we should consider the application of that principle to other matters respecting the community. If there was to be a referendum held in the North of Ireland about the establishment of the Roman Catholic Church, or a referendum in the South of Ireland for the establishment of the Protestant Church there, I would tell you the decision before the people had even voted. Where I come from we have two model villages, Elsberg and Alberton. There is no licence at all in Elsberg, and there is one bottle store in Alberton. When it comes to the voting as to whether a licence should be granted in Alberton, one of the most enthusiastic workers against the granting of that licence, one of those who most enthusiastically supported the Temperance Party in Alberton, is the liquor licence holder in Elsberg. The hon. member for Natal Coast (Mr. Saunders) said he was in favour of local option, because he could get more work out of his employees; another speaker said a total abstainer in America would do 2½ times the amount of work a moderate drinker would do in England. Does this rushing of work commend itself to all sections of this House? There is, in addition to this question of referendum, another principle underlying this Bill which is a more vital principle as affecting the rights of individuals. I refer to the absence of any provision for compensation. Now it may be said that voting for the Bill at this stage does not prevent one from seeing to it later on, that provision for compensation is inserted, but the absence of any such provision leads one to think that the promoters of the Bill do not believe in compensation being paid. In fact, it has been said that compensation cannot be associated with local option. At that same licensing court one of the speakers in favour of this measure said: &#x201C;We have nothing to say against decently conducted houses.&#x201D; The police report says: &#x201C;The conditions are better because the breweries are getting better tenants.&#x201D; Now another speaker at the Cradock conference said: &#x2018;We have no quarrel with the better class licensed victualler, who is, after all, carrying out a legal business under authority from the Government and the people of the Union.&#x201D; Quite so, carrying out a legal business under authority from the Government and the people of the Union. Those who support the Bill say: &#x201C;Referring to the vote of the people, it will be for them, when they so desire, to cut out the license traffic in South Africa. This will be done by a majority of the votes cast and without compensation.&#x201D; Yet those people against whom this will be done, it is admitted, are carrying out a legal business with the authority of the Government and the people, but they will be cast out without compensation by a majority of votes cast. I have here a pamphlet by the Rev. A. J. Cook, and he says the Bill is fair and just to all concerned. I leave it to the House to say what justice and fairness there is to those people who are carrying on a legal business that they can be cast out without compensation by a majority vote. I submit for the deliberation of the House that if the promoters of this Bill have nothing to say against decently conducted houses, or if they have no quarrel with the better class licensed victuallers, then there is no use for this Bill. Why do they require this Bill at all? They have no quarrel with the decent class licensed houses. The law already provides machinery for doing away with houses that are not decently conducted, and for taking away the licences of men who are not keeping within the law, and taking these statements as an expression of opinion of those who are interested in temperance, I submit that there is no necessity for the Bill for the purpose of getting rid of badly conducted houses. It is urged that one of the reasons why no compensation is provided for is that there can be no such thing as vested interests in licences. An individual who gets a licence, it is said, gets it for one year, and at the end of the year his contract is finished. Now the very fact that so many transfers of licences are taking place from time to time is evidence and indication that some vested interests are recognized. We find frequently sales of the good will of licences taking place. That is evidence that the good will of an individual is recognized, and to those who say that there can be no good will or vested interests in licences, I submit the case of the Alexander Hotel, in my constituency. That hotel was built some years ago by the late Mr. Alexander Stuart, who went down in the Lusitania. Before building he approached the licensing court and <span class="col_704" refersTo="page_0786"/>asked them whether, if he erected an hotel of that kind, he would be granted a licence, and they said he would. He built the hotel, the building of which cost him £20,000 and the furniture cost him £9,000. Is it likely that he would have spent that money, that he would have spent £29,000 if he knew that a contract for his licence was only for one year? There was an implication that so long as he conducted the business properly and kept within the law he could look forward to a renewal of his licence. I submit to the hon. the Minister responsible, the Minister of Justice is not here, that there might be some improvement in regard to the present powers of the licensing courts. I submit that one of the main causes of contravention is the excessive rentals charged for licensed premises. We find immediately a licence is granted, the value of the rental of the licensed premises goes up by 500 or 600 per cent. I submit that frequently those high rents are responsible for contraventions of the law, because tenants find it difficult to meet their rent, and I ask that licensing courts should be empowered to look into the question of the rent charged. Before finishing I want to give a few more extracts from this congress at Cradock, because it is the official record of those who are promoting this Bill. Unfortunately people are not looking at these things in the proper perspective, and they are inclined to indulge in abuse which they blame the other side for. We are told in one place that a large majority of the people throughout the country desire this measure, and we are told in another place that there is a minority against the measure, and a minority in favour of the measure, but that the great mass of the people can be guided if necessary, but in the meantime they move very slowly. In other words that the great mass of the people do not seem to care how it goes. Again we find a tendency to abuse not only the members of Parliament but also the press. Here we find a statement&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;It is very important to notice that most of the newspapers in their leading articles still sit on the fence. It is with them a case of profitable advertisements on the one side and the truth on the other side.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Again we have here a reference to members of Parliament. It says here&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;If members of Parliament knew that in every church throughout the whole of South Africa on the evening before the second reading a prayer meeting was being held in favour of the Bill, it is fairly certain that more than one of the Opposition would arrange a headache or other indisposition to justify his absence from the division.&#x201D;</block>

<p>And again, referring to last year&#x2019;s absentees&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;The general impression is that quite a number were simply making an excuse to be absent from this important vote.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Then it is suggested that every member who is not in favour of it should be escorted to the train when leaving for Parliament, so that he might&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;Postpone that headache which otherwise would have so unmercifully attacked him on the day of the vote.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Then again, quoting from an American article, one of the speakers says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;The senators and congressmen may sneer, but when they stand up to vote they fear the church more than they fear the wrath of God.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Now I say that unfortunately the admissions here would seem to indicate that certain sections of the church still believe in fear rather than reason and in threats rather than logic; and just as the history of the church in the past seems to suggest a tendency to militancy, so I fear some are inclined that way to-day. The church should not try to foster what it may consider to be a good thing, a thing in the interest of the human race, by threats to members of this House or to those who cannot agree with all its doctrines. The history of the Spanish Inquisition, of the Martyr Fires of Smithfield, and of how the Covenanters had to hold their services of worship of the Living God amidst the hills and bogs of Scotland in order to evade the attention of the church, are too well known, and I think that hon. members of this House, if they are satisfied that something is wrong, if they are satisfied that something requires righting, have sufficient intelligence and sense of right to take their own way of attending to that matter, as conscience dictates, without being told by the advocates of temperance that they are going to postpone a headache and vote for a measure which they do not consider just, merely because they are afraid of the church. I regret that I have to refuse to support this measure, it is not drafted in that spirit of equity and justice which one has a right to expect, and I hope that a majority of the House will see eye to eye with me.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nieuwenhuize">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NIEUWENHUIZE (Lydenburg)</person>:</from>

<p>Men maakt zich altijd een verkeerde voorstelling, omdat de bestrijding van dit Wetsontwerp dikwelswordt toegeschreven aan verkeerde motieven, dat iemand van wege eigen belang, geldelike belangen of handels belangen, tegen deze Wet spreekt. En aan de andere kant weer word gedacht, dat iemand tegen dit Wetsontwerp spreekt omdat hij in zeker mate misschien ervan houdt, om zoo nu en dan eens iets te gebruiken. Ik hoef niet te zeggen, dat wij die opvattingen ver van ons afwerpen, ik behoef niet te zeggen, dat er duizenden en duizenden in het land zijn die in hun leven nog nooit een glas sterke drank gedronken hebben en die toch tegen dit Wetsontwerp zijn. Dan zijn daar tienduisenden, honderdduizenden van matige mensen die zoo nu en dan een glaasje gebruiken en die ook geheel en al tegen dit Wetsontwerp zijn. Wij zijn allemaal tegen dronkenschap en tegen de dronkaard. Wij betreuren de dronkaard en verachten dronkenschap, maar toch zijn wij van gedachte dat het wegnemen van dronkenschap door dwang maatregels, een verkeerd beginsel is Wanneer wij verder gaan, dan zullen wij in de eerste plaats zien, dat hoewel dit Wetsontwerp genoemd wordt &#x201C;lokale keuze,&#x201D; wat alleen van <span class="col_705" refersTo="page_0787"/>toepassing zal zijn op zekere distrikten, dat toch die hele beweging bedoeld is om te komen tot totale afschaffing: &#x201C;total prohibition.&#x201D; Twee jaar geleden, toen voor de eerste maal dit Wetsontwerp ingediend werd, toen werd nog net gedaaiij aisof dit alleen de bedoeling was om de verkoop van drank in zekere distrikten te beletten, maar dit rookscherm, om het zoo te noemen, werd laatste jaar weggenomen en nu zijn wij ervan overtuigd, dat de voorsteller en cndersteuners totale afschaffing op het oog hebben. Wij kunnen dit ook zien uit de pamiletten die rond gestuurd zijn, uit de vele toespraken en uit de vele brieven die ons als leden bereikt hebben uit alle oorden van het land. Ik had drie jaren geleden de eer tegenwoordig te zijn bij een toespraak, gehouden door nu wijlen Mevrouw Knox Livingston en in haar toespraak, die mij in zekere mate ontstelde en verwonderde, werd ook door haar duidelijk aangegeven dat de hele bedoeling was totale afschaffing&#x2019; totale drankverbod in Zuid Afrika. Ja, ik herinner mij nog de woorden die zij sprak, toen ze zei dat volgens haar opinie de volgende algemeene verkiezing in Zuid-Afrika zou gaan om het beginsel van totale afschaffing. Dit doet mij genoegen om te kunnen zeggen, dat wij gelukkig nog niet zoo ver zijn gekomen. Om verder in te gaan op de noodzakelijkheid van totale afschaffing, waarvan de eerste stap zal wezen dit Wetsontwerp, moet ik zeggen, dat volgens mijn opinie, die in ons land nog met noodig is. In mijn ondervinding, in het gedeelte van de Unie, waar ik woon, kan ik eerlijk zeggen, dat dronkenschap in de laatste jaren met toegenomen is, maar afgenomen. Ik kan beweren, dat 25, 30, 40 jaar geleden in het algemeen meer drank gebruikt werd dan tegenwoordig en het is voor mij een verblijdend verschijnsel dat hoewel nog sommige, laat ik liever zeggen enkele, zonen van ons volk zich aan drank te buiten gaan, dat over het algemeen, vooral onder de jongere menschen, het drankverbruik minder is dan het 40 jaar geleden was voor zover als mijn ervaring gaat. En daar zijn, b.v., in Transvaal, tamelijke voorzieningen gemaakt om het drankmisbruik te verminderen. Daar zijn de licentiehoven, die onder een magistraat staan, een man die algemeen geacht is en oog aangeschreven staat, die &#x2019;n regvaardigheidsgevoel bezit en die ervaring heeft in het gedeelte waar hij magistraat is. Door dit hof word erop gelet wie de persoon is en wat zijn karakter is aan wie een dranklicensie word gegeven, en ook dat het aantal licensies in dorpen niet te groo-t word. Dan bestaat daar ook de voorziemng van de zwarte lijst, waarin personen die vader van een familie zijn, en die door onmatig drankgebruik hun huisgezinnen ruineeren opgeschreven staan, terwijl het verboden is onder gevaar van groote straffen op te loopen aan eemgeen om aan zoodanige personen sterke drank te verkopen. En daarom zeg ik, is die maatregel van dit Wetsontwerp nog niet zo hoog nodig in mijn opinie. Eenige leden hebben al aangehaald het groote verlies dat geleden zal worden door de wynindustrie. Ik wil mij daarbij met eens stellen op het standpunt van de wijnboeren zelf, maar wij hebben m ons distrikt zoo een weinig gevoeld, twee jaar terug, in 1922, toen de groote staking in Johannesburg was en toen voor drie maanden lang het verboden was om drank te verkoopen wat dit betekent. Het zal edele leden bijna bevreemden wat de terugslag was op ons distrkt ongeveer twee honderd mijlen van Johannesburg verwijderd. Wij hebben namelik in ons distrikt een aantal boeren die garst veroouwen en wij leveren omtrent 25,000 zakken garst aan brouwerijen in Johannesburg. Het gevolg van dit tij delike verlbod, dat maar drie maanden aanhield was, dat een verlies geleden werd van by de £10,000. Wanneer nu zo&#x2019;n kleine industrie als die garst-verbouwerij in zo&#x2019;n korte tijd in mijn distrikt zo een groote schade leed, wat voor een onnoemelijk bedrag zal dan verloren worden door die groote wijnindustrie. Maar meer in mij opinie dan de materieële schade, telt de schade die wordt toegebracht aan de persoonlike vrijheid, de belemmering van de persoonlike individueële vrijheid. Ik hou vol dat ieder het recht heeft om zijn eigen pad te kiezen. Deze Wet maakt misdaden van zaken die in onze rechtspraak en door het algemeen geweten met als misdaden worden beschouwd en de achtmg voor het recht en de wetten word daardoor in gevaar gebracht in het oog van het volk, dat tegenzin heeft tegen wetten die mgrijpen in het persoonlik gedrag van iedere persoon, hoe goed die wetten ook al bedoeld zijn. Wij lezen b.v. in de geschiedenis&#x2014;ik wil een voorbeeld aanhalen uit de Engelsche geschiedenis dat in de dagen van Cromwell het verboden was vloekwoorden te gebruiken Later zelfs werd in Engeland nog een Wet door het Parlement aangenomen, waarbij boeten werden gezet van 1s., 2s., 3s., 5s op een vloekwoord dat gebruikt werd. Maar na de dagen van Cromwell, na de terugkomst van de Stuarts, werd meer gevloekt als te voren en de menschen haalden blijkbaar hun schade weer in. Die wet had niets geholpen. Maar wij hebben in de geschiedenis van Zuid-Afrika ook voorbeelden van het ingrijpen in de persoonlike keuze en het persoonlijk gedrag. Neem b.v. de zoogenaamde pracht en praalwetten, die ingevoerd werden door Vader Tulbagh. Daar werd voorgeschreven hoe ieder mocht gekleed gaan en in hoeverre ieder mocht voorzien zijn van meubelen in het huis, enz. Natuurlik was dit een totale mislukking en een maatregel die spoedig in onbruik geraakte. Al die wetten die zo trier linen in de persoonlijke rechten van ieder individu, zijn tot nu toe nog altijd mislukkingen geweest. Wij kunnen niet iedereen drank ontzeggen, om enkelem van een gevaar te laten ontsnappen, waarvoor zij zelf geen zedelijke kracht hebben om tegen te strijden Ais wij verder ingaan op het punt van persoonlijke vrijheid, dan kunnen wij aanhalen dat daar vroeger zelfs inbreuk gemaakt is op de vrijheid van denken, vrijheid van geloof op de vrijheid van het spreken en schrijven&#x2019; Tegenwoordig is het een uitgenaaakte zaak, dat er vrijheid van denken, geloof, spreken en schrijven zal zijn, en dit zijn mee de grootste rechten die wij bezitten. Wat zou gebeuren wanneer de vrijheid van de pers, van vergaderingen, van toespraken, van geloof belet zou worden of aan banden gelegd moest worden. Wij willen vrij zijn in onze ideën. <span class="col_706" refersTo="page_0788"/>En wat b.v. omtrent rooken, omtrent dansen, omtrent het gaan naar theaters en omtrent het gebruik van den Zondag? Daar bestaan tusschen ons groote verschillen van meening, maar dit zou een groote tout zijn om in enig ding dwang op te leggen. Dit kan niet gedaan worden. Verder kom ik nu tot wat ik noem de invloed op de karaktertrekken van het volk zelf Het volk van Zuid-Afrika is samengesteld uit afstammelingen, nakomelingen, van Duitschers, Engelschen, Hollanders en Iran schen. Ieder van die vier natiën heeft een zekere eigenaardigheid in het volkskarakter aangebracht. Wij kunnen gerust zeggen, dat de verdraagzaamheid en degelijkheid voor he grootste gedeelte is aangebracht door de invloed van het Hollandsche volkskarakter, de zucht voor persoonlijkc vrijheid om te doen en te laten wat men wil, heeft ons volk voor het meerendeel geërfd van het Engelsche element maar de opgeruimdheid is bepaald een karaktertrek aangebracht door het Fransche bloed. Wij erkennen, dat het Afrikaansche volk bekemd is ails gastvrij, als opgeruimd en dat het ervan houdt om bij elkander te komen om gezellig feest te vieren en dat het de gewoonte is om na lange scheiding elkander gezondheid toe te drinken of te ontmoeten met een glas wijn. Ik kan niet zien dat daar kwaad in zit en al deze genoegens in het dagelijksche leven, die een Siting schijnen te zijn van die opgeruimdheid, van die gastvrijheid, die vriendelijkheid van het Afrikaansche volk, zouden onder deze Wet verboden worden. Ik denk dit zou een achteruitgang wezen in onze gewoonten en een achteiuitgang van het karakter in het algemeen. Nu kom ik aan iets wat altijd aangehaald wordt als een verdedig:ng van deze Wet, het voorbeeld van Amerika. Verleden jaar heb ik gelezen van een toespraak gehouden) door het edele lid voor Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) op Robertson en dit geachte lid heeft daar o_m gezegd: &#x201C;Ik betreur het telkenmale als ik zie dat ons volk aan vreemde invloeden onderworpen is, die met m Zuid-Afrika t-huis hooren&#x201D; en als daar ooit lets was waarmede ik volkomen instem met het edele lid voor Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) dan was het met die uitspraak van hern, dat het te betreuren is dat ons volk onderworpen is aan vreemde in™? den. En een van die vreemde invloeden is die Wet die nu voor ons ligt en die van Amerika naar ons toe overgewaaid is Is Amerika n waarlijk een land en is het Amerikaansche vok werkelijk een volk wat voor ons als voorbeeld moet dienen? Kunnen wij zeggen dat wij de Amerikaansche samenleving in alles behooren na te volgen? Ik denk volstrekt van met. Ik heb een boek gelezen dat geschreven was door een groot land en volkerikundige en die beweert daarin, dat Amerika een volk op zich zelf is, dat is te zeggen, dat de Amerikanen andere gezichtspunten hebben en dat het leven daar andere karaktertrekken heeft dan bij eemg ander volk in de wereld. Hij beweert dat de Amerikaan kenbaar is aan zijn persoon zelt, aan zijn scherpere gelaatstrekken, langer en magerder in zijn gelaat. En dit is met alles, want hij heeft ook andere opvattmgen, andere gedachten. Als wij van dingen in Amerika hooren en lezen, waar wij nooit van zouden droomen, dan <i>moet</i> het Amerikaansche volk, de hele natie bizondere karaktertrekken hebben. Denken wij b.v. aan het mormonisme in Amerika, of aan de lynchwet. Daar worden in Amerika toch nog elk jaar 20 of 30 of 40 menschen gelyncht, waarbij het volk zelf het recht in handen neemt, omdat daar niet genoeg vertrouwen gesteld word in de rechters, en het volk zelf het recht uitoefent, en die personen worden opgehangen zonder eenige vorm van rechtspraak. En ik geloof niet dat in ons land zooiets mogelijk zou zijn en dat bij ons nog ontzag voor het recht bestaat. En nemen we b.v. Ellis-eiland, waar al die immigranten doorgaan. Wat b.v. van al die echtscheidmgen die daar voorkomen? Laatste jaar alleen 132,000. Wat van die bioskoop-films die uit Amerika komen en die alle eerst gecensureerd moeten worden, voordat ze hier vertoond mogen worden? Ik wil niet eens spreken over de films die niet hier komen en dus niet door onze censuur gaan, maar die in Amerika getoond worden. En wij hebben hier veel gelezen van die Klu Klux Klan, dat geheime genootschap dat in het donkere van de nacht zonder verhoor menschen ter dood brengt. Ik heb gelezen, dat er nu weer een nieuw genootschap is opgericht bestaande uit vrouwen. Ik wil de naam maar niet noemen, maar het is vreeselijk om te vernemen van de gruwelijke dingen die in Amerika door hun gedaan worden. Als wij dit alles bedenken, dan geloof ik volstrekt met dat wij nu Amerika als voorbeeld moeten nemen om in alles te volgen. Ik geloof dat wij maar beter de gewone huiselyke manieren van Zuid-Afrika behouden moeten. En als wij letten op de geschiedenis van het drankverbod in Amerika, dan zien wij dat het daar altijd ook niet zoo mooi gegaan is. Ik zie b.v. dat in 1846 de eerste wet op drankverbod in Amerika gepasseerd werd in de Staat Main. Ik zie b. v. dat verschillende wetten van dezeltde soort als die nu voor ons ligt, iedere keer terug getrokken werden, b.v. in Connecticut in 1872, in Michichan in 1875, in Iowa in 1894, in South Dakota in 1896, in Vermont in 1902 en in New Hampshire in 1903. Zij werden gepasseerd en daarna weer teruggetrokken, omdat bevonden werd dat zij niet goed waren. Moeten wij nu hier ook een proefneming gaan doen en over een paar jaar weer komen en die wet terugtrekken? Ik denk dit is te riskant om zo een proefneming te doen. Ik heb willen aantoonen, dat dit voor ons volstrekt niet gewenscht is om het voorbeeld van Amerika in alles te volgen. Daar word aangehaald dat het karakter van het jongere geslacht in zekere mate nog moet worden gevormd em dat die Wet speciaal bedoeld is om hun te leeren niet te drinken. Maar in mijn opinie kunnen wij onze kinderen geen goede opvoeding geven wanneer wij alle moeilijkheden wegnemen. Op die, manier moeten wij ons volkskarakter met vormen. Jonge menschen moeten leeren om moeilijkheden te overwinnen door eigen kracht. Als dit Wetsontwerp word aangenomen, dan zal uit een bewijs zijn van &#x2019;n gevoel van gebrek aan eigenwaarde, zelfstandigheid en zelfvertrouwen <span class="col_707" refersTo="page_0789"/>in ons volk en in zeker opzicht wijzen op nationale degeneratie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sampson">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SAMPSON (Jeppes)</person>:</from>

<p>I find myself up against the principle of this Bill from the beginning. I am distinctly against local option. Had this Bill made provision by which a plebiscite of all the people of the Union could be taken, and providing for proper terms of reference to the people of the Union, this Bill would have had no greater supporter. This Bill is a make-believe, a sham. I have listened carefully to this debate for those who advocated this Bill to bring forward some solid argument showing that some measure of temperance reform might be expected from this Bill. But I have listened in vain. Not one single argument have I listened to in this House which would induce a man to vote for this measure. Hours have been taken up on the question of whether or not prohibition is beneficial in other countries, but surely the advocates of this measure would not try to make us believe that prohibition could ever be brought about under this measure. How can you get prohibition out of a local option Bill. All the advocates of this measure hope for is that in a few localities where the evil is least, that small amount of evil will be eliminated. In other words, they may succeed in getting Cape Town dry and leaving Wynberg wet. What hardship they cause does not matter a bit to them. It is one of those things brought forward as a smoke-screen at an election. The voter, who has been watching very carefully the work in this House, will very often be led by the nose at election time to vote for a person because he is a local optionite, for a member who all the time he is in this House, will vote against that man&#x2019;s interests. Local optionites know that this Bill will never bring about in the country the good they say it will. I would also point to the silence of the liquor interests in regard to this measure. I have a drawer-full of postcards and letters from local optionites, but not one single word from liquor interests, and for a very good reason.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>They work underground.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sampson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SAMPSON</person>:</from>

<p>A few individuals now engaged in the trade might suffer hardships under this Bill undoubtedly they would. But take the liquor interests as a whole, what have they to lose? Nobody in this House would say that the total amount of intoxicating liquor consumed will be any less under this Bill. Nothing of the kind, and they know it. Bring forward a proper Bill for a plebiscite of all the people in the Union and widen the question to be submitted to the public, and no one will be a greater supporter of that Bill in this House than myself. I am also told that I should vote for this Bill on the ground that it is a democratic measure, that it allows the people to choose for themselves it does nothing of the kind. If I say to a man, &#x201C;I will give you an opportunity of voting Yes or No for this or that proposal&#x201D; when that man wants something totally different from what he is asked to vote for, I shall not be allowing him to choose for himself. In this Bill you are deliberately slamming the door in his face and preventing him going along the road he desires to travel. Is that democratic? Nothing of the sort. I listened to one of the finest speeches in this House on the temperance question, delivered many years ago by the late Sir Bisset Berry, lie spoke for an hour and a half on the position of this country in regard to the drink question, and I believe he was right, as thousands of other people believed he was right, that it is only by State ownership and control that we shall bring about any permanent measure of temperance reform in South Africa. I advise hon. members to look up that hon. gentleman&#x2019;s speech in the library. It still remains vividly in my mind, and ever since I heard it I have been convinced that temperance reform in South Africa will only come about by nationalization of the liquor traffic. If this was an effective Bill, which would be likely to really affect the liquor interest in this country, the lobby would be crowded out by people in the liquor interest. But they know it is not a serious Bill, and they are not bothering. Why I am against this Bill is because I am quite sure that the people who promoted it have deliberately framed it so that the people may not be consulted on the question of the nationalization of the liquor traffic. Because they do that, and because I believe that this Bill is a sham and a make-believe, and I do not stand for these things in this House, I am going to vote against the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN (Von Brandis)</person>:</from>

<p>I understand a good many members are going to vote for the second reading of this Bill because they have been led into the belief that when it comes into Committee a clause compensating those who will be despoiled will be introduced. But it is like the question of the spider who said &#x201C;Will you walk into my parlour?&#x201D; etc. Those people will get very little. I may take it that those who are going to vote for the second reading are going to do so because they had been led to believe there was going to be such a clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member never read my opening speech.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>Anyway, I take it now it is perfectly clear to this House that there is going to be no consideration of the question of compensation, and those who said they were going to vote for the second reading can now recede from the position they adopted. I have been considerably puzzled as to why the hon. member for Calvinia (Dr. D. F. Malan) has not introduced this Bill this year.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. F. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>Why should I tell the hon. member?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I will tell the hon. member why; sitting by his side is the hon. the leader of the Opposition, and his attitude is directly opposite to the attitude adopted by the hon. member for Calvinia (Dr. D. F. Malan). The hon. member for Calvinia (Dr. D. F. Malan) when he spoke last year on this measure, said that if they expected any Government to bring in in they must have a change of Government.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from><span class="col_708" refersTo="page_0790"/>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. F. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister of Justice said that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I dare say that if the speech by the hon. member referred to was looked up it would be found to contain these very words&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;If you expect the Government to bring in any alteration of the law on this point, you will have to change your Government.&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. F. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>I was quoting the Minister of Justice.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>Well, the hon. member spoke with approval of those words then, but I surmise the reason why he has not thought fit to introduce the Bill this year. They have fond hopes of occupying these benches in the remote future, and it will be exceedingly difficult, if those hon. gentlemen occupy these seats, for the hon. member for Calvinia (Dr. D. F. Malan) to introduce this little measure.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. A. VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>Come to the point.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>Will the hon. member mind his own business? He would place the then Prime Minister, probably Gen. Hertzog, in a very difficult position, as the latter would have to vote against his leading henchman. That is why he did not introduce it, and asked my hon. friend, the member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) to introduce it instead.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>Tell us something about the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>We have been told that this Bill is a stepping-stone to total prohibition. Let hon. members in the country be warned what these advocates of local option are aiming at. In this action on the part of the supporters of this B 11, are we to accept it that it is an admission of failure on the part of the Temperance Society, the Blue Ribbon Society, and the Churches, in creating greater temperance? If so, I am very sorry indeed. Personally, I would prefer those societies to continue what I think is a very excellent work, namely, inducing moderation and sobriety. Therefore, I contend that very much more good would and could be done by these societies, the churches, and parents, by their invoking moderation in all things, not alone in drink, but in all things. We find that parents have wine on their tables, and they induce their little children to have a drink. Let the advocates of this cause prevail upon parents to keep drink away from their children.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>That is what we are doing in this Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>You will not do it by this Bill. I have had telegrams from the Transvaal, like many other hon. members, saying that if we carried local option we would stop these assaults on women by natives. But there is total prohibition among the natives in the Transvaal to-day, and therefore local option will not affect the position at all. I have always been opposed to local option or anything of the kind. I am not referring solely to local option in regard to drink, because if there is going to be local option in regard to drink, why not apply it, say, to the question of our overcrowded professions? Why not have a local option as to whether they should be increased or decreased? If we are going to have local option at all, let us have it in everything. Let us not have Parliament, but have the affairs of the Government controlled by, say, ten people, and have a referendum on every big question. But nobody has touched, as far as I can remember, the aspect of what the effect of this Bill, if passed, will have upon the revenue of the country. If people contribute to the revenue of the country by drinking moderately, why should we stop them? When the hon. member for Calvinia (Dr. D. F. Malan) gets into power and brings in total prohibition, will it not impair the revenue? I have been told on very good authority that the bootleggers in America are the greatest prohibitionists you can find. I am told they subscribe something like two or three millions sterling for the purpose of continuing the prohibition law, so that they can carry on their nefarious trade.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fourie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. P. J. FOURIE</person>:</from>

<p>Is that a fact?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>Dealing with the question of compensation, this has only been dealt with from the point of view of the licence, but there is the question of the landlord, the merchant who deals with the licence, and in many cases there will be the mortgagee of the premises, all these people would have to be considered, because they would suffer. And again, many people who are now carrying on their business in a decent way would go out of the business, and we should have them carried on by a worse class of people. I am not prepared to interfere with people who carry on their businesses in a decent and moderate way. There was a case in Johannesburg where there was a prosecution and conviction of one of the leading hotels for selling liquor at the back of its premises during prohibited hours. Its midnight privileges were taken away.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>Hear, hear!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, that was the right thing to do. That is no reason why decent people doing their business properly should be prohibited from carrying on.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>How many licences are there in the hon. member&#x2019;s constituency?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I could not say.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#boydell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BOYDELL</person>:</from>

<p>I know, five hundred and seventy-four.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>If the hon. member is as truthful in his other statements as he is in this one, then one need not take very much notice of what he says. There happens to be a little over 200 in the whole of Johannesburg, so it would be quite impossible for that number to be in my constituency. I submit that this Bill will have the effect of frightening capital away from South Africa. Unemployment is rife in South Africa to-day, and what will be the effect if local option is agreed upon? More people will be thrown on the streets, and I contend that those members of this House who <span class="col_709" refersTo="page_0791"/>have no mandate from their constituencies should vote against this Bill, In 1916 during a municipal election we had a test in regard to local option in Johannesburg. Under the Transvaal law of 1902 a local option election could take place under certain conditions. Well, one took place on the same day as the municipal election, and but for that there would not have been so many voters. But what was the effect? Out of 66,301 voters in Johannesburg 33,372 voted. Of these 78 per cent. voted for the continuation of the law as it existed, and only 22 per cent. voted for no licences.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>Why is the hon. member afraid of it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>Because the proposal now is to alter the law, and I am not in favour of any alteration. In Queensland, last year, they had a test, and 226,426 voted for licences, whereas only 136,000 voted for prohibition. There was a majority of 96,000 people who voted for the law as it stood. With reference to the recent elections in Scotland, the figures have already been quoted here, but I am told that the prohibitionists spent £300,000 in order to induce the electors to vote for local option.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#webber">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WEBBER</person>:</from>

<p>How much was spent on the other side?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>In the recent debate in the Houses of Commons on the Welsh Local Option Bill, no less than 400,000 postcards were sent to members of Parliament to induce them to vote for it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#webber">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WEBBER</person>:</from>

<p>What was the result?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>It was talked out there. Well, we can do that here if we want to, but I am not prepared to talk it out. I am quite prepared to have a vote on the subject. But I will tell hon. members of this House that the Labour clubs in Wales were opposed to such drastic steps, because they contended that it was the first step towards prohibition.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#webber">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WEBBER</person>:</from>

<p>Hear, hear.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member says &#x201C;hear, hear,&#x201D; meaning, apparently that he is in favour of total prohibition. Figures were quoted here this afternoon from the United States, but I will draw the attention of the House to the fact that a few days ago in the <i>Cape. Times</i> there was a telegram from Washington which said that large amounts of money have to be voted for the enforcement of prohibition. I wonder how many more aeroplanes and policemen we should require in South Africa to enforce the law if we should have prohibition, and how many boats we should want for defending our coast ports if this is carried? Now I want to have a word with the hon. member for Ladybrand (Mr. Swart). I want to congratulate him on his excellent maiden speech, but I would like to compare that speech with what his predecessor in title had to say on the subject.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#swart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SWART</person>:</from>

<p>What has that got to do with it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>In speaking on the <i>Local Option Bill</i> the late Mr. Fichardt said that more people were suffering from overwork than from overdrink, more men were ruined by speculation, by backing bills and by over-eating than by over-drinking. There has been no general election between 1923 and 1924, and one just wonders what the electors of Ladybrand think. Do they agree with what has been said by their present representative or by their previous representative?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#swart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SWART</person>:</from>

<p>They have given me authority to vote for the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I wonder whether they agree with the sentiments which were expressed by the late Mr. Fichardt, or by the present hon. member for Ladybrand (Mr. Swart)?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#swart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SWART</person>:</from>

<p>I can assure the hon. member that they agree with me.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I think we are indebted to the <i>Cape Times</i> for its leading article, this morning, on the same question entitled &#x201C;Prohibition Stalking Horse.&#x201D; I will not read the whole of it because it will be said that I am trying to block the Bill. I am not doing that at all. But I think I should mention what was said by the Rev. Dr. Martin, an ex-moderator of the General Assembly. He said that on a previous occasion he had voted &#x201C;no licence,&#x201D; but he had changed his mind as a result of personal experience of the working of prohibition in America and Canada. That is in contradiction to a statement made by the hon. member for Ladybrand (Mr. Swart) as to his experiences in America. Here we have Dr. Martin, and we have also heard what the hon. member for Ladybrand (Mr. Swart) has told us. I wonder who had the better opportunity of studying the question? The Rev. Dr. Martin, as a result of personal experience in Canada and America, actually changed his mind. He added that there was a great evasion of the law, and by that evasion the law was disregarded, and as a result the moral status of the community was being lowered. It is a mistake to force it on the community, as it can only have the effect of creating greater evils than you are trying to prevent.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>Which paper is the hon. member quoting from?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>The <i>Cape Times.</i></p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>Oh, they; they have also got an advertisement on beer.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>Now, I contend that it would be a very bad policy to force this Bill through this House, and I shall remind the House of what the late Gen. Botha said on this subject, viz., &#x201C;It would be a very bad policy to try and amend the liquor laws in small details, as that would only make the position more difficult than it was.&#x201D; A few days ago the hon. member for Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) talked about &#x201C;Lapwerk.&#x201D; Well, what we are doing now is lapwerk (patchwork), and may I just quote a few words from Lecke on democracy. He said: &#x201C;Curtailment of personal rights must be supported by a genuine public opinion. The change should be effected not by a mere majority but by a large <span class="col_710" refersTo="page_0792"/>majority.&#x201D; In conclusion, I should like to quote from Lord Birkenhead, the late Lord Chancellor of England. In attacking &#x201C;local option, he said &#x201C;that what was fundamental to the case for it was&#x2014;that a majority should impose its will as the result of the ballot box, upon a minority. To that doctrine he declared himself irreconcilably opposed. Those who favoured &#x2018;local option&#x2019; should address themselves to the task of persuading. That sobriety which depended upon compulsion had no value at all. It was tyranny.&#x201D; I am totally opposed to the principle. Lest it be said that I am trying to talk this out, I will discard a good many of my notes, but I read just a few days ago in one of the latest papers from England, a remark to the effect that, &#x201C;compared with only a year ago the receipts in one of the leading London clubs for food, were up by £72 and down by £75 for alcoholic drink. Men&#x2019;s habits were changing, and by a process which had nothing to do with Pussyfoot&#x2014;fanatacism.&#x201D; I strongly hope that this B 11 will not pass the second reading, )but if it does I hope that those who have allowed themselves to be persuaded to vote for the second reading because they think that there will be a compensation clause in the Bill, will reconsider their position and not be lead into a trap.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL (Stamford Hill)</person>:</from>

<p>On a matter of social reform like the one before the House, though I have not taken as keen an interest in it as the hon. member who has introduced it, I cannot give a silent vote although, had it not been for a few remarks by the hon. member for Jeppes. (Mr. Sampson), with whom I differ on this matter, I might not have spoken. I wish to say that my own ideas have not changed, and those ideas are largely on all fours with those of my hon. friend. I have always felt this. Looking back at the short span of my life I can remember, and there is not the slightest doubt about it, that a tremendous change has come over the habits of people in the direction of temperance and sobriety. I do not agree with what the hon. member who last spoke said on this subject when he quoted the writer of a certain article as having declared the change to be one of those fanatic changes which come about without cause. I hold contrary views. I can remember the days when the word &#x201C;teetotaler&#x201D; was almost synonymous to the meaning of imbecility.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#webber">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WEBBER</person>:</from>

<p>Crank.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>And worse than that. And if one traces this change I should say that it must have been due to the work done by these men who have pointed out to society one of its greatest failings. It seems to me that one has to recognize that a distinct current has set in, in the direction of temperance, to remove as far as possible the obstacles to the legitimate extension of that growing public sentiment against the immoderate use of liquor, against the degrading effect of the excessive use of liquor; and it seems to me that the most obvious thing to do is to remove the whole of the liquor business out of the arena in which profit is made so that it shall not be anyone&#x2019;s pecuniary interest that any member of the munity should drink one drop more than he may desire to do. On these grounds I have always been in thorough agreement with the point of view put forward by my hon. friend, that the first step, the real first effective step, should be the nationalization of the liquor traffic&#x2014;remove it entirely out of the arena in which any private individual makes profit. But I may say this that I differ from the hon. member for Von Brandis (Mr. Nathan), that the liquor interests are uninterested in this. I would be very much astonished indeed if that were so. I have received a long telegram with hundreds of names attached asking me not to support the Bill, and I must say that they are very much alert in this matter. As an illustration of their alertness I will give a little experience of my own. While I was serving during the South African Campaign, the late Mr. Quinn, who was a member of this House, died, and as I was at the time out of Parliament my friends nominated me for the division, and I was returned to the House. The first word I heard of the bye-election was through the keen alertness of the liquor trade and those in charge of their interests. I first heard of it when we were on the Christmas stunt at Iringa, an encircling movement in which we were three weeks on the march during the rainy season, and largely on short rations, and the troops had not had a rum issue. At Temaguie I saw the assistant quartermastergeneral, and after great difficulty, got a written order on the quartermaster&#x2019;s stores to serve out an issue of rum to my troops. From him I went to the telegraph office for orders, but found only a private wire, and reading &#x201C;In view of the bye-election are you in favour of total prohibition?&#x201D; This was from the Licensed Victuallers Association. [An Hon. Member: &#x201C;Did they send you any rum?] They would scarcely have asked me that question if they had been 3 weeks on the march in the rainy season. I only mention this to illustrate the argument that the liquor interest will take every possible step to secure their interests. But we very often find, though we hold one point of view, which is to us sound on theoretical grounds there and those who have pushed and these have adopted a system of work of their own. For many years they have been advocating that the people of this country should drink less and less, and that the best way to achieve then aim is to give the people in the various districts the power of restricting or determining what facilities should be given for the sale of liquor. In the circumstances I am prepared to say&#x2014;although I still believe what I have advocated would be the best way&#x2014;I am not prepared to stand in the way of those advocates who with the experience and with their vastly greater enthusiasm in the general subject, claim that reform is to be obtained in no other way &#x2014;that although I do not prefer this Bill I will do nothing to stop it. I do not want to give any personal views on prohibition, but I may quote the poet who speaks of compounding <span class="col_711" refersTo="page_0793"/>with things we are inclined to by damning those we have no mind to. I would not care for instance to support local option in the sale of tobacco and cigarettes, but I do not think that the ills which arise from the latter are anything like the ills which follow the excessive use of alcohol. I am going to vote for the second reading of the Bill, as I support the general principle, but I wish to make it clearly understood that this does not oblige me to not make an attempt to alter some of the provisions of the Bill. In the main I think it is a step in the direction of a diminution in temptations to intemperance amongst the people, and I agree that the system of local option has been successful in other countries where it has been applied. But if we are going to make progress in the direction of social reform, one thing we should see, that no injustice is done to those interested. I have no hesitation for a moment fin voting for the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#dreyer">

<from>†Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DREYER (Losberg)</person>:</from>

<p>Ek is nie juis teen die Wet, teen d;e dwang in die Wetsontwerp, omdat ek dronkenskap voorstaan nie, maar in my opienie sal die wynindustrie en die wynboere daaronder ly, want hierdie Wetsontwerp is niks anders as die dunne end van die wig, om te kom tot totale drankverbod. Daar word verwys na Amerika waar totale drankverbod is en ook die edele lid vir Ladybrand (de hr. Swart) het die toestande in Amerika as so pragtig geskilder en die Unie so donker. Die edele lid vergeet, dat verlede jaar die verklaring hier gemaak is, omtrent die drank-smokkelary in Amerika, wat grote afmetinge aangeneem het.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#swart">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SWART</person>:</from>

<p>Ja., vroeër was daar geen smokkelary, want toe was die verbod daar nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#dreyer">

<from>Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DREYER</person>:</from>

<p>Daarom stem ek in met die edele lid vir Lydenburg (de hr. Nieuwenhuize), dat waar die Transvaal Provinsie laaste jaar so swaar gely het onder &#x2019;n verbod van drie maande, wat dan die gevolge gaat wees van &#x2019;n totale drankverbod, want as ons sien dat in drie maande in &#x2019;n klein gedeelte van die land, waar &#x2019;n klein industrie is wat belang het by die maak van drank, meer as £10,000 skade gely is, wat sal dan die skade wees as daar totale drankverbod kom? Ek is voor enige industrie in die land, om die te ondersteun en aan te moedig en omdat hierdie Wetsontwerp die ondergang betoken van die wynindustrie, moet ek terwille van die wynbosre teen die Wetsontwerp stem.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#obrien">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">O&#x2019;BRIEN (Pietermaritzburg&#x2014;South)</person>:</from>

<p>I have listened attentively to the arguments brought forward by hon. members for and against this Bill, and we have heard a lot about the result of local option, but not one word has been put forward why the principle should be applied to this country. We have heard a great deal about the curse of intemperance and crime arising therefrom, but why should this Bill be applied to South Africa? Where is the great intemperance throughout the country? It is only in two districts throughout, South Africa that the curse of drink is very great. In the wine-making districts of the Cape, and on the Witwatersrand. In the wine-making districts of the Cape it is confined mainly to a section of the coloured people, and on the Rand through the evil of illicit liquor dealing. Where does the curse of intemperance obtain that such a Bill should be put forward to-day? Will this Bill cure the ills as they appertain to the Cape and the Transvaal? I do not think it will, but will accentuate and perpetuate them. This is a liquor Bill masquerading under the name of local option, but it creates crimes and penalties and adds to an already overloaded criminal code. It clearly states that compensation will not be given, and I consider that clause is sufficient in itself to damn the Bill. It is nothing more or less than spoliation. This Bill provides that a single majority should decide. Let us take an example. One hundred persons are entitled to vote, and it is suggested by this Bill that 51 can impose their will on the other 49. It says that if 100 people are entitled to vote, 51 people shall prevent the other 49 from drinking. That is the principle pure and simple.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>They may be preventing 20, or even five can decide.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#obrien">

<from>Mr. O&#x2019;<person refersTo="hansard_za">BRIEN</person>:</from>

<p>I am taking a round figure. An hereditary legislator in the House of Lords, speaking on national intemperance, said: &#x201C;That the causes of national intemperance are three. (1) adulteration of liquor, (2) the love of drink, and (3) the desire for more.&#x201D; It seems to me we have just as sapient legislators in South Africa as can be produced in the House of Lords. I consider the best and most effective manner for dealing with the evils of drink that exists would be the curtailment and the regulation of hours throughout the country. I am told that in the Witwatersrand there are something like 125 licences with what are ambiguously called midnight privileges. I hold that the proper course would be to bring in a uniform scale of hours throughout the Union, say, for example, from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m., which would provide quite enough drinking facilities, and I am quite sure would be welcomed by the licensed victuallers of the Union. I have a very clear case in my own mind of what happened in Maritzburg some years ago when the mayor issued to every burgess on the roll a card asking him to say what in his opinion was a desirable hour to close bars and canteens. The hour at that time was 11 o&#x2019;clock, and it was suggested that it should be made 10 o&#x2019;clock, and he got an almost unanimous reply suggesting that it should be made 10 p.m. This was carried out, and almost every licensed victualler in the place thanked him for that action. If common action is taken no one can be put at a disadvantage, and a regular hour throughout the Union will do much to set up what this Bill will never do. When in England and Ireland last year, I was struck by the fact that during the time I was there I never saw a single case of drunkenness. No doubt the habits of the people have changed, but I was told that the reason was the curtailment of hours, especially in the morning hours. It does not appear to be known that in Natal, for the last twenty-eight years we have had liquor option under Law 38 <span class="col_712" refersTo="page_0794"/>of 1896 in the case of new licences, and, strange to say, during that long period it has never been used. If there is such a tremendous demand for local option, why is it that during the last twenty-eight years in a country like Natal it has practically never been brought into operation? The advocates of this Bill throughout South Africa proclaim that this is the first step towards prohibition, in fact, its sponsor in this House said so himself. I think it would be much more honest and straightforward if the promoters of the Bill would bring forward a prohibition measure pure and simple, and let us have a vote on it. No, sir; this Bill is termed, euphemistically, I think, a Local Option Bill. But it is really a Local Coercion Bill, indeed it might be said to be a Local Tyranny Bill, and I shall vote against the second reading.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>†Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON (Border)</person>:</from>

<p>I shall support this Bill, and I shall not delay the vote, which I hope will be taken this afternoon, by more than a few minutes. I was not always in favour of local option, I confess, but I observe, with the hon. member for Stamford Hill (Mr. Creswell), and my life is perhaps longer than his, that the world is becoming more and more sober every year. On the other hand, the progress towards sobriety is not so fast as it should be, or as we desire it to be, and one is thus driven to such measures as local option to arouse public attention to this great, and I am afraid in this country, a growing evil to take steps to prevent it. So we have to take exceptional steps in South Africa, because in this country a large portion of the population, I mean the native and coloured, drink with the object of getting drunk and not with the object of being refreshed or of quenching their thirst. It is strange that it is not recognized in this country that the juice of the grape in almost every form it is presented does not quench thirst unless it is diluted with water. So we have to recognize the peculiar circumstances of this country. In the European and other great wine-producing countries there is very little or no drunkenness, because they have realized for generations, and through the centuries, that wine itself is not a thirst quencher, or that the spirits made from wine do not quench thirst unless freely diluted with water. I hope that this Bill will not lead to prohibition; I hope we will attain the desired end, that is, the prevention of excessive drunkennes or possibly drunkenness at all, by other means. It is very doubtful indeed whether the gigantic experiment which has been tried in America is going to be a success or not. I for one must keep an open mind on the question; the pros and cons are so very conflicting that it is very difficult indeed for any reasonable man to make up his mind what the true facts are. Furthermore, we require more extended experience than we have at present, not only to determine whether it prevents drunkenness but also on the other effects, the moral effects, of prohibition. All these require to be taken into consideration also. I do think it is rather a disgrace to this community, and to Governments generally, perhaps to this Government also, that Government is not concerned whatever with drink except with the alcoholic strength on which duty is paid. They have no concern with the quality of it, and the result is that we have houses licensed by the State to sell poison in a great many instances, and I contend we shall go a long distance towards solving the problem of drunkenness in this country by a rigid application of the Foods and Drugs Act, to prevent liquor that is essentially poisonous and deleterious to the human system to be exposed for sale in licensed houses. I would go further. I say that in the many cases we see where people have lost their lives through this stuff, and where it could be proved that the loss of life was due to the poisonous nature of the stuff sold under licence by the sellers of that drink, the sellers should be prosecuted for manslaughter. I would go further. I would trace the poisonous stuff, if such could be found, back to the manufacturers and to the wholesalers, back to those who are responsible for offering it for sale to the community; and I am sure we would go a long way&#x2014;perhaps 75 per cent. of the way&#x2014;towards checking drunkenness or curing it in this country if we were to insist that no liquor should be sold if it really was unfit for human consumption. I am not concerned with the loss of revenue forecast by the hon. member for Von Brandis (Mr. Nathan). It may be considerable, but I contend that if by eliminating drunkenness to a large extent we lost some revenue, there would be compensations in other directions. Compensation even in expenditure, compensation in the reduced cost of gaols, etc., so that I do think that this is not a very serious argument. But without detaining the House I say I support this Bill. I have asked those who are liquor optionists to regard it as a step in the right direction, not leading, I hope, towards prohibition, but leading to sound temperance in this country, more especially among the native and coloured population. And while it is a worthy course to advocate, I do ask those who see those desirable results ahead as the result of local option, to remember that they will really only be effective and satisfactory if it is carried out without serious injustice to any individual, and, therefore, I regret that apparently the question of compensation does not enter into the purview of this Bill, or into the minds of those who support this measure of local option. I do not think this would be a serious matter as regards the amount of compensation involved when we come to tackle it. After all, those interests no doubt will have four years in which to make their arrangements, and I am sure an equitable amount of compensation could be evolved. In the meantime, we should not want our moral ideas enforced at the expense of other people. We ought to be prepared to pay for them if the benefits to the community are so great as those who support this Bill declare them to be, and I go a long way with them in this direction, and surely it is worth having. But those persons who conduct their businesses properly, who have catered for the public, should have their cases taken into consideration. I will not detain the House any longer, but I do think the supporters <span class="col_713" refersTo="page_0795"/>of temperance, and we all are, whether local optionists or not, should take a serious view of the value to be gained by the community on insisting in as far as they can arrange that no poisonous liquor shall be sold in licensed houses, or those who sell it will be held responsible. I think a rigid application of the Food and Drugs Act, and a greater vigilance on the part of licensing committees where it is clearly proved that liquor of this deleterious quality has been sold, would go a long way to effect what we all desire, which is not local option, prohibition or rabid teetotalism, but the prevention of drunkenness in this country, especially among the native and coloured people, who drink, I repeat, not to refresh themselves or to quench their thirst, but with the sole object of getting drunk.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#keyter">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KEYTER (Ficksburg)</person>:</from>

<p>Ek het die laaste twee jaar my vriend van Calvinia (Dr. D. F. Malan) se Wetsontwerp nie net gesteun nie, maar gesekondeer en dit gedaan nie juis omdat dit van horn afkomstig was nie, dog omdat ek van oordeel was, dat dit &#x2019;n stap in die regte rigting was. Ek sal die Huis nie lank ophou deur al die argumente van die laaste twee jaar nogeens een vir een na te gaan nie; die saak is van beide kante van die Huis terdege bespreek, en &#x2019;n mens kan dit nou beskou as &#x2019;n afgesaagde plank. Net een argument, die sterkste, welke die teenstanders besit en telkens weer opbreng, wil ek nog &#x2019;n keer behandel&#x2014;dit is die van die gevestigde belange, &#x201C;vested interests.&#x201D; Ons hoor jaar na jaar en wel van beide kante van die Huis daardie gevestigde belange se regte verdedig en dan word geredeneer, dat die basis kom van die goeie ou vrystaatse Wet. Dis inmiddels baie jammer, dat die persone, wat daardie argument so graag aanvoer, daar in die grond so weinig van verstaan. Hierdie keer het hulle ook sommer weer die goeie Wet van die ou Vrystaat aangehaal. Ek moet verklaar, dat daardie argument van die gevestigde regte in daardie dage ook reeds hoog in die mode was: &#x201C;vested interests&#x201D; voorwaar. Maar die ou Vrystaatse Volksraad het &#x2019;n ander manier gehad om die dinge te beskou as ons nou, hulle het gesê: &#x201C;Landsbelang en volksbelang gaat voor &#x2018;vested interests,&#x2019;&#x201D; en dan doen hulle die ding wat reg is. Dit is jammer om te se, dat daar die laaste tyd in hierdie opsig verandering te bespeur is. Ek moet toegee, dat wat daardie saak betref nog dieselfde punt bestaat, maar daar is &#x2019;n groot verskil in daardie dage en nou se manier van behandeling van so &#x2019;n saak. In daardie dae, ek wens daar nogeens nadruk op te leg, was die maatstaf: wat is reg en wat is verkeerd en as die Volksraad oortuig is, dat &#x2019;n bepaalde gedragsiyn die regte is, dan stem hulle vir daardie ding en doen reg, wat ook al mag gebeur. Tans is die maatstaf&#x2014;en ons het twee dage daaroor hoor redeneer van beide kante van die Huis: &#x201C;vested interest. Dit het nogtans my ou hart goed gedaan om ook herhaaldelik te hoor verklaar, dat ons moet ophou om stemme te vang. Die stemmevangery is &#x2019;n groot verskil in vergelyking met daardie dage, toe enkel gevraag werd: wat eis die belang van die land en van die volk? Nou is die maatstaf: hoeveel stemme sal ek vang en hoeveel verloor met &#x2019;n bepaalde gedragslyn, al is die verkeerd; of kan ek nie &#x2019;n setel verower rue? Dit is die maatstaf en dit erken byna almal net soos hulle na die Huis kom, en dit maak die radikale verskil uit tussen daardie dage en nou en dit is die enigste argument, wat daar nou is en toe nie gehoor werd nie. Iets anders wat vir my baie vreemd is&#x2014;ek het in my hand n hele bondel telegramme, die ek oor die aanhangige Wetsontwerp ontvang het, en een van die publieke seksies telegrafeer, dat ek die Wetsontwerp ten sterkste moet bestry, terwyl ie ander, wat van niemand minder afkomstig is nie as van die hoofbestuur van die Oranje Vrouwe Vereniging in die Vrystaat, en dit is die afrikaanse moeders in die Vrystaat, telegrafeer, dat hulle verwag, dat ek sal stem voor die plaatselike keuse Wetsontwerp Is dit nie wonderlik, dat toe daar ander Wetsontwerpe voor die Huis was, daar nooit sulke telegramme gestuur werd nie? Maar die vrouwe van die volk van Suidafrika weet waar hulle moet aanklop, wanneer vrouwebelange op die spel staan. Dan stuur hulle telegramme aan die regte soort van wie hulle weet, dat hulle die Wet so sal help maak, dat die vrou, die man en die kind saam veilig huistoe gaan in die aand&#x2014;hulle weet welke is die regte plek om by aan te klop. Omtrent die Wetsontwerp self wil ek eerlik erken dat hy nie volmaak is nie; volstrek nie. Daar is een punt wat my hinder; ek het laaste jaar my vriend die edele lid vir Calvinia (Dr. D. F. Malan) daarop gewys en zanjaar is dieselfde fout nog in die Wet aanwesig, maar ek sal reguit se, dat ik voor die Wet sal stem, omdat dieselwe na my oordeel &#x2019;n stap in die regte rigting is. Daar behoort darem &#x2019;n kleine verandering aangebreng te word in Artiekel 5, want as dit daar so oop bly staan en een distrikt sou sig droog verklaar en die andereen haastaan me, dan is laasgenoemde in groot gevaar en maak ons&#x2014;om &#x2019;n growe uitdrukking te gebruik&#x2014;van een duiwel twee. Ek stel daarom voor, dat ons &#x2019;n verandering aanbreng in Artiekel 5, in die sin, dat as &#x2019;n bepaalde distrikt droog stem, niemand die reg sal besit om van buitekant af drank daarheen in te breng nie sonder &#x2019;n permit. [Een Edele Lid: &#x201C;Mag ek nie eers &#x2019;n sopie kry nie?&#x201D;] Dit is &#x2019;n fout wat die Wetsontwerp het, na my insien; want ons het ondervinding en ons weet wat gebeur en die vrou van die man wat suip weet dit nog beter. Ek herinner aan die toestand, waarin die Vrystaat daardie dage nog was, toe elke dorp sy paar kantiens had en die inrigtings op alle kruispaaie en wege aangetref werd; hoeveel mense het toe uit hulle grond geraak en wat was die toestand, toe dit weggeneem was en die vrou weet nog beter hoeveel verdriet die drank, wat so maklik te verkry was haar berokken het en omdat ek dit weet, daarom is ek daarvoor, dat die aangeduide verandering in die Wet aangebreng sal word. Die Wet kan geleidelik verbeter word; gee hom &#x2019;n kans en as hy nie goed werk nie, verbeter hom weer totdat hy goed werk. Dit is die plig van die Huis om stappe te neem ten einde &#x2019;n end te maak aan die dinge, wat daar tans gaande is. Nie dit alleen wat ek hier aangehaal het nie, maar ek het die <span class="col_714" refersTo="page_0796"/>saak met my kiesers op alle vergaderings bespreek, hulle om instruksies versoek en stem ten voile met hulle in. Byna die hele Vrvstaat, engelse en hollandse inwoners, keur die Wet goed en is daarvoor, dat hulle vertegenwoordigers voor moet stem. Ek voel, dat solank as ek met hulle instem, moet ek voor die Wetsontwerp stem en vertrou, dat die Huis die Wet sal aanneem en dat ons later die vrugte van die Wet sal sien, ja dat selfs die teenstanders die nut sal insien en dit regverdig.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alberts">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALBERTS (Witwatersberg)</person>:</from>

<p>Dit is nou twee jaar, dat die Wetsontwerp voor die Huis kom en laaste jaar het ek niks gesê nie, en net teengestem. Die edele lid vir Ficksburg (de hr. Keyter) het geseg, dat hy volg die edele lid vir Calvinia (Dr. D. F. Malan) omdat dit &#x2019;n stap in die regte rigting is. Ek bestry dit en verklaar, dat dit &#x2019;n stap in die verkeerde rigting is en dit is my plig om aan die Huis uiteen te set waarom ek so denk. Wat die edele lid vir Ficksburg (de hr. Keyter) se, dat dit &#x2019;n jag na stemme is ontken ek. Ek soek geen stemme nie, maar as ek eerlik teen n wetsvoorstel gekant is, dan stem ek teen en wil daar net aan herinner, hoe die edele lid stemmevangery veroordeel, maar byna in dieself de asem verklaar, dat hy nie teen die wil van sy kiesers sal stem nie, maar hulle stem wil versekureer; elkeen het die reg om stemme te versekureer, met behoorlike inagneming van sy eige eerlike oortuiging. Hy het tellegramme voorgelees en uitgeleg, hoe die vroue weet waar die regte plek is om by aan te klop, maar dit klop nie met wat die edele lid geseg het van die vroue stemreg nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#keyter">

<from>De hr <person refersTo="hansard_za">KEYTER</person>:</from>

<p>Dit is wat hulle my vra; ek het nooit beloof, dat ek in die Hius hulle sin sal doen teen my oortuiging nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alberts">

<from>De hr <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALBERTS</person>:</from>

<p>Ek is teen die Wet om verskillende redes. Een daarvan is, dat die Wet beoog, volgens wat die voorstanders self toegee, algehele prohibisie en dit is so duidelik as die dag, dat dit onmolik is en dat dit lets is, wat nooit kan en sal gebeur nie. Van die lede haal Europa aan en die toestande daar. Ek weet van Europa niks meer as wat ek hoor nie, en die meeste notisie neem ek in die verband van wat die edele lid vir Lydenburg (de hr. Nieuwenhuize) meegedeel het en ek reken., dat die voorstanders van die Wetsontwerp daarna met dankbaarheid behoort te geluister het, want dit kan van invloed wees op die strekking van die saak. Ek weet van Europa niks af nie en sou moet oorsê wat ek van ander gehoor het en daarom praat ek liewer nie oor daardie verre land nie. En wat betref die droge Amerika het ek gehoor wat die edele lid vir Ladybrand (de hr. Swart) verklaar het, want hy het die dinge op die plek self ondersoek en hy verklaar, dat hoewel dit droog is, tog kan jy by elke ryk man genoeg goeie drank kry en by die arme slegte drank.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#swart">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SWART</person>:</from>

<p>Ek het nooit geseg, dat mens by elke ryk man drank kan kry nie, maar wel dat daar ryk mense is, wat drank het.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alberts">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALBERTS</person>:</from>

<p>Dit toon in elk geval, dat dit onmolik is om &#x2019;n land droog te maak en waarom sal ons nou gaan en hierdie beginsel: invoer? Ons het reeds &#x2019;n begin gemaak in Transvaal met prohibisie vir die Naturelle en die edele lid vir Bezuidenhout (de hr. Blackwell) weet net so goed as ek wat die uitwerking daar gewees het. Hy het seker meer as eenmaal voor die hof gestaan om mense te verdedig, wat onder daardie Wet gevang en voorgebreng werd en om te protbeer om hulle te beskerm en los te kry. Het ons die naturel sy drank ontneem? Nee, hy het sy drank nog en maak selfs sy eige, met die gevolg, dat hy meer drink as vroeër. Sy kans om daar misbruik van te maak is nog net so sterk as vroeër. Die edele lid vir Rouxville (de hr. Hugo) is na ek verneem, nie teen die drank self nie, maar teen dronkenskap. Dit kan ons hom seker almal naseg, dog ons moet in ag neem, dat die drank &#x2019;n installing is, wat vir die mens daargestel is om van gebruik te maak; maar van alles word misbruik gemaak, waarom sal drank dan alleen uitgesonder word vir die beskuldiging, dat dit misbruik word en dit daarom afskaf? Dit is &#x2019;n instelling as enige ander ding, wat die mens ten dienste staat en die regte gedragslyn is om die mense te bestry, wat daar misbruik van maak en nie die instelling self nie. As hierdie Wetsontwerp deurgaat dan kry ons deur die hele Unie dieselfde toestand as wat ons met betrekking tot die naturelle in Transvaal het, as gevolg van die invoering van daardie Wet daar; die mense mag nie drink nie, maar is tog dronk net wanneer hulle verkies en wit mans en vrouwe sit in die tronk en hierdie We sal nog groter smokkelary aankweek. Gestel, dat daardie deel van Johannesburg drooggeleg word, waar al daardie drankmisbruik plaasvind en waar die meeste drinkplekke is, waar sal al die polisie en die speurders vandaan kom om hulle op te pas en waar al die tronke gevind word om die oortreders op te berg en waarvandaan al die wagters om die lyne op te pas? In die toestand, waarin die land en volk verkeer, tengevolge van daardie Wet is ons nie geregvaardig om hierdie wetgewing in te voer nie en ons verwag van die Regering, dat hulle nog hierdie sitting &#x2019;n plan sal maak, dat daardie drankwetgewing hersien word en dat hierdie Wetsvoorstel sal lei tot daardie oortuiging. Daar is baie griewe gelug, maar ek reken, dat daar een enkele stelsel deur die hele Unie neergeleg moet word&#x2014;wat in die Kaap Wet is, moet dit ook wees tot in Transvaal en as hulle vind, dat sterke drank wegge, neem moet word, doet dit dan, maar gee lets anders in die plek; gee ligte wyn, maar gee dit ook aan die naturelie. Maar as die hele volk en land sogenaamd drooggemaak word, dan beteken dit, dat wie iets wil drink, tegelyk n dief moet word, &#x2019;n Ander m.i. gewigtige oorweging is, dat die wynboere &#x2019;n deel van ons volk is; ons is aan mekaar geskakel, ons is &#x2019;n landbouwende volk en die graanboer, die mielieboer, die veeboer en die wynboer is almaal aan mekaar geskakel nie net deur die bloed nie, maar die een koop van die ander en as een van die skakels vernietig word, dan ly die hele ketting. Sou dit b.v. reg wees om &#x2019;n Wet te passeer, waardeur die landbouwende deel van <span class="col_715" refersTo="page_0797"/>die volk uitgeroei word, omdat enkele dit wil hê of omdat hier en daar een hom aan verkeerde praktijke skuldig maak? Dieselfde sou die geval wees met die uitroei van die wynstok, wat met die vadere van oorkant die seewater hierheen gekom het en ek verklaar hier, dat dronkenskap is sonde, maar die wynstok is dit nie. Ek het die edele lid vir Bezuidenhout (de hr. Blackwell) nog nooit hoor pleit vir die belange van die landbouwende stand nie, maar elke vertegenwoordiger van &#x2019;n landbou kiesafdeling behoort uit pligsgevoel teen hierdie Wetsontwerp te stem. As dit aangeneem word, raak dit die landbouwer deur die hele land en ons mag nie die mense die nekslag toebreng nie. Wat nog van die mense, wat in die drankhuise werk, wat die drank help fabriseer? Laat ons die drankhandel so maak, dat die Staat baas is en laat daar teen dronkenskap opgetree word, maar nie teen die wynboer of die wynstok nie. Met die tabakbelasting het n deel van die landbouwende bevolking &#x2019;n nekslag gekry en baie ander ook, want, soas ek reeds aangetoon het, ons is aanmekaar geskakel en ook &#x2019;n deel, wat die tabak nie plant nie het gely. Ek se daarom, dat ook onder hierdie Wet indien gepasseer, ook die veeboer, die landhouwer, die graanboer, sal daar ook onder ly. Die een leef van die ander en dit het die edele lid vir Bezuidenhout (de hr. Blackwell) nog nooit gese me. Hy kan sender hulle klaarkom on kan daarom gerustelik so &#x2019;n Wet indien. Ek sien egter nie waarom ons daardie Wet sal aanneem nie en voel dit my plig, &#x2019;n heilige plig, dat ek teen die Wet moet stem en as hy hier deurgaat in tweede lesing, sal ek by derde lesing mij uiterste doen om &#x2019;t te bestry en sal dan die gevoel hê&#x2019; dat ek my hande in onskuld kan was, want ek dan nie gehelp om misdadigers te maak nie. Dieselfde, sal ons sien, gaat gebeur met die wynboere. As hulle &#x2019;n klap kry, sal ons verwonderd wees hoe ver die klap sal gaan, dit sal &#x2019;n klap beteken vir die graanboere en die veeboere en andere, want die een leef van die anderen. Dis wat die lid vir Bezuidenhout (de hr. Blackwell) nog nooit besef het nie. Hy kan sonder drank klaar kom, ek ook. Ek drink nie maar ek se, dis &#x2019;n instelling en die voorstel nou voor die Huis wil die instelling vernietig. Ek voel dit as my plig, as my heilige plig daarteen te stem, en as die Wet vandag deurgaan in die twede lesing dan sal ek hom nog verder beveg by die derde lesing. As die Wet deurgaan, dan sal ek my hande in onskuld kan was want ek het my beste gedoen. En as die Wet in werking kom, dan sal jy nog die selfde toestande behou. Dis geen demokrasie nie maar autokrasie. Vir die handjievol dronkaards moet die hele bevolking &#x2019;n verbod opgelê word En diegene wat dan drank wil hê, of hij &#x2019;n dronkaard is of nie, word dan &#x2019;n misdadiger. Daarvoor kan ek nie stem nie. Daar word argumente aangehaal, dat as jy hier in die Huis nie daarvoor stem nie dan doen jy iets teen die Kerk. Maar dit het niks daarmee te doen nie. Ekself is &#x2019;n lid van die Kerk en ek stem daarteen. Ek weet, die meerderheid van die predikante is voorstanders van die Wet en ek sê dis reg, dis hulle plig, om die sonde tebestry. Ek sê dis hulle plig om dronkenskap te bestry. Maar ons kan tog nie &#x2019;n wetgeving aanmoedig waar die volk onder moet ly. Ek dink, dis nie die plig van die predikante om so &#x2019;n Wet aan te moedig nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER (Cape Town&#x2014;Castle)</person>:</from>

<p>At this late hour perhaps it is not right that one should take up much time, but I have to say a few words in reply to some of the arguments. This matter of liquor option has been brought up year after year, not only before the present Parliament but previous Parliaments. This particular measure has had consideration more than once, and a vote was taken last year when it was defeated by 50 votes against 41. I expect that those who are in favour of this legislation intend to bring the matter on the floor of the House year after year, although representation in Parliament may not have changed, in the hope of converting hon. members. This particular industry is in an unfortunate position. There are three important measures dealing with the industry this session. We had the <i>Wine and Spirits Control Bill.</i> There is a Bill which the hon. the Minister of Justice is bringing up in regard to the amendment of the Cape Liquor Laws, and now we have this <i>Liquor Option Bill.</i> The hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) when he introduced this Bill spoke of certain conditions in the Western Province and in Johannesburg. It seems to me with regard to Johannesburg that it is the very best example of the effects of total prohibition. You have total prohibition as to the sale of liquor in the Transvaal, not only to natives but to coloured people, and yet you have large numbers of white and other people in gaol for offences under this law. This shows that you cannot make the public sober or moral by Act of Parliament. You can restrain crime and punish it but you cannot make people moral by law. There are certain features which you can deal with, but there are certain things which can only be dealt with by force of public opinion. Parliament should come in after public opinion had asserted itself. Let us remember what happened in Johannesburg and the Western Province, and ask yourselves whether the conditions are being improved under the existing law. There is a steady improvement in sobriety in South Africa, and it is not necessary, in my opinion, to bring in this Bill for that purpose. It must not be forgotten that we have our own existing laws, which contain provision for local option. We have stringent laws, but now it is wanted to obtain a half-way house to prohibition. In order to get a new licence under the existing law it is necessary to get a majority of the voters on the roll&#x2014;not a majority of those who go to the poll&#x2014;before it is granted. The difference between the existing law and the provisions of this Bill is that there might be a haphazard and accidental majority at the poll, and one might wake up next morning to find that millions of pounds worth of property had <span class="col_716" refersTo="page_0798"/>been confiscated. Here you have to have a memorial signed by a majority of the voters on the roll, when you want to get a new licence, but in order to do away with all the existing licences the Bill only requires that a majority of those who go to the poll should vote in that direction. This is illogical. Those who advocate the sweeping away of licences in that way pose as democrats. Save us from such democracy. With regard to compensation: it should be remembered that even some of those who have promised to support the second reading have made it clear that they will do so on condition that there should be compensation. Every time this Bill comes forward it contains the same provisions, and I suppose it will be brought forward again and again in the hope that a majority will support it, no notice being taken of the suggestions with reference to a fourth option and compensation. I hope that at the next election the hon. member is going to make it a cardinal point, and if it is really an earnest thing to him then the hon. member would support no member of his own party who was not in favour of this Liquor Option Bill. Is this really a matter of life and death? Of course it is not, but if the people of this country want this Liquor Option Bill so seriously as the hon. member tells us they want it, they would soon see that it was in the forefront of political matters. If this is really a vital matter to the country, seeing the number of elections that have taken place, there would have been a Parliament that would have insisted upon it sooner. The hon. member knows that it is only one of many things, and those who have supported it have spent an enormous amount of time in propaganda, and there is a certain amount of feeling in the country undoubtedly about it. If they really believed in the sincerity of this thing, as I believe they do, why not have a majority of the people on the roll to decide, and not merely a majority of the people voting; that is the only fair and correct thing to do. The most serious thing about the Bill, and about which hon. members think so seriously is this, that those who are in favour of the Bill make no secret of the fact that it is a stalking-horse of prohibition. Behind this they want to get prohibition; it is no use to them unless it brings prohibition, I say those who are promoting the Bill think it is a half-way house to prohibition; it would be useless to them unless they thought that in this way prohibition would gradually be obtained. The experience of America shows that if you have a minority vocal enough you will eventually have prohibition fastened on the country. You will find in America to-day, as was indicated in the news we got from Washington a few days ago&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#boydell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BOYDELL</person>:</from>

<p>Who sent it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I do not know who sent it. This is a report from the Commissioner of Police in New York City, who gave an address on prohibition, and quoted some figures of what is going on there. The facts show clearly that there has been a serious increase in crime since prohibition. I do not say as a result of prohibition, but I do say that prohibition has not decreased crime. With regard to Aliwal North, the hon. member got the statement made in the House in answer to his question. I have the paragraph here; there is no suggestion in it that the police recommended these instructions to be removed. It does not say so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member did not deny that they made that report.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>There was no denial of the police statistics. I have heard nothing against the licensing court of Aliwal North; they have come to the conclusion on the facts before them that they should remove the restrictions as the result of the restrictions was not to improve the state of affairs so far as drunkenness was concerned. It does seem to me that at this stage when we are coming to the end of this Parliament, it is not the time, after the defeat of the measure which took place last year, to force this measure through. There ought to be more enquiry, and it should be proper local option and not sham local option; it should be proper compensation and not confiscation. If this Bill provided for compensation and proper local option I would support it, but it is not local option at all and as long as it remains a sham I will always oppose it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#claassen">

<from>Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLAASSEN (Standerton)</person>:</from>

<p>Daar is al bale gepraat oor die wetgewing wat hier voorgekom het, en dis moeilik om te sê wat nou eientlik helemaal jou opienie is en wat jy dink van sodanige wetgewing, as hier nou voor die Huis is. &#x2019;n Mens staat tusse twee groot moeilikhede met sodanige Wet, die één seksie is men besig dood te maak om die andere te laat lewe, die een kant wil men red, die ander verwoes. As daar &#x2019;n wetgeving voor die Huis sou gekom het met die doel om &#x2019;n vermindering, &#x2019;n inkrimping van dronkenskap te bereik en om n proof te neem om te sien wat die beste is om dronkenskap te verminder, dan sou daar nog iets voor te sê gewees het. Maar hierdie Wetgewing wat nou voor die Huis gekom het, as die aangeneem word, dan beroof en plunder ons &#x2019;n groot deel van die bevolking, wat sy bestaan, sy lewe maak uit die drankhandel. As ons nagaan die geskiedenis van die opvoeding in ons land, dan sien ons, dat die wynboere vir die instandhouding daarvan grote kapitale gespandeer het en om die kapitaal vandag weg te neem, dood te maak, teenoor persone wat nie agter hulle self kan kyk nie en geen kapitaal het nie, dit is moeilik. Ek stem in, dat daar sekere mense is wat hulle self nie weet te beheers nie en as jy siet die gebrek en ellende wat ontstaan, as die vader van &#x2019;n huisgesin &#x2019;n dronkaard is, dan voel jy amper asof jy voor die Wet moet stem. Maar die ellende sal bestaan bly, ek wil nie ver daaroor uitwei on welke manier, nie. In ander dele van die land word drank gemaak van kafferkoring en van mielies. Andere koop weer suiker en maak drank daarvan. Jy vind mense wat nie drank kan kry nie en hulle gaat heen en maak &#x2019;n minderwaardige produkt van suiker en wanneer jy die wynboer gaat doodmaak, dan sou jy ook die graanboer en die mielieboer en die <span class="col_717" refersTo="page_0799"/>suikerindustrie moet doodmaak om te kom tot gehele afskaffing van drank, want van al die dinge word drank gemaak. Ons praat van die blanke bevolking wat gered moet word, maar wat van die naturelle?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#havenga">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAVENGA</person>:</from>

<p>Wie gaat hulle kontrôleer?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#claassen">

<from>Lt.-Kol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLAASSEN</person>:</from>

<p>Die naturel gebruik suiker en ander goed om drank te maak en wie sal dit beskerm? As die Wet die bedoeling had gehad om &#x2019;n vermindering aan te bring in die drankliksensies by wyse van proef, dan sou ek daar miskien nog voor kan stem, maar as die wet so aangeneem word, dan sal die uitwerking wees totale drankverbod. Dis duidelik dat die voorsteller na die punt werk. Daar is baie petisies gekom om voor of teen die Wetsontwerp te stem, maar die mense buitekant weet nie die moeilikheid wat lede het om te beslis of hulle voor of teen moet stem nie, om te sê op welke wyse hulle reg doen. Maar ons neem hier &#x2019;n wet aan wat sekere seksie van die bevolking sij bestaan weg neem en dit sou onbillik wees van die Parlement om dit te doen. Ek hoop en vertrouw, dat edele lede hulle verstand sal gebruik om te weet wat hulle gaat doen as hulle voor die Wet stem.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naudé">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NAUDÉ (Pietersburg)</person>:</from>

<p>Ek sou my plig nie doen as ek nie hier sou vermeld, dat sekere seksie van my kiesers aan my &#x2019;n petiesie gestuur het met 400 handtekeninge om teen die Wetsontwerp te stem. Ook het ek telegramme ontvang van die dorpsbestuur en die Kamer van Koophandel van dieselfde strekking. Nogtans gaan ek voor die Wetsvoorstel stem, maar ek wil graag my posiesie in verband daarmee baie korteliks duidelik maak. Baie van die toesprake wat gemaak is, het dit laat voorkom asof die lokale opsie &#x2019;n nuwe beginsel is, maar in die Transvaal en die Vrystaat het ons die al lank gehad. En in die Kaapprovinsie bestaan dit ook.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#havenga">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAVENGA</person>:</from>

<p>Nog nooit gewees.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naudé">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>In die Koloniale Wet van 1893 kom ook die beginsel van lokale opsie voor.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#havenga">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAVENGA</person>:</from>

<p>Nie in die Vrystaat nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naudé">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>Presies dieselfde beginsel is daar al neergelê. Die enige moeilikheid is die ondoeltreffendheid omdat voors ening gemaak word dat die helfte van die kiesers wat as kiesers is ingeskrywe moet hulle stem uitbring om lisensies te kanseleer en ons weet.dat deur afwesigheid of om andere rede nooit al die kiesers aanwesig is by so&#x2019;n stemming nie. Dis glad geen nuwe beginsel nie en ek is verbaas om te sien dat mense teen die beginsel kan wees. Ek stem saam met edele lede, wat van mening is dat vir &#x2019;n tydperk van vier jaar voorsieninge gemaak moet word om &#x2019;n sekere kompensasie te betaal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#havenga">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAVENGA</person>:</from>

<p>Waar gaan ons die geld vandaan kry?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naudé">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>As die pulblieke belang eis dat die maatreël geneem moet word, dan moet ook die publieke belang vir die middele sorg en as die meerderheid daarvoor stem, dan moet ook die meerderheid van die volk daarvir sorg dat die kompensasie betaal word. Jy kan nie erkende gevestigde regte wegneem in die publieke belang sonder te kompenseer nie. Dis die moeilikheid wat ek sien in verband met die Wetsontwerp, en dit behoor uitdrukkelik bepaal gewees het in die Wetsontwerp, want anders sou dit baie onbillik wees. As &#x2019;n hotel b.v. &#x2019;n liksensie wil hê, &#x2019;n nuwe hotel, dan is dit nie voldoende om die planne vir die hotel voor te lê en applikasie te maak nie, maar eers moet behoorlike geboue daar wees, voordat &#x2019;n mens die applikasie kan maak. En die hotelle kos dikwels duisende en duisende van ponde. Dit sou dus onbillik wees om die regte ineens weg te neem en te vernietig, wat mense miskien jaar na jaar opgebou het, sonder om kompensasie daarvoor te betaal. Maar ek is heeltemaal voor die Wetsontwerp wanneer die voorsiening gemaak word.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#lemmer">

<from>†Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEMMER (Marico)</person>:</from>

<p>Ek het verlede jaar oor die Wet gestem sonder om daar veel oor te sê, maar voel dit tans my plig om eers &#x2019;n paar woorde te sê, voordat ek my stem oor die Wetsontwerp uitbreng. Ek wens van harte dat ek in dieselfde positie was van die edele lid voor Ficksburg (de hr. Keyter), en dat ook ik kon verklaar dat ek akkoord ging met degenen die pressie op my hebben uitgeoefend. Maar met my is dit anders. Ek stem niet in met hen die pressie op my hebben uitgeoefend, en is myn positie dus moeiliker dan die van het edele lid voor Ficksburg (de hr. Keyter). Ek keur dit af, dat die publiek gebruik maak van sulke gelegenhede om druk uit te oefen, want elke lid kom hier met &#x2019;n lewendige besef van sy verantwoordelikheid en wanneer sulke sake voorgebreng word, behoort hy te weet om sy diskresie behoorlik te gebruik. As dit my duidelik was, dat die maatregel afdoende sou blyk en dat werkelik die beoogde doel daardeur bereik sou word, dan sou ek een van die eerste gewees &#x2019;t om voor te stem; maar dit kom my voor of die maatregel berekend is om net die teënoorgestelde te bereik van wat beoog word en wat die voorstanders daarvan verwag. Dit is sonder twyfel, dat dit die wynindustrie sal benadeel en ten tweede sal dit sekere dislokasie veroorsaak in die besigheidswereld; besighede sal gesluit word en die aldus verlore geld sal gekonsentreer word by een of &#x2019;n paar bevoorregte handelaars. En dan is die vraag wat ek my stel: Sal dit in die nugtere werklikheid dronkenskap teenwerk en laat verminder? As daar vermindering van liksensies plaasvind, is dit nog nie vermindering van dronkenskap nie, en daar word geseg, dat dit aan die publiek corgelaat moet word of daar een of twee liksensies uitgegee sal word in &#x2019;n bepaalde dorp, maar ek gaat die maatregel teenwerk, omdat die ondervinding geleer het, dat as daar verskeie drinkplekke in &#x2019;n dorp is, dan gaat die man, wat sy sopie wil drink, in een daarvan, gebruik iets en gaat huistoe, volkome nugter. Maar as daar net een plek is, dan is dit onvermydelik, dat die maats mekaar daar raakloop; en kom daar nog een en nog twee; daar moet saamgedrink word en as die een gestaan het, moet die ander dit op die ry af ook doen, met die onvermydelike gevolg, dat teen <span class="col_718" refersTo="page_0800"/>die tyd, dat hulle huistoe gaah, almaal tamelik hoog-aan is en miskien selfs dronk. Ek kan eenvoudig nie sien welke heil van die voorgestelde Wetsontwerp verwag kan word nie, en dit kom my voor of, hoe meer iemand van jongs af geleer word, deur die hantere van drank, hoe gevaarlik dit is, hoe meer en beter hy later instaat is om hom daarteen te verset, en dit te hanteer sonder skade vir sigself. As dus &#x2019;n kind van kleins af leer en sien wat die skadelike gevolge van seg nou maar &#x2019;n vuurwapen kan wees, en dit word hom van kleins af in die hande gegee, sodat hy dit hanteer, dan kan hy des te beter later met so&#x2019;n lewensgevaarlike voorwerp vertrou word en dieselfde is dit met die wynboer en sy kinders; en hulle bly hulle lewe lank sobere mense. Maar mense, die net by gelegenheid opeens drank in die hande kry, ken die gevaarlike daarvan nie, en skyn minder instaat om maat te hou. Dus om die drankgelegenhede weg te ruim, oeteken nog volstrek die dieselfde as om die drankmisbruik, die dronkenskap af te skaf nie. Na my oordeel sal ek daarom teenstem, maar as ek nou wou luister na pressie, dan sou ek moet voor stem en kan geen twee here dien nie. Ek sou daarom onregvaardig handel teenoor diegene, wat ek verteenwoordig en teenoor myself deur van opinie te verander. Ek sien geen heil in hierdie Wetscntwerp nie, en dit is vir my onmolik om teen my oortuiging te stem. As dit so geskape stond, dat dit van my stem alleen afhang of die volk gevrywaar sou word of pie van een of ander nadelige saak, dan sou ek my eige oortuiging die swyge opleg en gevolg gee aan die van my kiesers &#x2014;vir hulle vraag: hoe moet ek stem in hierdie geval? Maar ek voel so sterk op hierdie punt, dat ek nog eers die kans wil kry om my kiesers te ontmoet, vir die geval dat my handelwyse nie presies strook met hulle opvatting nie. Maar ek het nie die reg om in stry met my oortuiging te handel nie, en gaat teenstem.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nixon">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NIXON (Denver)</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry to speak at this late hour, but I take the first opportunity and will limit my remarks to one minute. I shall merely say that while voting for the second reading of this Bill I intend to move for its amendment in an important respect in Committee. I support the second reading, though I have very grave doubts whether this Bill can possibly pass this House as it is drafted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brand_wessels">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BRAND WESSELS (Bethlehem)</person>:</from>

<p>Ek kan nie die gelegenheid laat virbygaan, sonder om &#x2019;n paar woorde oor die saak onder bespreking te sê nie. Die kwessie van plaatselike keus het so &#x2019;n wending geneem die laaste jaar, dat ek die kiesers op al die vergaderings die gelegenheid gegee het om te beraadslag en te besluit daaroor. Die edele lid vir Marico (Gen. Lemmer) voel dat hy moet teenstem, omdat hy nie sy kiesers geraadpleeg het nie; ek daarenteen het verwag, dat die saak weer op die proppe sou kom en hulle daarom die gelegenheid gegee om hulle gevoelens duidelik te maak en my sodoende instaat te stel hulle opvatting te leer ken. Ons het buitendien daar in my wereld die gelegenheid gehad om die danige amerikaanse afskaffersprofeet, Pussyfoot Johnson, te hoor praat en also in die gelegenheid gewees om die saak van alle molike kante te beoordeel; gevolglik was dit vir my geen reusetaak om die gevoelens van my kiesers te leer ken nie. Die kwessie hier vandag loop m.i. nie oor die grote probleem, of ons dronkenskap moet bestry en of ons onsself voor of teen dronkenskap moet uitspreek nie. Niemand ter wereld sal verklaar; ek is voor dronkenskap of daarvoor om dit te laat voortbestaan nie; dit is hier die vraag op welke manier die drankmisbruik die beste bestry kan word en wat is dus die beste manier om dit in ons Suidafrika tot &#x2019;n end te laat kom. My ou vriend die edele lid van Ficksburg (de hr. Keyter) het dit goedgevind om die ou Vrystaat weer voor die aandag te breng en te vertel, hoe die Vrystaat reeds in 1883 met &#x2019;n Wet die weg aangewys het, hoe die stryd gevoer kan word en hy meen, dat as ons daarmee in ooreenstemming wil handel, die saak gevonde is. Hy sal instem, dat dronkenskap by ons nie so kras is as waar nou dronkenskap heers nie. Wat hier moet ondersoek word is die Wetsontwerp en of die bedoeling net is om die drankmisbruik te beperk, of is die voorstanders daarop uit om totale prohibisie in te voer. Die edele lid, wat dit voorgebreng het, was eerlik genoeg om te verklaar, dat hy totale prohibisie beoog. Laat ons almaal eerlik wees en nie probeer om mekaar met lis uit te oorlê nie, maar laat die vriende wat dit so bedoel, sê: ons is nie van plan om die wynboer dood te druk nie, maar net om die drankhandel op die groot stede sodanig te beperk, dat die misbruik van drank daar kan tot &#x2019;n einde gebreng word. Ons het &#x2019;n voorbeeld van totale prohibisie in Amerika. Daar word soveel van gemaak en geredeneer, dat die volk die kans gegee moet word om daaroor te stem of die drankliksensie verminder sal word of totaal afgeskaf sal worde dan word dit aan die publiek voorgehou en gevraag welke skade dit die volk kan aandoen. Dit is duidelik, dat die lede wat stem vir plaatselike keus, nie die hele publiek is wat beslis nie, maar die klesers in een munisipaliteit of van een dorpsbestuur. Dit is my duidelik, dat dit nie &#x2019;n volkskeus is nie en dus nie &#x2019;n demokratiese stem nie. In my afdeling b.v. en so is dit oral, sal tweederde nie stem nie en die groot gedeelte, die vrouwe het geen stem nie, hoe kom hulle dan aan die reg om te praat van &#x2019;n volkskeus, van &#x2019;n demokratiese stem? Wie word beskou as die demos. Uit die duisende, wat op die platteland woon kan nie stem nie, dog moet buig onder die beslissing van die klompie dorpsbewoners. Hulle besluit of daar drank mag verkoop word of nie. Stem die hele volk en word dit dus &#x2019;n referendum, dan sou dit &#x2019;n eerlike beslissing wees, mits elkeen stem en nie om die tuin gelei word nie. Ek gaan teen die Wetsontwerp stem. As dit &#x2019;n geval was van &#x2019;n referendum, sou ek my leerleg by die volk se beslissing, maar hier word beoog om net die stemme van sekere klasse te neem, sekere dorpe, waar miskien sestig, sewentig en miskien tot honderd kiesers woon, maar die ses of sewe honderd kiesers, wat op die platteland woon, stem nie saam nie, <span class="col_719" refersTo="page_0801"/>sodat daardie klein klompies by meerderheid van stemme so genaamd beslis of die streek droog gemaak sal word of nie. Dit kan wees, dat dit meerderheid teen lisensies uitreik is maar dat die minderheid beslis om één wel aan te hou en omgekeerd. Ten twede, as die besluit b. v. is van die dorpsbewoners, dat die dorp sy lisensie moet hê, welke groot gevaar bestaat daar me, dat die dorp naby, wat nie die lisensie wil uitgee me, gepes word deur smokkelhandel van daardie ander dorp af? Een vriend het verklaar, dat die drank verkonsumeer kan worde, maar dit mag nie verkoop word nie Wat is die nut van die Wet, as die publiek besluit tot prohibisie en dit bly tog &#x2019;n halfslagtige maatregel? Ons het &#x2019;n treurige voorbeeld voor ons oge van wat daar gebeur in die grote stede, waar menige wit man en vrou en jong mens voor die hof verskyn wegens onwettige drankhandel en baie sit in die tronk, omdat daardie oortreding, daardie misdaad kunsmatiglik by wetgewing in die lewe geroep is. As ons neerleg, dat elke kleine dorpie kan besluit of daar &#x2019;n liksens uitgegee sal word of nie, dan maak ons nou weer &#x2019;n misdaad, want in die volgende dorpie is dit nie &#x2019;n misdaad nie om drank te koop. Die man, wat b.v. op Bethlehem kan drank koop en verkoop, sal op Senekal tronkstraf kry, as hy dit daar doen, daar sal baie eerlike mense in die tronk kom deur pogings om op die manier iets te verdien Ons moet geen slagyster vir die volk stel nie, want op die een dorp sal dit eerlike verkoop heet en op die volgende een misdaad. Is dit &#x2019;n misdaad om &#x2019;n glas wyn, bier of selfs brandewyn te drink? Nee, maar hier word &#x2019;n kriminele misdaad in die lewe geroep deur verstandige mense en die toekoms sal toon, dat die kastige plaatselike keus sal op die een dorp tot misdaad gemaak word, wat op die andereen &#x2019;n eerlike handeling is. Veronderstel een dorp word droog en die andereen bly nat en sal jarelank so blij, tensy daar &#x2019;n agitasie op tou geset word om dit te verander, dan sal die mense van die een dorp gaan na die ander om daar drank in die hande te kry en hulle sal meer drink as wat hulle anders sou gedaan het wanneer namelik die drank onder hulle bereik was en hulle sal nie ryk word nie. Die voorstanders kan nie stry nie, dat onder hierdie Wet gaan ons misdadigers maak. Die edele lid vir Boshof (de hr. C. A. van Niekerk) moes langer by die Huis gebly het, dan sou hy beter gesond geword het, want dit lyk of die besprekings hier sterk op sy senuwe werk. As die vriende van plan was om totale prohibisie in die lewe te roep, dans moes hulle die moed gehad het om daar ruiterlik mee voor die dag te kom deur so &#x2019;n Wet voor te stel. Dan het ons voor &#x2019;n eerlike oplossing gestaan; dan kon elke man geseg het: ek stem daarvoor om alle drank met &#x2019;n towerslag uit die wereld to verban en die hele wereld sober te maak. Hier word daarop afgestuur&#x2014;op totale prohibisie&#x2014;onder &#x2019;n Wet, wat die mooie kleed van demokrasie omgehang het, maar tog niemand sal om die tuin lei nie. As dit so voortgaat, dan sien ek geen heil en vra ek of ons nie die beginsel neerleg om netnou alle soorte industrie by wetgewing aan te tas nie? Vandag maak ons miskien die wynboer dood, verseker, dat ons nie more, oormore dieselfde beginsel gann toepas op die tabaksboer nie, deur neer te lê dat iedereen, wat die giftige plant kweek of dit rook, gestraf sal word, want dit is net so gevaarlik en skadelik vir die gesondheid as brandewyn? Mense, wat rook moet gestraf word en wat tabak verkoop, moet gestraf word en alle tabak word aan die brand gesteek. So sou ons op die ry af kan optree teen die wynboer, die tabaksboer, die skaapboer, die beesboer, die graanboer. Ons sukkel ons hele lewe lank om die boere bymekaar te kry en te laat ko-opereer en hulle sodoende met een band aanmekaar te bind en hier gaan ons as vertegenwoordigers van die wynboer, graanboer, veeboer en vrugteboer, en wil die wynboer uitroei. Ons het gevoel en gesien, dat die tabaksbelasting het vele arme blanke gemaak; wil ons dit voortset en baie wynboere ook tot arme blanke maak? Daar word gevra, waarom kan hy die wynstok nie uitroei en vrugtebome plant nie, of die wynstok uitroei en tabak plant nie. Laat hy tabak plant en more oormore word soortgelyke wetgewing daaroor ingevoer: dit is sleg vir dit of dat en moet uitgeroei word. Waarom maak hy nie rosyntjies nie? Ons weet, dat mens nie van elke soort druiwe rosyntjies kan maak nie en dat die wat vir wyn goed is, nie sou deug vir rosyne nie. Die grond sê geaardheid is ook een voorname faktor en waar druiwe groei sal nie juis tabak ook goed aard nie. Ander vra, waarom maak hulle nie moskonfyt nie. Stel jou voor, dat &#x2019;n man 300 leggers mos het en daar konfyt van moet maak en dan verstaan ek nog, dat die konfyt binnen vier en twintig uur gemaak moet word. Waar moet al die potte en ander gereedskap vandaan kom en die erdepotte om dit in weg te berg? En gesteld dat al daardie voorwaardes kon vervul word, waar op aarde gaat hy die mark kry vir soveel moskonfyt? Hulle praat ook wel van vrugte plant, maar hier kom ook die kwessie van die grond sê geaardheid kyk en buitendien is &#x2019;n vrugteboom nie in een dag groot nie. Ek word jammer vir die boer, wat uitgeroei word en daar is nog die laaste alternatief, dat hulle kan mielies plant op die grond, waar nou die wingerd is. Maar dit is tog bekend, dat die wynboere sê plase in seer vele gevalle baie klein is en maar van tien tot twintig morge beslaan. Daarop kan &#x2019;n man nie met mielies &#x2019;n winsgewende boerdery dryf nie. Ek kan nie vir die Wetsontwerp stem nie. Mens sou nog verder kan gaan, maar ek denk die tyd is daar nog nie ryp voor nie en dit is voldoende bewys, dat die Wetsontwerp te haastig en ondeurdag voor die Huis gebreng werd. Laaste jaar het ek ook telegramme gekry van dertig veertig kiesers en toe ek dat in die kiesafdeling terugkon blyk dat vele nooit die telegramme gestuur had me, maar dat ander gevraag had ot hulle die name kon gebruik. My ou vriend het vandag geseg dat dit geen partykwessie is nie en dit is ons met horn eens. Waar ek voel, dat ek my verstand moet laat lei deur wat die volk begeer, sal ek my onderwerp. Laaste jaar het <span class="col_720" refersTo="page_0802"/>ek my laat oortuig, dat die kiesers dit wou, maar ek het ondersoek en uitgevind, dat vele wat dan so danig daarvoor geywer had bywyse van telegramme, daar glad nie voor was nie. Elk geval moet ondersoek word. Ek het my moed in my hand geneem en sekere vriende spesiaal gaan ontmoet en daaronder die predikant en kerkraadslid en hulle het, na my gehoor te hê, oor wat ons voel vir die wynboer, verklaar dat ek so moes stem dat die wynboer geen kwaad aangedaan word nie; die voornaamste gevoel was, deur dik en dun, dat die wynboer nie uitgeroei moes word nie. Wie lus het kan vir die Wet stem, welke ten doel het die uitroeiïng van die wynboer. Die Wet spreek net van gepermitteerde drankgelegenhede, maar dit is &#x2019;n listig manier om totale drankverbod in te voer en daarmee gaan ek nie saam nie. As dit die bedoeling was van die Wetsontwerp om die maak van verderfelike sterke drank te beperk, dan sou ek die maatreël nog kan begryp. Maar wat van die ligte wyn, wat feitelik &#x2019;n nasionale drank is in Suid-Afrika? Die drank word hier gemaak en kan gesond gedrink word. Die word ook belet onder die Wet. Waar is dan die end van die beperkinge? Ek wil net se, dat dit my plig is om hierdie argumente voor die Raad te bring, omdat ek nie misverstaan wil wees nie. Ek wil nie dat mense onder die indruk is, dat ek teen die wetsvoorstel gaan stem, omdat ek voor dronkenskap is nie. Niemand kan dit beweer nie. Ek het op my eie beskeide wyse en manier baie gedoen in my eie dorpie om drankmisbruik teen te gaan en dat ons daar baie in geslaag is in die Vrystaat, blyk daaruit dat daar nie meer die dronkenskap heers as in die ou dae. Ek is nie voor dronkenskap nie, maar alleen teen die metode van lokale opsie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES (Christiana)</person>:</from>

<p>Dis nie &#x2019;n wetsvoorstel waarop ek stilswygend my stem kan uitbring nie. Dis &#x2019;n belangrike kwessie. Ek is ongelukkig afgepaar met die edele lid vir Wolmaransstad (Gen. Kemp), maar ek wil tog &#x2019;n paar woorde daaroor se. Dit is vir my eienaardig, dat ons &#x2019;n paar dae gelede &#x2019;n Wet gepasseer het, op voorstel van die edelagbare die Eerste Minister, wat die bedoeling het om die wynindustrie op vaste voete te sit en die Huis het aan die voorstel sy hartelike ondersteuning gegee. Die doel van die wetsvoorstel is die wynboere te help, en ons het gesê, dat dit ons plig is om die boere te help deur wetgewing. Maar hoe kan dan die Huis vandag net die teenoorgestelde doen? Hier kom ons as verstandige mense by mekaar om die wynboere te help. Ons maak die bepaling, waarby ons aan die boere sê, kyk, voor drie jaar tyd moet julle brandewyn opbewaar, julle moet &#x2019;n goeie artiekel maak en julle mag die nie vóór drie jaar verkoop nie. Dit bevat die bepaalde belofte van hierdie Huis aan die wynboere, dat ons na drie jaar ook sal sorg, dat daar afsetgeleentheid is en dat daar markte is vir die brandewyn. Maar watter soort wetgewing is dat, as ons in dieselfde asem heengaan, en aan die boere sê, dat oor vier jaar tyd dit moontlik is, dat daar glad geen drank meer verkoop kan word nie? Wat van die kapitaal wat dan belê is in die drank? Beteken dit dan alles niks? Ons het hier lange debatte gehad oor die arm blanke, en daar is van alle kante gesê, dat ons arbeidsgeleentheid moet skep, sodat die arbeid &#x2019;n kans kry. Nou, die enigste manier is om industrieë op te bou en bestaande industrieë te help, nie te sak nie en andere industrieë te skep. Van alle kante van die Huis is dit gesê, en ook my vriend die edele lid vir Calvinia (Dr. D. F. Malan) het gesê, dat ons arbeidsgeleentheid moet skep, en hier kom ons en breek dit af. Ons gaat heen en vernietig die wynboerbelange, en die belange van al wat daarbye betrokke is&#x2014;ek glo dis 30,000. Inplaas van hulle te help gaat ons al die mense op die arbeidsmark gooi. Wat gaat die gevolg daarvan wees? Al die kapitaal word vernietig. Ons het &#x2019;n wet gepasseer omtrent die kontrole van die wynindustrie, om die wynboere te help, en hier kom ons met &#x2019;n wetgewing van die aard en gaat die hele ding vernietig. Dit alleen is genoegsaam vir my om te sê, dat ek heeltemaal teen die wetgewing is. Ek laat my nie in met praatjies oor Amerika nie. Dit het niks daarmee te doen nie. Ons het alleen te doen met die toestande in Suid-Afrika en ek sê dat dit vir hier &#x2019;n verkeerde wetgewing is. Al sou ek heeltemaal ten gunste van die beginsel wees, dan nog sou ek daarteen wees, omdat die wetgewing die hele wynindustrie gaat vernietig.</p>

</speech>

<p>Motion for the second reading put, and the House divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;51.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Barlow, A. G.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Bisset, M.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brown, D. M.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coetzee, J. P.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Enslin, J. M.</p>

<p>Fitchat, H.</p>

<p>Forsyth, R.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Henderson, R. H.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Jansen, E. G.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Moor, J. W.</p>

<p>Muller, C. H.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nixon, C. E.</p>

<p>Oliver, H. A.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. v. W.</p>

<p>Saunders, E. G. A.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Stewart, J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Stuart, W. H.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk. C. A.</p>

<p>Venter, J. A.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Webber, W. S.</p>

<p>Werth, A. J.</p>

<p>Tellers: Louw, G. A.; Naudé, J. F.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;53.</p>

<p>Alberts, S. F.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Bezuidenhout, W. W. J. J.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Buchanan, W. P.</p>

<p>Burton, H.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, P. S.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>Dreyer, T. F. J.</p>

<p>Fourie, A. P. J.</p>

<p>Fourie, J. C.</p>

<p>Graumann, H.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p><span class="col_721" refersTo="page_0803"/>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Jordaan, P. J.</p>

<p>Lemmer, L. A. S.</p>

<p>Le Roux, P. W.</p>

<p>Mackeurtan, H. G.</p>

<p>Malan, C. W.</p>

<p>Malan, F. S.</p>

<p>McAlister, H. S.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Obermeyer, J. G.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Purcell, I.</p>

<p>Robinson, C. P.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Rooth, E.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Scholtz, P. E.</p>

<p>Smit, J. S.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Van Aardt, F. J.</p>

<p>Van Eeden, J. W.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, B. I. J.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. H. B.</p>

<p>Wilcocks, C. T. M.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R.; De Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly negatived.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1924-03-07T18:30:00">6.30 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

