---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol1 - FRIDAY 22 FEBRUARY 1924'
layout: debate
year: 1924
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 22nd FEBRUARY, 1924.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1924-02-22T14:23:00">2.23 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#additional_estimates_railways">

<heading>ADDITIONAL ESTIMATES (RAILWAYS).<br/>ADDITIONELE BEGROTING (SPOORWEGEN).</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>laid upon the Table&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Estimates of the Additional Expenditure to be defrayed from Railways and Harbours Revenue Funds during the year ending 31st March, 1924. [U.G. 3&#x2014;&#x2019;24.]</li>

<li>(2) Estimates of the Additional Expenditure to be defrayed from Loan Funds during the year ending 31st March, 1924. [U.G. 4-&#x2019;24.]</li>

</ol>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.<br/>VRAGEN.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Alexandra Hospital.<br/>Alexandra Hospitaal.</heading>

<question by="#mostert" to="#minister_van_volksgezondheid">

<num>I.</num>

<from>De hr. MOSTERT</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Volksgezondheid:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Hoeveel kinderen aan het Alexandra Hospitaal voor zwakzinnige kinderen zijn er die (<i>a</i>) Afrikaans en (<i>b</i>) Engels spreken;</li>

<li>(2) wie van de volgende ambtenaren aan die inrichting zijn volkomen tweetalig, n.l.: de hoofd-dokter, de hoofd-instrukteur, en de instrukteurs in houtwerk, kleremakerij, schoenmakerij, schilderwerk, matrasmakerij en blikslagerswerk; en</li>

<li>(3) door wie wordt de aanstelling van instrukteurs gemaakt?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_volksgezondheid" to="#mostert">

<from>De MINISTER VAN VOLKSGEZONDHEID:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) (<i>a</i>) 59; (<i>b</i>) 76 en 5 kunnen niet spreken.</li>

<li>(2) Alleen de instrukteur in schilderwerk is tweetalig, maar de anderen hebben gedeeltelik kennis van Afrikaans. Er moet echter op gewezen worden dat de kinderen niet onder deze instrukteurs zijn, doch op school waar de onderwyzers ten voile tweetalig zijn.</li>

<li>(3) Aanstellingen worden door de Regering gedaan op aanbeveling van de Staatsdienst Kommissie, waar zulks nodig is.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_408" refersTo="page_0488"/>Promotion of Utrecht Magistrate.<br/>Bevordering Van Magistraat Van Utrecht.</heading>

<question by="#giovanetti" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. GIOVANETTI</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior what special qualifications were possessed by Mr. J. W. Robertson, second-grade magistrate of Utrecht, with twenty-three and a half years&#x2019; service, who has been promoted to be first-grade magistrate of Mafeking (Cape) over the heads of 72 second and third-grade Cape magistrates with equal or longer service?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#giovanetti">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>Mr. Robertson as a Free State Officer had been selected on recommendation of the Public Service Commission for promotion in that Province, but on Mafeking falling vacant through the promotion of a Capo magistrate to a magistracy in South-West Africa, Mr. Robertson was appointed thereto by reason of his special suitability for a magistracy with a large native population, combined with his actual seniority in grade over all second-grade magistrates. There may be magistrates with longer service than Mr. Robertson, but according to my information no magistrate who is senior in grade to him has been passed over by this promotion. Even on the question of length of service, however, I may add that in addition to his service since June, 1900, he had nine years previous Government service, namely: in Bechuanaland from 1891 to September, 1895, and in Rhodesia from September, 1895, to June, 1900.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Import of Bacon, Butter and Cheese.<br/>Invoer Van Spick, Boter En Kaas.</heading>

<question by="#venter" to="#minister_van_financien">

<num>III.</num>

<from>De hr. VENTER</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Financiën:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Hoeveel spek en vet (bacon), boter en kaas respektievelik gedurende de twaalf maanden voorafgaande 31 Desember 1923 ingevoerd is;</li>

<li>(2) wat was het totale bedrag van invoerbelasting op zodanig spek en vet, boter en kaas respektievelik;</li>

<li>(3) van welke landen is zodanig spek en vet, boter en kaas respektievelik ingevoerd; en</li>

<li>(4) of hij gewillig is de nodige stappen te nemen om de boor in de Unie te beschermen tegen de invoer van spek en vet, boter en kaas om het bestaan van deze industrieën te verzekeren?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_financien" to="#venter">

<from>De MINISTER VAN FINANCIEN:</from>

<p>Die antwoord bevat &#x2019;n lange lys van name en cyfers, wat ek nie die Huis sal voorlees nie. Ek handig die lys in.</p>

<p><i>Het volgende is het antwoord</i>:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Spek, £574,074.<br/>

Boter, £1,166,433.<br/>

Kaas, £832,459.</li>

<li>(2) De informatie is niet beschikbaar daar invoerrechten nog niet op al bovenstaande artikelen betaald zijn.</li>

<li>(3) Spek werd ingevoerd van&#x2014;<br/>

Het Verenigd Koninkryk.<br/>

Kanada.<br/>

Australië.<br/>

Duitsland.<br/>

Frankryk.<br/>

Denemarken.<br/>

Noorwegen.<br/>

Zweden.<br/>

Zwitserland.<br/>

Verenigde Staten van Amerika.<br/>

Boter werd ingevoerd van&#x2014;<br/>

Het Verenigd Koninkryk.<br/>

Australië.<br/>

Nieuw Zeeland.<br/>

Indie.<br/>

Kenya.<br/>

Brits Zuid-Afrika.<br/>

Denemarken.<br/>

Italië.<br/>

China.<br/>

Argentinië.<br/>

België.<br/>

Verenigde Staten van Amerika.<br/>

Kaas werd ingevoerd van&#x2014;<br/>

Het Verenigd Koninkryk.<br/>

Kanada.<br/>

Australië.<br/>

Nieuw Zeeland.<br/>

België.<br/>

Holland.<br/>

Italië. <br/>

Denemarken.<br/>

Frankryk.<br/>

Zwitserland.<br/>

Griekenland.<br/>

Noorwegen.<br/>

Spanje.<br/>

China.<br/>

Verenigde Staten van Amerika.<br/>

Brazilië.<br/>

Argentinië.</li>

<li>(4) De vraag wat betreft of de invoerrechten op spek de Unie industrie genoegzaam beschermen, is onder overweging. Boter kan en wordt slechts in de Unie ingevoerd in grote hoeveelheden wanneer hier droogte heerst, anders beschermen de bestaande tarieven de plaatselike industriën genoegzaam. Kaas: De kaas in de Unie ingevoerd is voornamelik van een type of soort die niet in de Unie gemaakt wordt en de v.a.b. kosten zijn gewoonlik hoger dan de plaatselike groothandel waarde van kaas. Onder de omstandigheden wordt geen verdere bescherming van de plaatselike industrie vereist.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Production of Cotton.<br/>Produktie Van Katoen.</heading>

<question by="#grobler" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. P. G. W. GROBLER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether, with a view to the acceleration of cotton production, he will consider the advisability of establishing a separate Division of Cotton;</li>

<li>(2) whether he will establish a Government Cotton Seed Farm on which sufficient pure seed could be produced for the country&#x2019;s requirements: and</li>

<li>(3) whether he will state the policy of the Government in regard to the cotton industry?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#grobler">

<from><span class="col_409" refersTo="page_0489"/>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) There is a Division of Tobacco and Cotton. The cotton industry, the great importance of which is recognized, does not suffer by being controlled in the same division as tobacco. When the interests of the cotton industry, by its growth, appears to demand the attention of a separate division, the question will be reconsidered.</li>

<li>(2) The production of pure cotton seed is undertaken by the Department at the Rustenburg Experiment Station. The provision of such seed on a larger scale will be considered with the chief of the Tobacco and Cotton Division, and the three technical officers whom the Empire Cotton Growing Corporation is sending to South Africa within the next two or three months. A suitable farm for that purpose is already in view.</li>

<li>(3) The resistance of cotton to drought, the suitability of a large portion of the Union to cotton growing and the payability of this crop have been established. For these various reasons the industry has undoubtedly become a permanent one; moreover, the advance in prices, owing to the continued shortage of the United States&#x2019; crop, renders cotton a very payable industry at present, and this is bound to give a considerable stimulus to cotton growing. Compared to its economic value, this industry receives more technical assistance than any other, but, as the Government believes that it has a great future in South Africa and, as it is practically a new industry in the country, it should toe fostered in every way possible, and, therefore, the Government proposes to give it whole-hearted support. The following technical staff is already employed for the industry&#x2019;s advancement:</li>

</ol>

<p>Chief of the Division, Pretoria;</p>

<p>Assistant Chief and Manager of the Tobacco and Cotton Experiment Station at Rustenburg;</p>

<p>Itinerant Instructor, Natal;</p>

<p>Itinerant Instructor, Transvaal;</p>

<p>Technical Assistant, who also grades cotton, Pretoria;</p>

<p>Plant Breeder, Rustenburg.</p>

<p>The Empire Cotton Growing Corporation is sending three highly-qualified experts, as I have already indicated, to advise in the further development of cotton growing. These gentlemen&#x2019;s salaries the corporation has voluntarily undertaken to pay. The whole question of the future of the industry in South Africa will be discussed with them, with a view to seeing what further steps might be necessary to accelerate progress.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>S.A. Alkali, Ltd.<br/>Z.A. Alkali, Bpkt.</heading>

<question by="#munnik" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. MUNNIK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to the closing down of the S.A. Alkali, Ltd.;</li>

<li>(2) whether he is aware that this company was formed to work up one of South Africa&#x2019;s natural products;</li>

<li>(3) whether he is aware that the industry was killed by the dumping of carbonate of soda from abroad; and</li>

<li>(4) whether steps will be taken for the protection of the industry?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#munnik">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>The answer to parts 1 and 2 of the question is in the affirmative. With regard to parts 3 and 4, I understand the matter has been referred to the Board of Trade and Industries and that the report of the Board will be sent in as soon as it has the full information required to enable it to come to definite conclusions.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#abe_bailey" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Sir ABE BAILEY:</from>

<p>Arising out of this question, I should like to ask the right hon. the Minister if he knows that representations for assistance on behalf of this company were made 16 months ago, and, secondly, whether he will instruct the Board of Trade and Industries to dispense some sympathy to these and other industries before the general election?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#abe_bailey">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I do not propose to answer the latter part of the subsidiary question, but as far as the first part is concerned, my attention has been drawn to it, but in any case nothing can be done by the board as such. If any relief is to be given, it must be given by Parliament.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Mr. CRESWELL</from>

<p>When this question was referred to the right hon. the Minister, were steps taken to get from the industries the necessary information?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>The first telegram I got about this was a fortnight ago; that was referred to the Board.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Mr. CRESWELL</from>

<p>Were the first representations to the right hon. the Minister, that this dumping was interfering with the industry of the country, only made a fortnight ago?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Disposal of Government Claims to Crown Mines.<br/>Verkoop Van Regerings Claims Aan Crown Mines.</heading>

<question by="#munnik" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Mr. MUNNIK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether any Government claims have been sold or leased recently to the Crown Mines; if so,</li>

<li>(2) what was the sale price or the terms of lease; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister will lay the papers upon the Table of the House?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#munnik">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) and</li>

<li>(3) The following is a schedule giving briefly the particulars asked for:</li>

</ol>

<p><span class="col_410" refersTo="page_0490"/>CROWN MINES, LIMITED.</p>

<p>BEWAARPLAATSEN AND UNHELD PROCLAIMED GROUND LEASED FROM GOVERNMENT.</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Date of Lease.</p></td>

<td><p>Farm.</p></td>

<td><p>Description of Rights.</p></td>

<td><p>Total Area in Claims.</p></td>

<td><p>Terms of Disposal.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>26.9.13</p></td>

<td><p>Turffontein No. 21.</p></td>

<td><p>Portion Bewaarplaatsen 1121/30.<br/>

Portion Waterright 398<br/>

Portion Machine Stands 79/174.<br/>

Portion Water-right 360</p></td>

<td><p>5•2778</p></td>

<td><p>An annuity of £19,979 for fifteen years, less £3,699 16s. 4d. appropriated as transfer duty. First payment on 30th September, 1911.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>17.8.17</p></td>

<td><p>Langlaagte No. 13.</p></td>

<td><p>Water-rights 373, 380, 396, 374, 78, 366, 375, 376, 331, 381, 138, and Crown Reef Bewaarplaatsen.<br/>

Mining Stands 17/18.</p></td>

<td><p>105•87</p></td>

<td><p>An annuity of £9,926 for fifteen years. First payment on 31st December, 1917.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Turffontein No. 21.</p></td>

<td><p>Water-rights 138, 359, and Crown Reef Bewaarplaatsen.</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>14.3.23</p></td>

<td><p>Langlaagte No. 13.</p></td>

<td><p>Water-right No. 333</p></td>

<td><p>0•80</p></td>

<td><p>For £100.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>14.3.23</p></td>

<td><p>Mooifontein No. 14.</p></td>

<td><p>Portion</p></td>

<td><p>82•28</p></td>

<td rowspan="2"><p>For £31,000.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Vierfontein No. 15.</p></td>

<td><p>Portion</p></td>

<td><p>412•01</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p><i>Note</i>.&#x2014;All the areas are subject to payment of Rent equivalent to Claim Licences.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Mr. CRESWELL</from>

<p>Arising out of this question, will the hon. the Minister inform us how the Government came to be possessed of these claims? Were they open claims?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>Perhaps I might give a description of some of them. Turffontein, portion of Bewaarplaatsen, five claims; portion of water right. Water right is the undermining right of these little rights which have been dealt with, five claims and so on; there is a whole list of them.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Resignation of Administrator of Transvaal.<br/>Bedanking Van Admintstrateur Van Transvaal.</heading>

<question by="#munnik" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Mr. MUNNIK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to a newspaper report to the effect that the Administrator of the Transvaal has resigned as Administrator in order to qualify as the S.A.P. candidate for Wakkerstroom; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether any pledge or undertaking has been given to Mr. Robertson that in the event of his defeat he will be reappointed as Administrator of the Transvaal?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#munnik">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) No pledge or undertaking either has been given or asked for.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Bye-Election at Wakkerstroom.<br/>Tussen-Verkiezing Te Wakkerstroom.</heading>

<question by="#munnik" to="#minister_van_binnenlandse_zaken">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>De hr. MUNNIK</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Binnenlandse Zaken of zijn aandacht bepaald is bij een persbericht dat de tussen-verkiezing te Wakkerstroom bestreden zal worden volgens de oude delimitatie; en zo dit bericht juist is, waarom volgens de oude delimitatie?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_binnenlandse_zaken" to="#munnik">

<from>De MINISTER VAN BINNENLANDSE ZAKEN:</from>

<p>Indien het edele lid sektie 43 van de Zuid Afrika Wet wil nagaan, zal hij vinden dat de procedure strikt volgens Wet is.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railway Clerks on Evening Duty.<br/>Spoorweg Klerken Op Avonddienst.</heading>

<question by="#hunt" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Maj. HUNT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is a fact that some 40 responsible clerks in headquarter offices at Johannesburg are called upon to perform evening Parliamentary duty on evenings immediately preceding private members&#x2019; days;</li>

<li>(2) if so, whether any remuneration is paid to them in regard to this special duty;</li>

<li>(3) if not, whether they are allowed time off in lieu of the time occupied on such special duty;</li>

<li>(4) whether they are allowed any consideration for tram fares incurred thereby;</li>

<li><span class="col_411" refersTo="page_0491"/>(5) whether it is a fact that many of these clerks have been called upon to be in attendance for several sessions of Parliament, but have never yet been called upon to furnish information for Parliament while on this special duty; and, if this is so,</li>

<li>(6) whether the Minister will cause better arrangements to be made in order to avoid calling upon men, many of whom live in outlying districts of Johannesburg, to leave their families of a night in order to attend office unnecessarily?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#hunt">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No. A number of responsible clerks are detailed for evening Parliamentary duty, but the number in attendance does not exceed eight at any one time. As there are two private members&#x2019; days in each week, it necessitates attendance on approximately one evening every third week for each clerk.</li>

<li>(2) No.</li>

<li>(3) No.</li>

<li>(4) No.</li>

<li>(5) I am not aware of any such cases.</li>

<li>(6) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Agreement with Imperial Cold Storage Co.<br/>Overeenkomst Met Imperiale Koelkamer Mij.</heading>

<question by="#hunt" to="#prime_minister">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Maj. HUNT</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) In view of the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 4 of Act No. 49 of 1919, which provides that, save for the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 4 (which refers to certain Union Land Settlement Acts), no grant of any title, right or interest in State land or minerals within South-West Africa or of any right or interest in or over the territorial waters thereof shall be made, and that no trading or other concessions shall be granted without the authority of Parliament, and in view of section 2 of Act No. 32 of 1921 having extended the provisions of Act No. 49 of 1919 until such are repealed by Parliament, and seeing that under section 1 of Act No. 24 of 1922 Walvis Bay is incorporated in the territory of South-West Africa, why was the agreement entered into between the Administrator of South-West Africa and the Imperial Cold Storage Co., dated 21st October, 1922, made subject to the ratification of the Union Government instead of being made subject to the authority and ratification of Parliament;</li>

<li>(2) whether the Government has taken the advice of its legal advisers as to whether the agreement can legally be put into force and effect and can come into operation before authority has been obtained from Parliament, and, if so, whether such advice will be laid upon the Table of this House; and</li>

<li>(3) if such advice has not been taken, whether the Government will take it now and lay the same before Parliament?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#hunt">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>The agreement entered into between the Administrator of South-West Africa and the Imperial Cold Storage Company dated 21st October, 1922, was confirmed by the Union Government on the 4th November, 1922. It was not submitted to Parliament, as such a course was unnecessary. The incorporation of Walvis Bay in the Territory of South-West Africa, in terms of section 1 (1) of Act 24, 1922, did not have the effect of abrogating the Land Laws at the commencement of that Act in force in Walvis Bay; on the contrary, the laws hitherto in force at Walvis Bay remained. Consequently the restrictive provisions as to the alienation of rights in land contained in section 4 (1) of Act No. 49 of 1919, had no application in Walvis Bay. So far as the mandated territory was concerned, the rights granted to the Imperial Cold Storage Company did not in effect constitute a &#x201C;trading or other concession&#x201D; within the meaning of section 4 (2) of Act No. 49 of 1919. Legal advice, which was of the above tenor was taken, but it would be unusual, and it is not proposed to place such advice on the Table of the House.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#creswell" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Mr. CRESWELL</from>

<p>Arising out of this question, will the right hon. the Prime Minister give this House an opportunity to discuss whether they should consider the use of this incorporation of Walvis Bay merely administrative, or whether the whole of the territory of South-West Africa has been used or abused by making it the pretence for establishing a monopoly?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#creswell">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>Hon. members of the House will have the opportunity of discussing this or any other question in relation to South-West when the Prime Minister&#x2019;s estimates come up.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Importation of Leather.<br/>Invoer van Leder.</heading>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_van_financiër">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>De hr. C. W. MALAN</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Financiën of hij een opgaaf ter Tafel van het Huis wil leggen, de volgende biezonderheden gevend over het tijdvak 1 Julie 1923 tot 31 Desember 1923 aangaande invoer in de Unie, n.l,: (<i>a</i>) de waarde en hoeveelheid van zoolleer; (<i>b</i>) de waarde en hoeveelheid van zoolleer zijden; (c) de waarde en hoeveelheid van zoolleer onderlijven; (<i>d</i>) de waarde en hoeveelheid van zoolleer schouders; (e) de waarde en hoeveelheid van zoolleer bochten; (<i>f</i>) het aantal analyses die gedaan zijn en het aantal onderzoekingen die niet voldaan hebben aan de Vervalst Leder Wet; en (<i>g</i>) het totaal bedrag van opgelegde boeten?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_financiër" to="#malan">

<from>De MINISTER VAN FINANCIËR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(<i>a</i>) tot (<i>e</i>) Afzonderlike aantekeningen worden niet gehouden van de verschillende soorten zool en bovenleer ingevoerd, doch vanaf 1 Julie tot 31 Desember 1923 werden 778,348 pond, waarde £99,247, zool-en bovenleer, buiten die van gehalte ingevoerd, waarvan het geraamd wordt dat 60 percent voor gebruik in de schoenen industrie was.</li>

<li><span class="col_412" refersTo="page_0492"/>(<i>f</i>) Er wordt geen aantekening gehouden van het aantal ontledingen onder de doeane regulaties, en wat betreft de Wet op Vervalst Leer, 1923, die treedt niet in werking voor 1 Julie aanstaande.</li>

<li>(<i>g</i>) Vervalt.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Value and Quantity of Leather Imported.<br/>Waarde en Hoeveelheid van Ingevoerd Leder.</heading>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_van_financiën">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>De hr. C. W. MALAN</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Financiën of hij een opgaaf ter Tafel van het Huis wil leggen, de volgende inlichting gevend over het tijdvak 1 Julie 1923 tot 31 Desember 1923, n.l.: (<i>a</i>) de waarde en hoeveelheid van bovenleer in de Unie ingevoerd; (<i>b</i>) de waarde en hoeveelheid van vrij doorgelaten bovenleer; (c) de waarde en hoeveelheid van bovenleer waarop belasting werd betaald; (d) de waarde en hoeveelheid van ingevoerd geglansd geiteleer; (<i>e</i>) de waarde en hoeveelheid van ingevoerd kalfsleer; en (<i>f</i>) de waarde en hoeveelheid van ingevoerde schaapvellen voor voering?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_financiën" to="#malan">

<from>De MINISTER VAN FINANCIËN:</from>

<ol>

<li>(<i>a</i>), (<i>b</i>) en (<i>c</i>) Afzonderlike aantekeningen worden niet gehouden van de verschillende soorten bovenleer in het stuk.<br/>

36,870 pond, waarde £22,197 van leer van hoge gehalte in het stuk werden toegelaten tegen 3 percent&#x2014;vrije tarief, gedurende het tijdperk Julie tot Desember 1923.</li>

<li>(<i>d</i>), (e) en (<i>f</i>) Zodanige aantekeningen zijn niet beschikbaar.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Import of Leather Footwear.<br/>Invoer van Lederen Schoeisel.</heading>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_van_financiën">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>De hr. C. W. MALAN</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Financiën hoeveel lederen schoeisel, insluitende de volgende klassen, n.l.: mans, vrouwen en kinderen slippers, wandel-zeilschoenen en sport-zeilschoenen, werd ingevoerd in de Unie gedurende het tijdvak Julie tot December 1923, en wat was de waarde van die invoer respektievelik?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_financiën" to="#malan">

<from>De MINISTER VAN FINANCIEN:</from>

<p>Mans, vrouwen en kinderen slippers&#x2014;118,024 paren, waarde £19,112, werden gedurende het tijdperk Julie tot Desember 1923 ingevoerd. Afzonderlike aantekeningen worden niet gehouden van wandel-en sportzeilschoenen, die met lederen zolen inbegrepen zijn bij laarzen en schoenen. Zeilschoenen met rubber zolen bedroegen 212,031 paren, waarde £38,392, gedurende het tijdperk Julie tot Desember 1923.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Costs of Irrigation Works.<br/>Kosten van Besproeiingswerken.</heading>

<question by="#mostert" to="#minister_van_landen">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>De hr. MOSTERT</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Landen in verband met elk een van de besproeiingswerken aangegaan onder de voorzieningen van de Besproeïings en Waterbewarings Wet van 1912:</p>

<ol>

<li>(<i>a</i>) wat de oorspronkelike beraming van kosten was, hoeveel de belasting volgens dezelve zou bedragen per morgen en hoeveel water per morgen per maand zou de grond onder besproeiing krijgen?</li>

<li>(b) wat de uiteindelike kosten zijn van voltooide werken, hoeveel de belasting volgens dezelve per morgen is en hoeveel water krijgt de grond onder besproeiing per morgen per maand; en</li>

<li>(c) wat is de laatste beraming van de onvoltooide werken, hoeveel zal de belasting volgens dezelve bedragen en hoeveel water per morgen per maand zal de grond onder besproeiïng krijgen;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_landen" to="#mostert">

<from>De MINISTER VAN LANDEN:</from>

<p>De inlichting door het edele lid gevraagd is zo veelomvattend dat hij niet billikerwijs van mij kan verwachten mijn Departement de taak op te leggen al de aangevraagde biezonderheden uit te werken. De &#x201C;statistiese opgave van besproeiïngsraden door de Regering financieel ondersteund,&#x201D; in het jaarlikse verslag voor 1920-21 van de Direkteur van Besproeiïng vervat, behoort het edele lid groteliks behulpzaam te zijn.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#mostert" to="#minister_van_landen">

<from>De hr. MOSTERT:</from>

<p>Wil die edelagbare die Minister dan vertel hoeveel van die skema&#x2019;s hy het, as hy ons nie al die informasie wil gee nie.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_landen" to="#mostert">

<from>De MINISTER VAN LANDEN:</from>

<p>Ek dink die edele lid moet self maar aan die Board skrywe. Ek dink daar behoor beperkinge gestel te word in die aard van die vrae wat edele lede stel. As ek die edele lid al die informasie wil gee waar hy voor vra, sal dit &#x2019;n dosyn mense van my Departement ses maande neem om dit uit te vind. Ek dink die edele lid behoort die vraag nie te stel nie.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Reduced Railway Rates for Forage, etc.<br/>Verlaagde Spoorweg Tarieven voor Voeder, enz.</heading>

<question by="#cilliers" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Capt. P. S. CILLIERS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether, in view of the continued drought in the northwestern districts of the Cape Province, the Railway Administration has considered the desirability of granting reduced rates in respect of forage and other fodder for the purpose of feeding stock which is in impoverished condition?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#cilliers">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Yes; from 25th instant a rebate of 50 per cent. will be granted on fodder sent to declared drought-stricken areas for feeding stock on drought-stricken farms.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN</from>

<p>At what price?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#van_heerden">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Fifty per cent. off the regulation price.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Working Men on Juries.<br/>Werklieden op Juries.</heading>

<question by="#strachan" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Mr. STRACHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware of the serious financial loss suffered by the average daily-paid working man when serving on the jury at criminal sessions; and, if so,</li>

<li><span class="col_413" refersTo="page_0493"/>(2) whether he is prepared to agree to the payment of increased fees where such serious financial loss is proved to the satisfaction of his Department?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#strachan">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I am aware that service on the jury sometimes involves financial loss to the daily-paid working man. To the professional and commercial man also that loss is sometimes fairly considerable. The loss, however, can in no instance be serious as, especially in the larger centres, no man is likely to be called upon to serve on a jury more than once in the course of many years.</li>

<li>(2) It is not practicable to frame regulations for the payment of allowances to persons serving on juries on the lines suggested. Even if it could legally be done the administration of such a regulation would be impossible. It must be remembered that service on a jury is the fulfilment of a public duty, and any tariff of fees which contemplates the reimbursement to members of juries of the loss of earnings or income suffered as a result of absence from their work or business during the period served on the jury, would involve a huge expenditure which could not possibly be justified. The existing tariff aims at enabling the average jury member to defray the out-of-pocket expenses of his journey to and detention at the Court. I may point out that even so the expenditure in jurors&#x2019; fees is very substantial. I regret I cannot at present hold out hope of an amendment of the regulations for the increase of these fees.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>May I ask the hon. the Minister whether the law contains any regulation providing who should serve?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I think the Criminal Procedure Court makes that provision.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Storing of Goods at Lourenzo Marques.<br/>Opslag van Goederen te Lourenzo Marques.</heading>

<question by="#close" to="#prime_minister">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Mr. CLOSE (for Mr. Webber)</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister whether any steps are being taken to continue the arrangement at present existing with regard to goods warehoused at Lourenzo Marques for transit to and consumption in the Transvaal?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#close">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>The Union Government has suggested to the Government of Mozambique that the arrangement arrived at last year in regard to goods, in transit and goods held in bond at Lourenzo Marques for ultimate consumption in the Union, should be maintained, subject to six months&#x2019; notice at the discretion of either Government. This arrangement has worked very satisfactorily indeed, and in the mutual interest of the trade relations between the Union and Mozambique, I earnestly hope it will be continued. No answer has yet been received from the Mozambique Administration.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Dumping Duty on Superphosphates.<br/>&#x201C;Dumping&#x201D; Belasting op Superfosfaten.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Upon what grounds has the exchange dumping duty been imposed On superphosphates imported into the Union; and</li>

<li>(2) whether the Minister is aware that the imposition of this duty will adversely affect farmers dependent on agriculture who have suffered heavy loss through the recent drought?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) In order to protect Union manufacturers of superphosphates from a form of dumping brought about by the depreciated currency of certain countries.</li>

<li>(2) No. Superphosphates may not be sold in the Union at less than 82s. per ton of 2,000 lbs., free on rail at the port of landing, and this is not an unreasonable price, having regard to the protection of a local industry that is so essential to the farming community. If there were no fertilizer factories in the Union, farmers would undoubtedly have to pay more for superphosphates than they do to-day.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>Arising out of that question, may I ask the right hon. the Minister whether the Agricultural Advisory Board was consulted before the duty was imposed?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I do not know.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Supply of Fertilizers to Farmers.<br/>Levering van Kunstmest aan Boeren.</heading>

<question by="#henderson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XIX.</num>

<from>Mr. R. H. HENDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the result of the action of his Department in the case of King and others, district Boksburg, who were supplied with useless fertilizer during last year and eventually sued for payment for same by the suppliers;</li>

<li>(2) what steps have been taken by the Department to prevent a repetition; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the company which supplied the fertilizer is still in existence, and what steps have been taken to test the goods it is now supplying to the farmers of the country?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#henderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I would ask the hon. member to allow this question to stand over.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Natives (Urban Areas) Act, 1923.<br/>Naturellen (Stadsgebieden) Wet, 1923.</heading>

<question by="#henderson" to="#prime_minister">

<num>XX.</num>

<from>Mr. R. H. HENDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) When the Natives (Urban Areas) Act of 1923 will be put into operation;</li>

<li>(2) whether, where land has to be acquired before the Act can be given full effect to, such notice will be given the local authorities, that the ground required may be secured on the best terms; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government has made, or will make, provision whereby local authorities, who have no town lands or common-age, shall receive such assistance in respect of securing such land as is necessary to give effect to the Act?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#henderson">

<from><span class="col_414" refersTo="page_0494"/>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The Natives (Urban Areas) Act was brought into operation as from the 1st January, 1924, by Proclamation No. 249 of 1923.</li>

<li>(2) Where an urban local authority is required to make further provision for the needs of natives within its area, the procedure laid down by section 2 (1) of the Act must be followed, and this affords ample notice to enable the local authority to secure land.</li>

<li>(3) Section 7 (1) (<i>a</i>) of the Act provides for the expropriation of land required by an urban local authority for the purposes of the Act, and section 7 (1) (<i>b</i>) for the borrowing of money on security as specified, or under any law to provide facilities for the construction of dwellings, e.g., the Housing Act.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Leave to Gangers on Hartebeestpoort Irrigation Works.<br/>Verlof Aan Ploegbazen Bij Hartebeestpoort Besproeiïngswerken.</heading>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>XXI.</num>

<from>Mr. CRESWELL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Minister will lay upon the Table the regulation or regulations ensuring to gangers employed on the Hartebeestpoort Irrigation Works five days&#x2019; holiday leave per annum on full pay; and</li>

<li>(2) whether it is a fact that the resident engineer has stated to the men concerned that he knows nothing about five days&#x2019; leave on full pay being due to gangers for every twelve months&#x2019; service?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) There is no regulation dealing with this subject other than instructions of the Unemployment Committee to grant leave on full pay for the five public holidays&#x2014;Christmas, Good Friday, Ascension, Labour and Dingaan&#x2019;s Days</li>

<li>(2) The hon. member, no doubt, misunderstood my previous reply, as five additional days to the above holidays are not due to gangers after twelve months&#x2019; service.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Mr. CRESWELL</from>

<p>Will the hon. the Minister explain why, in an answer recorded in Hansard, he said these men were given five days&#x2019; leave on full pay for each year of service. I wish to ask the Minister if he is contradicting an answer he gave a week ago?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>I never said anything of the sort.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Mr. CRESWELL:</from>

<p>I asked the Minister whether the leave was granted&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>The hon. member will give notice.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Mr. CRESWELL:</from>

<p>This is a question of fact. I asked the hon. the Minister whether this leave was granted, and, if not, whether he would see that this reasonable concession was made. He replied that five days&#x2019; leave for each year of service was granted, and that, therefore, the second part of the question fell away. To-day he replies that it was not granted.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>I have given the hon. member the reply he asked for, and I should suggest, if he wants further information, he should give notice.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Trading Rights in South-West Africa.<br/>Handelsrechten In Zuidwest Afrika.</heading>

<p>The PRIME MINISTER replied to Question XVII, by Mr. P. G. W. Grobler, standing over from 19th February.</p>

<question by="#grobler" to="#prime_minister">

<heading>Vraag:</heading>

<p>Of hij weet wat de houding is van de Britse Regering met betrekking tot het aanzoek van de Regering van de Verenigde Staten bij genoemde Regering om gelijke handelsrechten in het Zuidwest mandaatgebied, met het oog op de uitspraak van het Hof van Appel op 30 November, 1923, dat de Unie een soevereine staat is en als zodanig het mandaatgebied beheert, en verder met het oog op het antwoord aan Kol. Wedgewood, gegeven in het Lager Huis op 25 Junie, 1923, t.w. dat de Britse Regering geen macht heeft om in de daden van de Unie Regering in te grijpen als mandaathouder, daar deze de Unie Regering, alleen aan de Volkerenbond verantwoording verschuldigd is?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#grobler">

<heading>Antwoord:</heading>

<p>De houding van de Britse Regering is eenvoudig om met Dominiums te raadplegen en hun wensen dienaangaande te vernemen, daar de Dominiums voornamelik in de &#x201C;C&#x201D; Mandaten betrokken zijn. De zaak werd door de Dominium Eerste Ministers verleden jaar in Londen besproken. Doch geen konklusie werd door hen bereikt, en definitief antwoord is nog niet gegeven op de representaties van het Goevernement van de Verenigde Staten.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oral_question">

<heading>ORAL QUESTION.<br/>MONDELINGE VRAAG.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railway Material Ordered From Continental Firms.<br/>Spoorweg Materiaal Besteld By Vasteland Firma&#x2019;s.</heading>

<question by="#henderson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. J. HENDERSON,</from>

<p>with leave, asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether the statements in the daily press are true that his Department has placed large orders for railway material with continental firms instead of with British firms?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#henderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The following orders have been placed for rails recently:</p>

<p>100 <i>miles</i>: 80 <i>lb. rails.</i></p>

<p>This order (in two lots of 50 miles) has been placed with Messrs. Krupp and Bochumer Verein, Germany, at a price of £6 18s. 6d. per ton f.o.b., equal to £87,048.</p>

<p>Lowest British price (£8 12s. 3d. per ton) was £108,259.</p>

<p>Difference in favour of German tender, £21,211, equal to 24.3 per cent.</p>

<p><span class="col_415" refersTo="page_0495"/>39 <i>miles:</i> 45 <i>lb. rails.</i></p>

<p>This order for 39 miles was placed in Belgium with Messrs. Cockerill &amp; Ougree Marikaye jointly, at a price of £6 12s. per ton f.o.b., equal to £18,202.</p>

<p>Lowest British tender was at rate of £9 5s. f.o.b, £25,511.</p>

<p>Difference in favour of Belgium tender, £7,309, equal to 40 per cent.</p>

<p>70 <i>miles</i>: 60 <i>lb. rails.</i></p>

<p>This order was placed in France, the tender of the French firm being at the rate of £6 7s. 6d. per ton, equal, £42,075.</p>

<p>The lowest British tender was £8 15s. per ton, equal to £57,750.</p>

<p>Difference is favour of French tender, £15,675, equal to 37 per cent.</p>

<p>With the exception of the 100 miles of 80 lbs., the rails are required for new construction, and the saving effected will go to help reducing the cost of the lines for which the rails are required.</p>

<p>An order for wheels and axles was also placed with Messrs. Krupp, whose tender was lower than the lowest British tender by £7,733.</p>

<p>So far as the rails are concerned the Administration is satisfied that the specifications are up to standard. With regard to delivery, the delivery arranged is quite satisfactory.</p>

<p>The total orders for rails as based on lowest continental accepted tenders amount to £147,325, whereas the British tenders amounted to £191,520.</p>

<p>Difference in favour of continental tenders £44,195, equal to 30 per cent.</p>

<p>Only just now while we are sitting here a cable has been handed to me showing the effect of a little competition. We have had an offer from a British firm quoting at a lower price, which shows what competition can do. I would also like to point out that the Bradford Corporation&#x2014;I think that is the firm in England&#x2014;has placed an order in Belgium for goods at a saving of 30 per cent. We have also saved a total of 30 per cent. I think that in the circumstances the hon. member will believe that we were fairly justified in our actions.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#adjournment">

<heading>ADJOURNMENT.<br/>VERDAGING.</heading>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to move, sir, that the House do now adjourn. My reason for bringing this is because it seems to me unwise and useless for this House to proceed with its deliberations when a Minister of the Crown has so little sense of his responsibilities to this House that&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>What is the hon. member&#x2019;s point?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I am giving my reason why I think that the House should now adjourn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member must give a reason for his motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>My reason is that it is time that the House should adjourn, because I put the following question to the Minister of Lands on the 5th of February&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;(1) Whether it is the fact that gangers employed on the Hartebeestepoort Irrigation Works receive no holiday leave on pay for any completed twelve months&#x2019; service; and, if so, (2) whether he will consider making the necessary alterations in the regulations so as to secure for these men this reasonable concession?&#x201D;</block>

<p>The Minister of Lands replied that they receive five days&#x2019; holiday leave per annum on full pay. Two minutes ago, in reply to a further question, he said I had mistaken his answer, as these men receive no holidays at all. It is trifling with the House, and displays such a lack of the dignity that is due to this House on the part of a Minister of the Crown, that I think this House should mark its sense of disapprobation, as we are entitled to receive courteous, correct and truthful answers from Ministers instead of any haphazard remark which they may feel inclined to give.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>It appears that the hon. member for Stamford Hill (Mr. Creswell) desires to move the adjournment of the House as a substantive motion under Standing Order No. 36, in order to discuss the nature of the reply given him this afternoon by the Minister of Lands. But while a substantive motion for the immediate adjournment of the House may be made at any time that Mr. Speaker is in the Chair, it seems clear that a motion for the adjournment of the House in order to raise a general discussion may only be moved in terms of Standing Order No. 34. Discussions on substantive motions, such as the hon. member now moves, are confined at the end of the day&#x2019;s proceedings to questions affecting the business of the House, and it seems to me that no question which may be raised by means of a distinct motion should now be discussed. If the hon. member takes exception to the nature of the replies given to his questions by any Minister, it is competent for him to table a motion on the subject, and in the circumstances I do not think I can allow any further discussion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I think, Sir, the rules of this House permit any member to move the adjournment of the House at any stage of the proceedings.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I can take that motion. It is moved that the House do now adjourn. Who seconds?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#boydell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BOYDELL</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>I am not opposing the motion, Sir, but as my answer has been brought into question, may I have the right to reply?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, I think the Minister may reply.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Stamford Hill (Mr. Creswell) seems to be in a bad temper this afternoon, and seems determined to vent his spleen against me. He asked me a question on the paper, which I answered to the best of my ability. He is, however, not satisfied with the reply, and I <span class="col_416" refersTo="page_0496"/>asked him to put a further question. I should be the last to show any discourtesy to the hon. member or to any member of this House, but it seems to me that the hon. member wants me to give him the reply he wants&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>No, no.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>If the hon. member wants to table a further question I shall try my best to answer him, but I will not be dictated to by the hon. member.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hertzog">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HERTZOG</person>:</from>

<p>Ek moet sê dat as daaroor gestem word, dat ons dan vir die verdaging moet stem.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#eerste_minister">

<from>De <person refersTo="hansard_za">EERSTE MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Vir die verdaging?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hertzog">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HERTZOG</person>:</from>

<p>Ja, en eenvoudig dit, dat ek denk, en die Huis sal dit opgemerk het, dat gedurende die laaste paar weke het die lede hier in die Huis werklik oorsaak gehad om seer gegriefd te voel oor die gedrag van edelagbare Ministers in verband met die beantwoording van vrae. Ek dink ons moet dit heel kalmpies doen, maar ek dink dis net so goed dat ons deur verdaging dit kalmpies onder die aandag bring en as daar vanmiddag oor gestem word, stem ek vir die verdaging, Ek wens dat daar eens in die Hu s behoorlik oor die griewe gepraat word.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#eerste_minister">

<from>De <person refersTo="hansard_za">EERSTE MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Ek verstaan, Mnr. Speaker, die reeling is dat enige lid die verdaging van die Huis kan voorstel, maar nie op die gronde deur die edele lid vir Stamford Hill (de hr. Croswell) hier geopper. Die gronde is uit die weg gereeld en as die Huis verdaag, dan is dit onder die gewone reel van omstandigheid, sonder die redes deur die edele lid vir Stamford Hill (de hr. Creswell). My punt is dit, dis private dag. Ons sit hier en die dag is geneem ter wille van die besigheid van private lede. As dus private lede kom en hul wil vakansie hê en nie sit nie, dan dink ek, ons moet onse gewone bereidwilligheid toon en nie daarteen indruis nie. As hy persisteer, dan sou dit onvriendelik wees om daarteen in te gaan en ek dink ons behoor saam te gaan met die voorstel, en nie daarteen te stem nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>There can be no debate on a motion of this nature. I now proceed to put the question.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>On a point of order, Sir, I think I am entitled, if I wish, to withdraw my motion for the adjournment, but I shall raise the same question later on the motion that the House do adjourn. I have been distinctly&#x2014;[Hon. Members: &#x201C;Order!&#x201D;]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I now proceed to put the question.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I withdraw the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#collins">

<from>Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COLLINS</person>:</from>

<p>I object.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Objection has been raised. I put the question that the House do now adjourn.</p>

<p>Motion agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1924-02-22T15:12:00">3.12 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

