---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol2 - TUESDAY 29 JULY 1924'
layout: debate
year: 1924
month: JULY
month_slug: Jul
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>TUESDAY, 29th JULY, 1924.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1924-07-29T14:21:00">2.21 p.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#new_member">

<heading>NEW MEMBER.</heading>

<p>Sir WILLIAM MACINTOSH, introduced by Col.-Cdt. Collins and Mr. Robinson, made, and subscribed to, the oath, and took his seat.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#speaker&#x2019;s_ruling">

<heading>SPEAKER&#x2019;S RULING.</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to refer to Notice of Question No. XXII on the Order Paper for to-day in the name of the hon. member for East London (North). In framing notices of question certain rules followed in practice must be observed. The purpose of a question should be to obtain, and not to supply, information. The question should not be of excessive length and should not contain statements not strictly necessary to make the question intelligible, nor should it contain arguments, inferences, imputations or matter designed merely to give annoyance, nor can the expression of an opinion be sought for by a question. The Order Paper is published by authority of the House, and the Clerk of the House, under Mr. Speaker&#x2019;s authority, may correct any notice of question or of motion infringing the rules or otherwise irregular. Now, the hon. member for East London (North) yesterday handed in a notice of question to be put to the Hon. the Prime Minister to-day in connection with General Manie Maritz and his release. In that notice a certain question put in this House on the 2nd April, 1918, together with the reply thereto, was given word for word, as also certain evidence given by the Hon. the Prime Minister before a Select Committee in 1915. It seems to me to be unnecessary to burden the records with a repetition of this question and reply and evidence. To my mind the whole purport of the notice of question as drafted was not so much to obtain, as to supply, information, and the hon. member appears to have been seeking to put into the question what might properly be included in a speech. As the hon. member had left these buildings when the notice was being dealt with by the Clerk of the House, and as therefore his attention could not be drawn to the matter, in the circumstances I authorised the Clerk to publish the question in an amended form as appearing on the Order Paper for to-day. If the hon. member wishes to do so, he can withdraw his question and put it at some future date in an amended form in conformity with the rules and practice of this House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>You have given a decision to which I must agree, but&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER: I cannot allow any discussion on the matter I have given my ruling.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>I am not disputing your ruling for a moment. I submit that because hon. members have only heard your decision&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_members">

<from><person refersTo="hansard_za">Hon. MEMBERS</person>:</from>

<p>Sit down, sit down, order.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Hon. members cannot call into question or discuss a ruling given from the chair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>I submit that because hon. members have only heard your decision they do not understand your ruling. As your ruling has embodied certain comments, allow me to read the question to the House in its original form.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot allow the hon. member to go any further into the question.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_members">

<from><person refersTo="hansard_za">Hon. MEMBERS</person>:</from>

<p>Order, order&#x2014;sit down.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>I have to bow to your decision. Of course, there will be other opportunities of fully discussing this question.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member will have several opportunities at which he can bring up the whole matter, but this is not the right way.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading><span class="col_23-24" refersTo="page_0053"/>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>New Cape Central Railway.</heading>

<question by="#buirski" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>I</num>

<from>Mr. BUIRSKI</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How far the negotiations initiated by the late Minister of Railways and Harbours for the taking over of the New Cape Central Railway have proceeded, and what has been the result of such negotiations; and</li>

<li>(2) whether the Minister is prepared to lay the papers in connection with the matter upon the Table?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#buirski">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The question of taking over the New Cape Central Railway is engaging the attention of the Administration.<br/>An inspection of the line is necessary, and this is now being done. On receipt of the Engineer&#x2019;s report the matter will receive further consideration.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Asiatic Segregation.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#prime_minister">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Government will introduce legislation to prevent Indians from buying farms in Natal in juxtaposition with land held by European farmers, and, if so, when;</li>

<li>(2) whether it is the intention of the Government to proceed with the passing of the Class Areas Bill which had reached the second reading stage during the last session of Parliament; or</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government intends to introduce any other Bill to provide for the segregation of the Asiatic population in the towns into separate residential and trading areas; and, if so, when; and,</li>

<li>(4) to what extent will the Government carry out a policy of compulsorily repatriating Asiatics at present in Natal who originally came to that Province as labourers or as traders from India, Arabia and elsewhere?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1), (3) and (4). These matters will receive the consideration of the Government after the present session.</li>

<li>(2) It is not intended to proceed with the measure.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Insolvency Legislation.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice whether he will at an early date, cause a Commission to be appointed to enquire fully into, and to report upon, the working of the Insolvency Act, 1916, with instructions to such Commission to recommend in which direction or in what manner the said Act should be amended and improved in the interests of commerce and trade?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>Data concerning this question are being collected, but I doubt whether the appointment of a Commission will be necessary. I intend, however, to give the whole matter my careful consideration during the recess.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Immigrants Regulation Act, 1913.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior whether any correspondence has passed between him and the hon. member tor Cape Town (Hanover Street), anent the Immigrants Regulation Act, 1913, and if so, whether he will lay such correspondence upon the Table?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I beg to lay upon the Table copies of the correspondence referred to.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Qualifications of Members of Parliament.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he will introduce legislation in the following directions, namely <i>(a)</i> that no person who holds the office of a Municipal Councillor shall be capable of being chosen or sitting as a Senator, a member of the House of Assembly, or a member of a Provincial Council; (<i>b</i>) that no person who holds the office of a Provincial Councillor shall be capable of being chosen or sitting as a Senator, a member of the House of Assembly, or as a Municipal Councillor; (<i>c</i>) that no person who is a member of either House of Parliament shall be capable of being chosen or sitting as a Provincial or Municipal Councillor; and</li>

<li>(2) if so, when?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) and (2) It is not intended to introduce legislation in the direction outlined in the question.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways, Railway Sleepers and Bridges.</heading>

<question by="#brink" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Mr. BRINK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) (<i>a</i>) Whether the Railway Administration will buy such South African sleepers as may be offered in future; and <i>(b)</i> if so, at what price;</li>

<li>(2) when the Government intends to start building the George-Knysna line; and</li>

<li>(3) whether he will have the railway bridge across the Touws River built in such a way that it will also serve as a wagon bridge?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#brink">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) <i>(a)</i> The policy of the Administration is to purchase all suitable South African sleepers offering. <i>(b)</i> Present prices, yellow-wood 6s. each delivered Storms River or Knysna sleeper factories. Creosoting, etc., brings cost to 11s. 11d. each. A slightly higher rate than 6s. is paid for first-class hardwood sleepers, but very few are offered to the Administration.</li>

<li>(2) Staking out, as a preliminary to construction, will be commenced in September next.</li>

<li><span class="col_25-26" refersTo="page_0054"/>(3) Sympathetic consideration will be given to the question of co-operating with the local authorities in the erection of a combined road and rail bridge over the Touws River. Arrangements have been made for a survey of the site for the bridge with a view to determining the expenditure which would require to be borne by the authorities concerned and the Administration and where there are any technical or working objections from the railway point of view.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>Ministers repeat in Dutch their answers to English questions. Will they also give the English version of question answered in Dutch?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS:</from>

<p>I am prepared to do that, though it will occupy some time.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Native Segregation.</heading>

<question by="#van_zyl" to="#prime_minister">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Maj. G. B. VAN ZYL</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to a speech delivered on the Parade, Cape Town, on Sunday, the 29th June last, by one Professor Thaele;</li>

<li>(2) whether he was correct when he stated &#x201C;Hertzog would not confine the native to alphabetic education, but would leave him free to learn Greek, read Homer, study philosophy, mathematics, astronomy and whatever else they wished&#x201D;;</li>

<li>(3) whether the said speaker is correct when he says that the Prime Minister told him <i>(a)</i> that segregation would be put into effect in three years&#x2019; time; (<i>b</i>) that the native and white man would each have his areas; (<i>c</i>) that neither a native nor a white man would be compelled to live in one or the other area; (<i>d)</i> that he could own property in either, but would have no political rights outside his own segregated area; and (<i>e</i>) that in the black area the white man must carry a pass;</li>

<li>(4) whether this is part of the Government&#x2019;s policy in regard to segregation; if not, what is the policy; and</li>

<li>(5) whether, if all the statements referred to are not correct, which of them are and in what respects are the remainder incorrect?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#van_zyl">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No; but I have been informed by the gentleman concerned that the report of his speech referred to is an utter misrepresentation of what he did say.</li>

<li>(2) There is nothing, as far as I know, to prevent the native from learning Greek, reading Homer and studying philosophy or whatever else he wishes, and I have no intention to interfere with his freedom to do so.</li>

<li>(3) (4) (5) I am not prepared to make any statement as to segregation; or as to what the details of it may be until such time as the question may have been fully enquired into and considered and decided upon by Government.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>When are you likely to work out a policy?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>Have patience.</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>Wait and see.</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER (to Sir Thomas Smartt):</from>

<p>It took you fourteen years to do nothing.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#duncan" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Mr. DUNCAN:</from>

<p>And it will take you another fourteen.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Ten-Shilling Notes.</heading>

<question by="#van_zyl" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Maj. G. B. VAN ZYL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to the great inconvenience suffered by the public generally by reason of the 10s. notes being withdrawn from circulation; and</li>

<li>(2) what is the Government&#x2019;s policy in regard to this matter?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#van_zyl">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I am aware that complaints of the nature referred to by the Hon. Member have been made.</li>

<li>(2) This question is subsidiary to the major question of restoring the gold standard, which will have to be decided next year, as with gold in circulation there would be no need for the 10s. note. Under the circumstances the Government is not prepared to bring about any change pending the decision on, the major question.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Crown Lands in Zululand.</heading>

<question by="#deane" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. DEANE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the total area of Crown Lands in Zululand still available for settlement; and</li>

<li>(2) what is the estimated area suitable for cotton growing?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#deane">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) It is impossible to state without further investigation how far the present unsurveyed land in Zululand is suitable for settlement. So far as surveyed land is concerned the area is approximately 185,000 acres.</li>

<li>(2) The whole of the surveyed unallotted area is considered more or less suitable for cotton growing.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Crown Lands in Waterberg.</heading>

<question by="#tom_naudé" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. TOM NAUD&#x00C9;</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) When the Government intends to have a re-valuation made of Crown land issued in the Waterberg and Pietersburg districts; and</li>

<li>(2) whether the Government is prepared to give settlers in those parts, and especially in ward Koedoesrand, extension of time for payment of instalments and interest until such re-valuation has taken place, as these people are in great distress and unable to pay the high prices?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#tom">

<from><span class="col_27-28" refersTo="page_0055"/>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) An inspection has recently been made of the Government farms in the Koedoesrand Ward of the Waterberg district, with a view to determining how far, if at all, a reduction should be made in the purchase price of the land already allotted in that area. The report of the Inspection Commission is now receiving the consideration of the Government. The Department of Lands is not convinced that any case exists for a general re-valuation of the allotted farms in the Pietersburg district.</li>

<li>(2) The Government is prepared to consider applications from settlers in financial difficulties for extension of time to pay their rent or instalments. Each case will, however, be treated on its merits.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Imports of Rhodesian Cattle.</heading>

<question by="#tom_naudé" to="#prime_minister">

<num>XI</num>

<from>Mr. TOM NAUD&#x00C9;</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister whether he will inform the House how and when the Government intends prohibiting the importation of Rhodesian cattle and cattle from the adjoining territories into the Union?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#tom_naudé">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>It is proposed to hold a conference between the representatives of the Union Government and those of the Governments of Northern and Southern Rhodesia in October, when this and other matters connected with the existing Customs Agreement will come up for discussion and decision. The question in so far as it relates to the adjoining territories of Bechuanaland, Swaziland and Basutoland is receiving the attention of the Government.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Rhodesian Cattle and Railway Facilities.</heading>

<question by="#tom_naudé" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Mr. TOM NAUD&#x00C9;</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is a fact that special facilities are being granted for the conveyance or Rhodesian cattle from Messina over the Union Railways;</li>

<li>(2) how many special cattle-trains run every week from Messina for the conveyance of such cattle;</li>

<li>(3) whether it is a fact that a rebate is allowed on cattle from Messina to the Rand and other places, and why; and</li>

<li>(4) whether he will discontinue those facilities; and, if not, why not?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#tom_naudé">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) As the ordinary train service could not deal with the volume of traffic offering, it was necessary recently to run additional trains for the conveyance of cattle from Messina to Durban.</li>

<li>(2) During June eight such additional trains were run, equal to two per week. During July, 21 additional trains were run, or an average of a little over five per week. A further additional train which is scheduled for to-day will conclude the traffic for this year.</li>

<li>(3) The same tariff applies to all cattle conveyed by the Railway Administration, and no rebate is allowed in respect of any cattle except upon proof that the cattle have been exported oversea.</li>

<li>(4) <i>(a)</i> The additional trains were run to meet traffic requirements. <i>(b)</i> The rebate on cattle exported oversea is with a view to the development of the export livestock trade and to assist towards relieving glut in local markets.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>The President Kruger Statue.</heading>

<question by="#tom_naudé" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>Mr. TOM NAUD&#x00C9; (for Dr. H. Reitz)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether he intends to provide the sum of £600 which is still required to remove the statue of President Kruger to Station Square, Pretoria; and, if so, whether he will immediately inform the Mayor of Pretoria of his intention?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#tom_naudé">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The answer is in the affirmative.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Zululand Cotton Area and Blackwater Fever.</heading>

<question by="#robinson" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>Mr. ROBINSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands how many of the original allottees, or their managers, of the three farms, granted in the Hluhlue cotton area of Zululand a few years ago for settlement experimental purposes, have died of blackwater fever as a result of the malarious climate?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#robinson">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>One allottee died, and it was unofficially reported to the Department that the manager representing the allottee of a second farm had also died. From hearsay it is believed that the cause of death in both instances was blackwater fever.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Louis Trichardt Railway Station.</heading>

<question by="#pirow" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. PIROW</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware of the great inconvenience and expense to which the town of Louis Trichardt is put by reason of the fact that the railway station is four miles from the town;</li>

<li>(2) whether he is aware of the fact that a small deviation of the line from Bandolier Kop will give Louis Trichardt a conveniently situated station; and</li>

<li>(3) whether he will, during the present session, make provision for shifting the station as indicated above, or otherwise give the necessary instructions for an immediate survey?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#pirow">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Louis Trichardt station is approximately four miles from the centre of the town.</li>

<li>(2) To bring the railway closer to the town would involve a deviation of eleven miles, and would mean lengthening the through line by approximately seven miles.</li>

<li>(3) A previous survey shows that to bring the line into the town of Louis Trichardt would involve considerable expenditure. I regret, therefore, I cannot return a favourable answer to the request that provision be made in the Estimates for carrying out the work suggested.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_29-30" refersTo="page_0056"/>Mr. A. S. Mostert&#x2019;s Mission to Zululand.</heading>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether Mr. A. S. Mostert was sent by the Government on an official mission to Zululand;</li>

<li>(2) if so, what was the. mission;</li>

<li>(3) what were his instructions;</li>

<li>(4) at whose expense was he sent; and</li>

<li>(5) whether he has made any report to the Government, or to the Minister, either verbal or written, and, if so, what was the nature of the report?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#nicholls">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) and (3) To investigate the possibility or otherwise of utilising any of the unallotted Grown land for cotton settlements on a new basis.</li>

<li>(4) Mr. Mostert placed his experience and knowledge at the disposal of the Government without remuneration; only his travelling expenses will be paid.</li>

<li>(5) Mr. Mostert has been asked by the Government to report on other areas, and when his investigations are completed a final report covering all his investigations will be submitted by him to the Government for consideration.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Arising out of that question, may I ask the Minister why he deliberately&#x2014;apparently deliberately&#x2014;went behind the Natal Land Board in making this appointment? The duties that seem to have been carried out by Mr. Mostert, a civilian, are those devolving upon the Land Board of Natal and I would like to get an explanation from the Minister why this unusual proceeding was carried out.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>I have given my reply. The hon. member had better put a question on the paper.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Col. D. REITZ</from>

<p>Does the Minister refuse to answer?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>You can put a question upon the Paper.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>I take it the Minister is not prepared to answer this question. It is a pity, but I will put it on the paper.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Greytown&#x2014;MooI River Railway Extension.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_railways">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether it is the intention of the Government to proceed with the construction of the line of railway already surveyed connecting up the Greytown-Maritzburg branch line at Mizpah with the main line at Mooi River and with a connection to Muden?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>As the hon. member is aware, no new railway for the conveyance of public traffic can be constructed without the sanction of Parliament. The claims of the Greytown-Mooi River area will be carefully considered in conjunction with those of other districts when the next railway construction programme is under consideration.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>WITPOORT AND WAAIKRAAL TELEPHONES.</heading>

<question by="#muller" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Gen. MULLER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs whether he will extend the telephone line from Babsfontein to Witpoort and thence to Waaikraal, seeing that such extension is urgently required and has been promised?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#muller">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>Extension of the telephone from Babsfontein to Witpoort is now in hand. It is proposed during the present financial year to join Waaikraal to Delmas, and this work will be started as soon as possible.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Settlers and Arrear Payments.</heading>

<question by="#vermooten" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XIX.</num>

<from>Mr. VERMOOTEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether the Government intends to introduce legislation to afford relief to settlers on the several settlements, viz., by (<i>a</i>) capitalising all arrears; (<i>b</i>) extending the period for repayment from 20 to at least 40 years; and (<i>c</i>) a re-valuation of the ground, or otherwise?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#vermooten">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS (on behalf of the Minister of Finance):</from>

<p> I intend during next session to introduce a bill dealing with these and other questions.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Political Appointments.</heading>

<question by="#hattingh" to="#prime_minister">

<num>XX.</num>

<from>Rev. Mr. HATTINGH</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is in accordance with the policy of the Government that political appointments such as those of the Administrators of the Provinces and South-West Africa, and of certain other bodies, remain unchanged; if not.</li>

<li>(2) whether the Government will take steps to bring its views to the notice of the persons concerned and will inform this House accordingly; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government will afford the House an opportunity to discuss the matter?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#hattingh">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I must ask the hon. member to allow the question to stand over.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Will the hon. Minister repeat the answer?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I merely asked that the question stand over.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>It is a difficult question.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>The &#x201C;Stop Order&#x201D; System.</heading>

<question by="#hattingh" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XXI.</num>

<from>Rev. Mr. HATTINGH</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Government will take steps during this session to put a stop to the so-called &#x201C;stop order&#x201D; system prevailing oh the Witwatersrand;</li>

<li>(2) if not, whether the Government can inform this House whether it intends to take such steps when action will be taken in connection therewith;</li>

<li><span class="col_31-32" refersTo="page_0057"/>(3) whether the Government intends to enquire into the native recruiting and other concession trading rights on the mines in order to bring the same more in conformity with the interests of the general public; and, if so,</li>

<li>(4) whether the Government will institute such enquiry during the recess?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#hattingh">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>The hon. member&#x2019;s question refers to several matters which are admittedly complicated in character, and in regard to which I do not wish to say anything definite until I have had time to give personal attention to them. The stop order question and that connected with trading rights on the Reef will both receive my serious consideration at an early date.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>The Release of ex Col. Manie Maritz.</heading>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister">

<num>XXII.</num>

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>I can accept no responsibility for the question as it appears on the Order Paper, and accordingly do not ask it.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Reduction of Letter Postage.</heading>

<question by="#henderson" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>XXIII.</num>

<from>Mr. HENDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs whether the Government intends to reduce the charge for letter postage, and, if so, when and to what extent?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#henderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>This is purely a question of finance. I am giving consideration to the question of postal rates generally and hope to make a statement on the subject later in the present session.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Dumping Duty on Australian Butter.</heading>

<question by="#henderson" to="#minister">

<num>XXIV.</num>

<from>Mr. HENDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance on what grounds the Government has decided to impose a dumping duty on butter imported from Australia?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#henderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>It was represented that Australian butter was being exported at a price to the Union free on board that is less than that at which it was being sold for home consumption in the usual and ordinary course of trade, plus the free on board charges. Enquiries confirmed the allegation of dumping as defined by law, consequently a proclamation was issued imposing a dumping duty on such butter in the interest of the dairying industry of the Union.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Squatters at Vaalbank and Steenkoppies.</heading>

<question by="#pretorius" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>XXV.</num>

<from>Lt.-Col. N. J. PRETORIUS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware <i>(a)</i> that the Government has certain interests in the farms Vaalbank and Steenkoppies, in the district of Krugersdorp, and (<i>b</i>) that those farms have for some time past been occupied by European squatters;</li>

<li>(2) whether it is not desirable that those farms should now be allotted in terms of the Land Settlement Act; and, if so,</li>

<li>(3) whether the purchase price could be reduced by the amount already paid by the squatters?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#pretorius">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) It is not considered that the land is suitable for alienation in agricultrual holdings under the Land Settlement Act, 1912. Steps are being taken to survey a certain number of sites for disposal under the Crown Land Disposal Ordinance 1903 (Transvaal). Applications if made for those sites by the present occupiers will receive every consideration</li>

<li>(3) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Legislation.</heading>

<question by="#sampson" to="#minister">

<num>XXVI.</num>

<from>Mr. SAMPSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries what steps the Government intends to take to deal with the pitiable condition of a large number of miners&#x2019; phthisis sufferers and their dependents caused by the postponement of legislation over the last four years?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#sampson">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>In reply to the hon. member, I beg to state that I propose to go carefully into the question of the miners&#x2019; phthisis legislation as soon as possible after the commencement of the recess.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Victimization of Strikers on the Mines.</heading>

<question by="#allen" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XXVII.</num>

<from>Mr. ALLEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware that men who took part in the great strike on the Witwatersrand in 1922 have been, and now are, blacklisted and refused employment by the mining companies; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) what action he proposes taking to put a stop to this form of victimization?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#allen">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>The answer to my hon. friend is that I am going into this question carefully, and will ask for the time being that the matter stand over.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister">

<from>Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>Give it to us in Dutch.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINSTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>I will reply as I did in another place, and say that I have too much respect for the other official language to wish to murder it in this House.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>You might show your respect for the language by trying to learn it.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railway_accounts">

<heading>RAILWAY ACCOUNTS.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS moved as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the following documents presented to this House during the last session of Parliament be laid upon the Table, viz.:</block>

<ol>

<li>(1) Statement of Accounts of South African Railways and Harbours for financial year 1922-&#x2019;23 with Report of Controller and Auditor-General. [U.G. 46&#x2014;&#x2019;23.]</li>

<li>(2) Statement prepared in terms of section <i>forty-nine</i> of Exchequer and Audit Act, <span class="col_33-34" refersTo="page_0058"/>No. 21 of 1911, as amended by Exchequer and Audit Amendment Act, No. 31 of 1916, of all Special Warrants issued during period 23rd June, 1923, to 24th January, 1924, under section <i>forty-eight</i> of the Act.</li>

<li>(3) Schedule of Pensions, South African Railways and Harbours, as at 30th September, 1923. [U.G. 43&#x2014;&#x2019;23.]</li>

<li>(4) Return showing receipts and expenditure under Railways and Harbours Charitable Fund during 1923.</li>

<li>(5) Report of the Select Committee on Railways and Harbours. [S.C. 4&#x2014;&#x2019;24.]</li>

</ol>

<p>Mr. VERMOOTEN seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that the documents were upon the Table.</p>

<p>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS moved&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the documents be referred to the Select Committee on Railways and Harbours.</block>

<p>Mr. VERMOOTEN seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#estimates_and_financial">

<heading>ESTIMATES AND FINANCIAL.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the following papers, laid upon the Table on the 25th instant be referred to the Select Committee on Public Accounts:</block>

<ol>

<li>(1) Nineteenth Report of the Natal Museum for the financial year 1st April, 1923, to 31st March, 1924;</li>

<li>(2) Special Report to Parliament by the Controller and Auditor-General under section <i>forty</i> of the Exchequer and Audit Act;</li>

<li>(3) Return prepared in terms of section <i>twenty-six</i> of the Exchequer and Audit Act, 1911, showing particulars of Special Warrants issued by His Excellency the Governor-General during the period 26th February, 1924, to 24th July, 1924;</li>

</ol>

<p>Mr. VERMOOTEN seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#finance_and_appropriation">

<heading>FINANCE AND APPROPRIATION.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>moved, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the following documents presented to this House during the last session of Parliament, be laid upon the Table&#x2014;</block>

<ol>

<li>(1) Finance Accounts, Appropriation Accounts, Loan Funds and Miscellaneous Funds (exclusive of Railways and Harbours) for the financial year 1922-&#x2019;23, with the Report of the Controller and Auditor-General. [U.G. 38&#x2014;&#x2019;23.]</li>

<li>(2) Return of staff of the Land and Agricultural Bank of South Africa as at 31st December, 1923, rendered in terms of section <i>six,</i> sub-section (1) of Act No. 18 of 1912.</li>

<li>(3) Statements of the following accounts audited by the controller and Auditor-General under the provisions of section <i>sixty</i> of the Exchequer and Audit Act, 1911, together with the Controller and Auditor-General&#x2019;s Report thereon:<br/>South African Museum, for 1922. Transvaal Museum, for the year ended 31st March, 1923.<br/>Natal Museum, for the year ended 31st March, 1923.<br/>State Library, Pretoria, for 1922. National Zoological Gardens of South Africa for 1922, and<br/>Michaelis Art Gallery, for the year ended 31st March, 1923.</li>

<li>(4) Return prepared in terms of section <i>twenty-six,</i> sub-section (3), of the Exchequer and Audit Act, 1911, showing particulars of special warrants issued by His Royal Highness the Governor-General during the period 19th June, 1923, to 24th January, 1924.</li>

<li>(5) Return showing the position in regard to the printing of annual reports of Departments.</li>

<li>(6) Finance Accounts, Appropriation Accounts and other financial statements of the Province of Transvaal for the financial year 1922-&#x2019;23, with the Report of the Auditor of Accounts. [T.P. 6&#x2014;&#x2019;23.]</li>

<li>(7) Report of the Provincial Auditor on the Accounts of the Orange Free State Province for the year ending 31st March, 1923. (Printed.)</li>

<li>(8) Thirteenth Report of the Public Debt Commissioners, with Appendices, for the financial year ended 31st March, 1923. [U.G. 34&#x2014;&#x2019;23.]</li>

<li>(9) Finance Accounts (including Trust and Village Water Supply Accounts), Teachers&#x2019; Pension Fund Accounts and Appropriation Accounts of the Province of Natal for the period 1st April, 1922, to 31st March, 1923, with the Provincial Auditor&#x2019;s Report thereon. [N.P. 3&#x2014;&#x2019;23.]</li>

<li>(10) Schedule of Advances made to lessees of Crown Lands during the year 1923 under the Land Settlement Act, 1912, as amended.</li>

<li>(11) Reports of land purchased under sections <i>ten</i> and <i>eleven</i> of the Land Settlement Act, 1912, as amended during 1923.</li>

<li>(12) Schedules of Pensions (excluding pensions payable by the Railways and Harbours Administration), Awards during the period from 1st October, 1922, to 30th September, 1923, and cessations during the same period. [U.G. 48&#x2014;&#x2019;23.]</li>

<li>(13) Return prepared in terms of section <i>twenty-six</i> of the Exchequer and Audit Act, 1911, showing particulars of special warrants issued by His Excellency the Governor-General during the period 25th January, 1924, to 25th February, 1924.</li>

<li>(14) Reports of the Trustees of the South African Art Gallery and the South African Fine Arts Association for the year ending the 31st December, 1923. (Printed.)</li>

<li><span class="col_35-36" refersTo="page_0059"/>(15) Balance Sheet of the South African Fine Arts Association for the year ending 31st December, 1923.</li>

<li>(16) Report of the Commissioner of Inland Revenue for the year 1922.&#x2019;23.</li>

<li>(17) Report of the Board of Trustees of the South African Public Library, Cape Town, for 1923. (Printed.)</li>

<li>(18) Comparative classified summary of ordinary expenditure from revenue, excluding Railways and Harbours, for the period 1913-&#x2019;14 to 1922-&#x2019;23, and the appropriation for 1923-&#x2019;24. (Printed.)</li>

<li>(19) Schedule of Governor-General&#x2019;s and Administrator&#x2019;s special warrants for expenditure during 1923-&#x2019;24 under paragraph 13 of the Financial Regulations promulgated in terms of section 3 of the Exchequer and Audit Proclamation, 1921 (South-West Africa Territory).</li>

<li>(20) Report of the Land and Agricultural Bank of South Africa for the year ended 31st December, 1923. [U.G. 17&#x2014;&#x2019;24.]</li>

<li>(21) Statement of assets and liabilities of the Land and Agricultural Bank as at the 31st December, 1923.</li>

<li>(22) Profit and loss account of the Land and Agricultural Bank as at the 31st December, 1923.</li>

<li>(23) Return of interest and instalments due to the Land and Agricultural Bank on the 31st December, 1922, and outstanding on the 31st December, 1923.</li>

<li>(24) Report of the Select Committee on Public Accounts. [S.C. 2&#x2014;&#x2019;24.]</li>

</ol>

<p>Mr. VERMOOTEN seconded.</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that the documents were upon the Table.</p>

<p>The MINISTER OF FINANCE moved&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the documents be referred to the Select Committee on Public Accounts</block>

<p>Mr. C. A. VAN NIEKERK seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#proportional_representation_(provincial_councils)_bill">

<heading>PROPORTIONAL REPRESENTATION (PROVINCIAL COUNCILS) BILL.</heading>

<p>Mr. D. M. Brown was granted leave to introduce the Proportional Representation (Provincial Councils) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 15th August.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#south_african_society_of_accountants_(private)_bill">

<heading>SOUTH AFRICAN SOCIETY OF ACCOUNTANTS (PRIVATE) BILL.</heading>

<speech by="#close">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That in accordance with the resolution of the House of Assembly of the 8th April, 1924, the proceedings on the South African Society of Accountants (Private) Bill be resumed at the stage at which they were suspended last session.</block>

<p>As hon. members will be aware, this is a Bill of very considerable public importance, although it is brought forward as a private measure. The object is to ensure that the very important profession of accountancy shall be carried on under the best conditions and guarantees; this is of the highest importance, particularly to the business people of the country. Last session the Bill was sent to a Select Committee, the personnel of which commands the utmost confidence from this House for the ability and knowledge of the subject possessed by the members of that Select Committee. They unanimously found the preamble of the Bill proved. They went through the measure very carefully. Many objections had been raised and many difficulties had occurred, but as a result of discussions and long deliberations by the Committee certain compromises were arrived at and concessions made, the result being the practical disappearance of most of the difficulties. A Bill of this sort is not only of the utmost importance to the community, but it causes very great expense indeed to the people who bring it forward, and on this Bill there has been a considerable expenditure of money by the various societies which, in the most public-spirited way, have brought this measure forward. Unless the motion is adopted the Bill stands a chance of being dropped altogether, and the result will be that these public-spirited promoters will probably find it necessary to introduce the Bill all over again, provided they can afford to do so. That seems a wholly unnecessary course to have to take and, fortunately, there is provision in our Standing Rules under which a Bill can be resumed in the following session. In April before the House was prorogued leave was given to suspend the Bill with a view to leave being obtained to resume the proceedings this session. Hon. members will be glad if opportunity be afforded to bring the Bill forward this session, so that the House can decide on the principle, and I have no doubt of the result. The Select Committee, which took a great deal of evidence, has sent in its report, and the stage at which I propose the Bill should be resumed is the second reading.</p>

<p>Mr. STRUBEN seconded the motion.</p>

<p>By direction of Mr. SPEAKER,</p>

<p>The CLERK read the Orders of the House of the 12th February, 1924, giving leave to introduce the Bill and the First Reading; of the 19th and 21st February, appointing the Select Committee; of the 19th February, referring to the Committee Petitions in opposition to the Bill; of the 28th February and 27th March, granting leave to amend the Preamble; of the 1st April, reporting the Bill with amendments, and of the 8th April, giving leave for proceedings to be suspended and that the Bill may be proceeded with this session.</p>

<p>The motion was then put and agreed to; second reading 1st August.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_railways">

<heading>NEW RAILWAYS.</heading>

<speech by="#conroy">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">CONROY</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Government be requested to consider the advisability of constructing at the earliest possible date a line of railway from Bothaville through the districts of Hoopstad, Bultfontein and Boshof to point at or near <span class="col_37-38" refersTo="page_0060"/>Paardeberg Station, on the Kimberley&#x2014;Bloemfontein line, due consideration being given to the interests of the principal villages and diamond mines in the aforementioned districts, and also a line from a point on the Bloemfontein&#x2014;Brandfort line to the Hagenstad Saltpans.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">C. A. VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment. The line in question was sanctioned before the Anglo-Boer war, and would have been built if that regrettable war had not intervened. Under the Crown Colony Administration the line had never been built, because the Administration favoured the towns and neglected the country districts. Since union the line had been built to Bothaville but nothing more was done. It ought now to be built to Paardeberg Station. I also support the other parts of the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nieuwenhuize">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">NIEUWENHUIZE</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a light line of railway from a point on the Delagoa Bay line in the vicinity of Elandshoek Station along the Crocodile River to the farm Sterkspruit No. 757, in order to develop the part of the country known as Schoemanskloof and the neighbouring farms.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The expenditure in connection with this line will be from £25,000 to £30,000. The situation and the value of the land will justify the building of the line. That part of the country is very much out of the way but it is very well suited to the growing of all kinds of produce, especially citrus. There are about 70,000 citrus trees. Nine miles of the light railway was built by a company. The Government is therefore asked to take over the existing line and to build another nine miles to it. It is of great importance that this fertile part of the country should be connected with the main line to Delagoa Bay.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rood">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">ROOD</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment. The production from that part of the country has been doubled during the last two or three years and therefore the line would be fully justified.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#tom_naudé">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">TOM NAUD&#x00C9;</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Pietersburg <i>via</i> Malipsdrift to Middelburg.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The Constitution lays down that the Railways of the country should be managed on business principles, and I know, therefore, that most of the proposed lines will not be sanctioned by the Government. The line from Pietersburg to Middelburg is, however, an exception, and will be quite payable. The line will run through very fertile parts to one of the best parts of the country for the growing of grain; indeed, one of the best parts in the world for grain. There are mountains&#x2014;not mines&#x2014;of asbestos. Cotton can be grown there, and traffic will not be lacking. If the Minister will only visit those parts he would be convinced that it is necessary and that it will be a payable proposition for him and for his Railway Board to put this line on the next programme of construction.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">J. B. WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#muller">

<from>&#x2020;*Gen. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MULLER</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Benoni to Bronkhorstspruit and thence northwards along the Olifants River to Pietersburg, in order to develop the agricultural and mineral resources of those districts.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I am glad to have an opportunity to speak to this motion. A line is wanted from Benoni to Bronkhorstpruit in a northern direction. That part of the country is very wealthy, there is an abundance of water, there are minerals. If this part is developed by means of a railway line, there will be room for many people. I know a man there who grows 2,000 bags of wheat. People can sow and plant right through the winter. It is certain that this line will yield a profit as far as the conveyance of agricultural products are concerned. And then there is such a wealth of minerals in that district, which awaits development. For that purpose a railway line is needed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment. The House has learned with great pleasure that the Government intends to build a line to Zululand. The territory through which this line will run is much larger than Zululand. The country is excellent for agricultural purposes, and there the best marble quarries are found in the Transvaal. The development of that part has been retarded by the want of a railway line. I hope that these few words of the member of Pretoria South (Gen. Muller) and of myself will move the Minister to build this line.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heerden">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">G. C. van HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>I move as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;a line from Tarkastad to Cradock, and a line from Middelburg (Cape) to either Nelspoort, Biesjespoort or Hutchinson.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I may state with regard to the first of these lines that a survey has already been made&#x2014;in fact it was made in the old Cape days. Why construction was not proceeded with, I am unable to state. A line was constructed as a branch line from Bowkers Park to Tarkastad, and I may state that it is the only branch line&#x2014;or rather one of the very few branch lines&#x2014;which pays its way to-day. This was probably done with the object of some day extending the line to the Midlands. With regard to Cradock itself we know that the Government has spent a million pounds in the erection of irrigation works there, and we know that the district has a huge future provided the new Government give it a fair chance. The second line, from Middelburg to some point Hutchinson, etc., will considerably shorten the distance from East London to Cape Town, and will traverse an area which in the future promises to be splendid for grain growing. I appeal to the Minister so soon as possible to send the Railway Board to inspect these areas.</p>

<p>Mr. MOFFAT seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#badenhorst">

<from><span class="col_39-40" refersTo="page_0061"/>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">BADENHORST</person>:</from>

<p>I move as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and that the Government be further requested to consider the advisability of as soon as possible taking over the New Cape Central Railway.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The line which I want is not one which is still to be built. It is a line which is already in existence for years and that has proved to be a payable one. The question was brought up repeatedly in this House and I hope that the Minister will take compassion on the people who ask that the Government should take over the New Cape Central Railway. It is not only a few people who ask this, because the voters&#x2019; rolls show that I am speaking on behalf of 16,000 voters. The existing line, the N.C.C.R., is ruining the farmers. Beautiful apples are grown there, oranges are wasting, and it is useless to produce anything because the railway prohibit them from reaching the markets. For instance, timber is conveyed from Knysna to Mossel Bay for £1 15s., and from Mossel Bay to Riversdale it costs £15. A ticket from Cape Town to Riversdale costs more than £4, and if it is taken out at George, 60 miles further, it costs less. Ministers have repeatedly promised that the matter would be tackled, but nothing more was done. It was nothing but reasonable to expect that the Minister would now concede to the request for taking over this line, which is now a payable one, and if the State takes it over it will pay still better.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brink">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">BRINK</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment. Recent repeated reductions have been made for the conveyance of products for a distance of over 300 miles. The people of George and Knysna have not, however, profited by those reductions because over the N.C.C.R. line they are less than 300 miles from Cape Town, but the high tariffs on that line take away all the profits.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#buirski">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">BUIRSKI</person>:</from>

<p>I have very great pleasure in supporting my hon. friends. I believe this question has been discussed on many occasions by the former member for Swellendam (Mr. Van Eeden), when it had the very sympathetic hearing of this House. I must say that I am very satisfied with the reply from the Minister of Railways and Harbours. The New Cape Central Railway is a railway which should be taken over by the Government, and, personally, I think the time is now ripe when there should be no privately-owned railways in the country. The New Cape Central Railway is undoubtedly one that goes through a most fruitful part of the Union. Farmers in the Robertson and Swellendam districts are doing their utmost to produce, but are seriously handicapped by excessive rates. As a business man who knows the district well, I may state that in some instances we pay three or four hundred per cent. in excess of what the Government charge. For instance, you can send a bag of wheat to Natal for about 2s. 9d., while for a bag of wheat from Swellendam to Worcester we have got to pay 1s. 6d. per bag. I could give many such instances. Even in regard to railway fares: from Swellendam to Cape Town the fare is £4, whereas you can travel from Protem to Cape Town for about 15s. 6d. In moving my amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Protem to Swellendam,&#x201D;</block>

<p>I may say that this is also a line which the Government should take in hand. The name itself is an indication that it was the intention of the Government to take it up because we have the words &#x201C;Pro, tem,&#x201D; which, I believe, stand for &#x201C;for the time being.&#x201D; The time has arrived when I think the Government should seriously consider when they bring in their Bill an extension of the line from Protem to Swellendam. It is only a matter of 27 miles, and I believe it will not cost probably more than £100,000. The country itself is practically level, and it undoubtedly is one of the best for grain production. I can testify that in the immediate vicinity, whereas in former years a matter of 500 bags of oats or grain was produced, to-day the same farmer is producing 6,000 to 7,000 bags. I maintain that that line would serve a portion of the country where it is very desirable to have a railway. I believe the Minister is very sympathetic towards Swellendam and Caledon, and I hope that when the time arrives he will not overlook us.</p>

<p>Dr. DE JAGER seconded the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>I move as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Worcester <i>via</i> Villiersdorp to a point on the Caledon line.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I have much pleasure in moving this amendment, which concerns a line that has had the attention of the Government for years, as is testified by the visit of the Railway Board, the Minister, and the surveying of the line. The line would connect two of the most important agricultural districts in the Union, two districts of almost unlimited agricultural possibilities. It will run along the Doring River and then through the valley of Villiersdorp, which is very well suited to agriculture and stock rearing. Many examples could be quoted of this, but it is not necessary for me to do so because it is a recognised fact. The enormous development of that part of the country during the last few years redounds to the credit of the inhabitants and is also an honour for the agricultural population of the Western Province. The growing of fruit in the Villiersdorp district has made such vast strides during the last few years, that it is felt that that part of the country cannot go on at that rate unless a line is built. The growing of fruit has to be encouraged, and it cannot be done unless a line is built. The proposed line will also open the big markets of the north to the districts of Caledon, Bredasdorp and Swellendam. I support the member for Swellendam (Mr. Buirski) in his motion for a line from Protem to Swellendam. The time has arrived to give more attention to the southwestern districts, which are free from all kinds of agricultural pests and are suitable for all branches of agricultural development.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from><span class="col_41-42" refersTo="page_0062"/>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">J. B. WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>They only want a little manure!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>During the past year the Caledon District produced a million bags of grain. The sheep in the district number 220,000, and the district is very suitable for the growing of fruit and vegetables. I do not want to say anything against the needs of other districts, but I do want to say, that there are few districts which have the advantages of this one. If ever a line was built in the interests of South Africa, it is the line from Sir Lowry Pass to Caledon and Bredasdorp. Caledon is one of the finest coastal belts of the country. There is a great deal of traffic from Bot River to the coast. During the first part of the year 10,000 people were conveyed by motor from Bot River.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I have great pleasure in seconding the amendment moved by the hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige). To-day already you have a motor traffic between Worcester and Caledon, Caledon and Hermanus, a motor traffic which is carrying a great many passengers in competition with the railway. If the railway line which the hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige) suggests were built there it would carry not only those passengers but a great many more. Not only is the area the most productive but you have the people there too, the people settled on the land. We are talking a great deal about closer settlement. There is no part more suitable for closer settlement than this area. The production would be increased in that area ten-fold if this were done.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>I move (on behalf of Dr. Rood), as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Karino to Witrivier.&#x201D;</block>

<p>It gives me much pleasure to move this amendment because the settlement on the Wit River is of great importance to the Low Veld of the Transvaal. More than £500,000 was spent on citrus growing and other branches of farming in a short time in those parts. Over 11,000 morgen are under irrigation and a considerable portion is under cotton, which thrives there. The oranges which are grown are intended for export, and if there is no means of conveyance citrus growing cannot be made payable in those parts.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#te_water">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">TE WATER</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">J. H. B. WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>I move (on behalf of Mr. Keyter), as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Ficksburg to Senekal, with due regard to the interests of Rosendal.&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#cilliers">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">CILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">A. I. E. DE VILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Kendal Station to Breyten Station.&#x201D;</block>

<p>This line runs through one of the best portions of the country. A lot of mealies are grown there but at present it is not a payable business on account of the absence of a railway. This want is greatly felt, with the result that not a quarter of the mealies is grown there which might be grown.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#waterston">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">WATERSTON</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;a line to Sutherland, and an extension of the line at present ending at Ceres.&#x201D;</block>

<p>This is a part of the country which has no railway at all. The town of Sutherland is 72 miles from the nearest railway station. All the other lines are asked for parts of the country which are served to some extent. All the members say that the lines they want will pay. I hope that that is true, but my constituents are also taxpayers. My constituency consists of four fiscal divisions. Two of them, Ceres and Sutherland, have an area of over 2,000,000 morgen, and there are only five miles of railway. If this little line can be extended from Ceres to Calvinia, the public will be very glad, but they will even be satisfied if it cannot be extended quite so far.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">J. S. F. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and an extension of the line from Somerset Strand to Gordon&#x2019;s Bay.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I think this is one of the shortest lines on record. Certainly it is the shortest of all those which have been submitted here to-day. It is only four miles long. It is a very important line. As we know, brevity is the soul of wit. It is also a recommendation when building a railway. It will probably therefore recommend itself to the Minister, as he must naturally deal with these matters with some regard for the expense that is likely to be incurred. The extension I propose is a necessary extension of the present line which goes to Somerset Strand. I would put it to the Minister that he should find out the enormous amount of holiday traffic which comes down there. If he did that he would see that these additional four miles would bring in a very handsome revenue. Last session I presented a petition in connection with this matter and from the signatures it could be seen that people representing almost every village and town in South Africa came down to this place and desired this line. Without the railway there is a great deal of inconvenience. For instance, they have to bring goods from Somerset Strand to Gordon&#x2019;s Bay by wagon at a cost of 6d. per 100 lbs. Passengers have to continue the journey in taxis, paying 4s. each for the return journey. Really this is almost a necessary addition to the Strand line. There is a very fine water supply from Steenbras, and there are some developments going on by which the three culverts over which the Steenbras pipeline runs are being bridged so that the pipeline track can be used as a high level road, with the result that you will soon have a very fine road opening up the whole of the face of <span class="col_43-44" refersTo="page_0063"/>the mountain side, and if you have the extension of the railway to Gordon&#x2019;s Bay later on you would probably be able to carry the railway along the face of the mountain to serve the Steenbras reservoir and shorten the route to Hermanus and other resorts. I believe surveys of the line have been made, so the Minister will know exactly what the costs will be. I think that at one time the Cape Explosive Works considered the building of a railway along the face of the mountain. As far as one can understand, there seems to be no reason whatever against the construction of the line, except possibly that Government does not want to go in for a new railway programme at this early date. The extension to Gordon&#x2019;s Bay, however, will not be expensive, as the road is level and the increased traffic to the seaside resort of Gordon&#x2019;s Bay would handsomely pay the Government. One of the advantages of this place is that it has beautiful fishing. I do not know whether there are some members who have not yet enjoyed the pleasure of fishing, but if there are, I would advise them to go in for fishing, that being the best pastime for a weary politician.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment. I forgive the member of Cape Town&#x2014;Hanoverstreet (Mr. Alexander) for not consulting me, because he has brought forward the matter in such an able manner. I hope that the Minister will take the matter into serious consideration, and I assure him, if he does so and comes to Stellenbosch again, he would have a better reception there than he had last time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">P. W. LE R. VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;an extension of the Nylstroom&#x2014;Vaalwater line, and an extension of the Pienaarrivier&#x2014;Tuinplaats line.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Several speakers have advocated their lines on the ground of more development and greater production. More development and greater production are very important, but a large population has a greater claim. In the North of the Transvaal there is room for a bigger population, as Rhodes said. In Waterberg, a district as large as one-eighth of the Transvaal, there is room for a large number of people. If we only get a railway, the population will increase. I welcome the proposed railway to Zululand, but that line does not run through such a rich territory as the one in my district. This line can be built very cheaply and the country is admirably suited to every branch of agriculture. There is a small line about 20 miles in length which is served by a Dalton tractor. That is the only line for developing the country. Under these circumstances I hope that my district will have the attention of the Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sampson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">SAMPSON</person>:</from>

<p>second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Benoni, or the vicinity thereof, to Bronkhorstspruit and thence to the Bushveld.&#x201D; Bushveld.&#x201D;</block>

<p>This motion is the same as that of the member for Pretoria South (Gen. Muller), and I hope that the double appearance of it on the agenda is a good omen for the carrying out of the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy_speaker">

<from>*The <person refersTo="#hansard_za">DEPUTY-SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The amendment Japses, because the mover has already seconded another amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Am I to understand that the hon. member for Pretoria District (North) (Mr. Oost) is not moving his amendment?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member has already spoken&#x2014;he has seconded an amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>With the permission of the hon. member, I will take his place and move his amendment. I am very pleased to see that there is quite a number of members who are-beginning to realize the importance of Benoni in the scheme of things in South Africa. I hope the new Minister of Railways, who I hope-will be an old Minister later on, will realize the necessity of looking upon Benoni with more encouraging eyes than it has been regarded in the past. I move as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a<i></i> line from Benoni, or the vicinity thereof, to Bronkhorstspruit and thence to the Bushveld.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Now, my argument all along in the Houselias been that we should not go in for a scheme* of railway development based entirely on the pounds, shillings and pence point of view, and watching the ledger, as has been done by the former Minister of Railways and Harbours, but that we should look upon railways as a developing factor&#x2014;something which opens up the country&#x2014;and I think it is becoming more and more realized that there is wanting in what is known as the back-veld&#x2014;I see my hon. friend over there calls it Bushveld&#x2014;something to furnish the residents thereof an opportunity of getting their commodities to market The largest market is undoubtedly Johannesburg, and the easiest method of reaching Johannesburg from the east is via Benoni. We thank the hon. member who has conceived a railway from, Benoni to Bronkhorstspruit and thence into the Bushveld, and via Bronkhorstspruit up along the Olifants River, and it would be a tremendous developing, factor in that portion of the country and to people agriculturally inclined and industrially occupied. I understand this is a very highly mineralized district along the Olifants River and the building of a line there will redound not only to the credit but to the ultimate advantage of the whole country, and therefore I most wholeheartedly support the suggestion that this railway should be suggested to the Minister of Railways and Harbours, to Bronkhorstspruit and then up via the Olifants River to the Bushveld.</p>

<p>Mr. PIROW seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Douglas to Postmasburg, with due <span class="col_45-46" refersTo="page_0064"/>consideration to the interests of the intermediate towns.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I would like to say a word for civilization in the distant North-West. Up till now the North-West was the step-child of the Government, but I hope that in this matter also there will now be a change, as the North-West needs assistance. I recommend that this line be placed on the next programme of railway construction. In those parts, north of the Vaal River, there is not much opportunity for social intercourse and the progress of the community is thereby retarded. There are great opportunities for agricultural development, but I base my claim also on other considerations. Apart from agricultural development, there are good prospects in respect of mining. There are asbestos mines, but very little has as yet been done. The asbestos mines have to be worked on a much larger scale, and there is also a lot of iron. For all this a railway is urgently needed. Near to Postmasburg there is a promising diamond mine, and a railway line is needed for further development. The rural population have no means of conveying their products to the market, for instance, to Kimberley, and consequently there is no encouragement for cultivation. Griqualand West means a great deal for stock rearing and the meat production of the country, and it should be the aim of the Government to further the interests of Griqualand rather than the adjacent districts. But more about this later. It ought to be our aim to assist civilization in those parts, and therefore I hope that this House will take the amendment into favourable consideration.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#munnik">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MUNNIK</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#vermooten">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">VERMOOTEN</person>:</from>

<p>I move as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and an extension of the line from Maclear to Matatiele.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The line is already built to Franklin, in Natal. Now there is still an opening of 80 miles between the Gape and Natal. This link has to be supplied in order to connect the Cape system with that of Natal. A beginning can be made with the line to Matatiele. This will be the first step in effecting a connection which is so urgently required. The line will run through a very productive part of the country, which will be greatly developed by a railway connection.</p>

<p>Mr. STEYTLER seconded the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#gilson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">GILSON</person>:</from>

<p>moved, as an amendment to this amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end &#x201C;or alternatively from Kokstad to Umtata.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The House has only to consider the desirability of an immediate connection between the Cape and Natal.</p>

<p>Mr. ROBINSON seconded the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">W. B. DE VILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and an extension of the Kimberley&#x2014;Wintersrush line to Kuruman.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The railway has been built from Kimberley to Wintersrush, but it does not go any further and therefore it means very little. The line has to be extended to Kuruman, which is 160 miles from the nearest station. There are the Rooibergen, where plenty of minerals are found. If ever there was a district which needed a railway for development, it is Kuruman. In 1920 I brought in a similar motion, but unfortunately the last Government did not see the urgency of the line and nothing was done. The Minister of Railways and Harbours has now paid a visit co the district and also another Minister, and I hope that Kuruman will now get its line.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fordham">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">FORDHAM</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mostert">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MOSTERT</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;a line from Klaver via Kokenaap to Grootvlei, and a line from Klaver via Van Rhynsdorp to Calvinia.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Many lines are being asked for, but I am in the peculiar position of living in the North-West, a territory of 26,000 square miles without railways. It is 270 miles from Klaver to the Orange River, and from the Orange River to the railway in German West it is another 80. If somebody gets sick at Namies he will die before a doctor can be called in. The previous Government consistently neglected this part. Over £900,000 has been spent on the irrigation works at Klaver. In 1920 the Government lost £600,000 on imported wheat. This could have been prevented if the portion suitable for growing wheat in the North-West had been developed. A sum of £1,000,000 is sent out of the country every year for the purchase of wheat. The culture of wheat is therefore of more importance to the country than the growing of cotton.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment. It is quite true that the whole of the North-West is one big blank on the railway map. The whole of Bushmanland is without a railway, and I therefore support the motion for building a line in this part of the country. The line can then later be extended to Gordonia. All the people will support such a line because it will enable them not only to convey their stock by train to the market, but also in times of drought, such as the present one, when they have to move their stock over great distances, when they lose hundreds of them on the road, a railway will greatly diminish their losses and prevent their impoverishment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#marwick">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MARWICK</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;a line from Richmond (Natal) <i>via</i> Rosebank to a suitable junction on the Mid-Illovo line, an extension of the line from Eston to a point on the South Coast line between Illovo River and Amanzimtoti, a line from Richmond to Ixopo <i>via</i> the Umkomanzi Valley, and a broadening of the Mid-Illovo line from Umlaas Road to the standard gauge.&#x201D;</block>

<p><span class="col_47-48" refersTo="page_0065"/>In supporting the amendment standing in my name I shall have little to say, not because there is not a great deal that could be said, but because I take it that the object of this great offensive on the railway question is that a large omnibus resolution should be passed this afternoon. I must say, however, that the area which would be traversed by the lines proposed in my amendment is an area which is the most productive in the most productive Province of the Union and that the farms along the proposed lines of railway are held by progressive farmers whose flocks and herds and products have been rendered famous by their prize-winning throughout every show of the Union. These farmers are each one of them two-fisted one hundred per cent. men who are only waiting for a railway for the most complete development of this area. I commend the resolution to the approval of the House.</p>

<p>Brig.-Gen. ARNOTT seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">J. J. M. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Ladismith to Calitzdorp.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Everybody knows the fertility of that part of the country, 80,000 morgen of which is under irrigation, but this is of little avail if there is no railway connection. From a business point of view, it is essential to complete the connecting link of 32 miles between Ladismith and Calitzdorp, as the line from Oudtshoorn to Calitzdorp and from Touws River to Ladismith will probably be completed next year. This will considerably shorten the distance between Cape Town and Port Elizabeth. This will also assist the Government in its attempt to solve the poor white problem. There are between 700 and 800 poor whites from every part of the country working on the line, which is now being constructed there, and these people are living in the hope that a start will be made on the new line. It will also be in the interest of the Government because it will enable it to take over the New Cape Central Railway on more favourable terms.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#le_roux">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">S. P. LE ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment. It is no new railway which is being asked for. This line was on the programme of the Government on a previous occasion, but for certain reasons it was then decided not to proceed with the construction. The previous Minister said he could not grant the line from Calitzdorp to Ladismith because that would be unfair competition with the New Cape Central Railway in the coastal traffic. I am convinced, however, that we have no such moral or legal obligation towards the New Cape Central Railway. The railway from Touws River to Ladismith will not pay if the line is not extended to Oudtshoorn, because in the latter case the passengers will travel from Cape Town to Oudtshoorn and Port Elizabeth. This line runs through important districts. The Minister has to take this into consideration, as also the fact, that this is a necessary and almost indispensable link between the two railway systems.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bremer">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">BREMER</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;a line from Somerset East <i>via</i> Pearston to Graaff-Reinet and Murraysburg, and a line to Aberdeen.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The line I ask for is one which will develop the Central Karroo. There are large and fruitful farms which require development. Moreover, this line will connect the Western with the Eastern railway system, which will be of great importance for the trade between the East and the West. I hope that the Minister will take it into favourable consideration.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fick">

<from>*Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">FICK</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smit">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">SMIT</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;a line from Klerksdorp to Ottosdal, and a line from Klerksdorp to Coligny.&#x201D;</block>

<p>This matter needs no recommendation. The previous Government was so convinced of the importance of this line, that it sent the General Manager of the Railways during a certain election with my opponent to take a survey of the stations. At the last election the former Minister of the Interior even indirectly promised these lines at a meeting of my opponent. It is unnecessary, therefore, to say anything more on the matter.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naude">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">A. S. NAUDE</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#boshoff">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">BOSHOFF</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a branch line from Ventersdorp to Klerksdorp.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I think that the line contained in my motion is one of the most urgent. The line will run through one of the greatest grain districts. This district to-day suffers a great deal from drought and locusts. Some of the people there can hardly earn a living. If the line is built now, some of these people can earn something. It is an urgent necessity. The Minister ought to take this in consideration. Besides, the line will be a payable proposition.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mcmenamin">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">McMENAMIN</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">H. S. GROBLER</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Bethal to Middelburg (Transvaal).&#x201D;</block>

<p>A survey has already been made of this line. The line is badly required for the agricultural development of the district and it will also be a great convenience for the towns and villages in that part of the country if the line is built, which I hope will be the case, and it will also be a great incentive to the development of the coal mines. I know that the members of the new Government are acquainted with those parts. They have also held out hopes to the population that the line will be built, and I am <span class="col_49-50" refersTo="page_0066"/>therefore very hopeful that my amendment will be accepted by the Government and the line built.</p>

<p>Mr. NICHOLLS seconded the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">E. H. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a connecting line from Prince Albert Road or other suitable point to Vondeling or other suitable point, in order to establish direct connection between the Western Karroo and Port Elizabeth.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I do not want to draw comparisons with the other parts, where lines are asked The line which I propose is, however, not only a local one, but one for a large territory of from five to six districts and a great connecting link between East and West. It is absurd that there is no connecting link between the main lines from Cape Town and Port Elizabeth except by means of a private line, the New Cape Central Railway. There is no connection for a distance of over 400 miles between Worcester and De Aar. The Western Karroo is a great wool producing country, and the great market for their product is Port Elizabeth. It is therefore important to send this by the shortest possible route. A line from Beaufort West to Aberdeen would possibly be more suitable, but the country through which that line will run is thinly populated, and the contention of the Railway Board is, that no new line should be built through a part where there is not sufficient local traffic; while in the country east of Prince Albert Road much grain, lucerne, beans and fruit are grown. I was surprised to discover how fertile that part of the country is. If the requested line is built, it will run through a fertile country where there is a possibility for great development. Then there is also the question of a connection between East and West. This is a result of the old struggle of years ago. There were interests in Cape Town that wanted to keep us apart, but the people of the Midlands want to, trade and to be connected with both. Therefore, they favour this line, which, if built, will be one of the most important in the whole of the Cape Province.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#william_macintosh">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="#hansard_za">WILLIAM MACINTOSH</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment, and hope the House has taken due note of the very weighty arguments brought forward by the mover.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and an electric line from Johannesburg to Pretoria, in order to provide work for the unemployed.&#x201D;</block>

<p>My motion is slightly different, as I do not ask for the usual railway, but for the electrification of a certain line. It was not my intention, during this short session, to ask for this railway. I have seen, however, that other members apply for lines, and as the direct line between Johannesburg and the Capital of South Africa is of vital importance, and as it will have to be built some day, I have decided to ask for it now. I sympathize with the Minister, because so many new lines are being asked for. The Minister is still young, however, and I am sure he will do his utmost. It is asserted that there is already a line between Johannesburg and Pretoria, but the new line will run through such an important part that it will be quite worth the while building it, and according to other members, there will always be enough to do for the existing line. Another good purpose that this line will serve is, that it will give employment to people at present out of work. The Government daily receives a large number of applications for work. Reference has been made to the solution of the problem of unemployment, and I am sure that the carrying out of my motion will give work to a large number of unemployed on the Rand. But another question arises: why should it be an electric railway? Experience has shown that the ordinary railway between Cape Town and Simonstown could not adequately cope with the traffic. There will have to be another line, and therefore I think that it is desirable that we should proceed immediately with the construction of an electric railway between Johannesburg and Pretoria. There is a great amount of traffic and the railway will open a very fruitful portion of the country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#papenfus">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">PAPENFUS</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment. I think the Minister of Railways and Harbours will pause and consider deeply before giving his sanction, or his blessing, to the construction of any new line. According to the last Bulletin of the General Manager of Railways, out of forty-nine lines only nine show a surplus, the remaining forty disclosing deficits. I have very great pleasure in seconding the proposal. You have here the necessary requisites for the construction of a payable line. You have by far the largest city in the Union, and the executive capital of the Union quite isolated from any other place, but in close proximity to one another. By the present line we have to make a deviation of eleven miles, and in the very short distance between Johannesburg and Pretoria, of about 35 miles, you have to make this long detour, and lose time, and pay dearly for it. The result is that there is very strong competition by way of motor traffic, and if these conditions are allowed to continue, the time will not be far distant, especially when the road is put in that condition of repair in which it should be placed, that the railway will carry comparatively little passenger traffic, because people will not only save time but money by travelling by motor. Here you have two large centres of population, and the intervening country between Johannesburg and Pretoria is of a highly productive character. The Minister has recognized the claims of the residents to the north of Johannesburg for facilities, inasmuch as he has granted them a bus service, but it has had a somewhat chequered career. A little more than a year ago, I proposed a resolution of a similar character to the one now before the House, and I then had the support of fourteen or fifteen members. The then Minister of Railways and Harbours was so impressed <span class="col_51-52" refersTo="page_0067"/>with the weight and strength of the case that he accepted the motion. He had investigations made and sent me a copy of the report of his experts. This report was not of a wholly encouraging character, not because any argument put by me was refuted, but because the building of an electric line would entail very heavy expense. In my opinion the expenses incurred would not be commensurate with the great advantages to be derived. I am not enamoured of the way in which my hon. friend has brought forward this motion, because he has based his whole argument on this: &#x201C;That it would provide work for the unemployed.&#x201D; Well, it would to a certain extent; but there is need for this railway apart from that. If the Transvaal had not gone into Union, there can be no question that this line would have been long since built, and I would urge the hon. Minister to visit the scene and the people concerned would be very glad to take him round. At Pretoria he would see to the north the richest diamond mine in the world, and in the south he would see the richest goldfields in the world; in the east by far one of the largest coal deposits in the world. Now I do not want to enlarge upon this matter, but I hope that the hon. Minister will take it very seriously into consideration, and I am satisfied that he has before him a good sound business proposition. There is no doubt that if this line is built we shall have within a short time one endless line of settlements and a contented, prosperous, happy population between Pretoria and Johannesburg.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">STRUBEN</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment, to add at the end of the motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;And a line from Alexandria to a junction on the Grahamstown&#x2014;Port Alfred line.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I do feel that in the building of railways in the country that sufficient attention has not been paid to the coastal belt of the sub-continent. I believe that the coastal belt in future is going to carry a very dense agricultural population, and the railway I am asking for to-day is essential to such development and was sanctioned in 1906. It is really an extension of the line from Alexandria to a point on the existing line from Grahamstown to Port Alfred. We do not say where it shall actually go, but I would ask the hon. Minister to bear in mind that any line which is sanctioned should go where we have the greatest present and potential production. The coastal belt from Alexandria to East London&#x2014;and I speak from full knowledge&#x2014;is the most productive of our Union. We have heard of the necessity of a larger population on the land and I personally have ventilated that subject, and I would say that of all parts of the country I have been through&#x2014;in that section of the country lies the best chance of successfully settling men who can run small farms It has a wonderful climate and soil and excellent general conditions&#x2014;a freedom from pests and locusts, and immunity from drought; so that this line is well worthy of consideration. I believe reports have been made by the Railway Board, and I have good reason to believe that the reports are favourable to the building of this line. In moving that this railway be given due consideration by the Minister, I feel that I am on very strong ground.</p>

<p>Maj. BALLANTINE seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Peddie to East London.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The amendment I have to move follows very naturally on that moved by the last speaker. As he has informed the House, a line was sanctioned nearly twenty years ago, and from. Barkly Bridge to the Grahamstown&#x2014;Port Alfred line, and a continuation from Peddie to East London, follows as a natural course. I am only sorry that in moving this amendment I am not assisted by a large scale map because if I were, hon. members would see at once that the construction of this line would appeal to them, even from geographical considerations. It may interest hon. members to know that Fort Peddie was one of the earliest outposts of white civilization in South Africa, and it has remained an outpost. It has never been connected with the main body as it should have been. There are many reasons why this railway should be constructed. Historically, it is entitled to it. Peddie existed and its people were doing useful work when places to which lines have since been constructed were not even geographical expressions. The construction of this line would not only benefit the inhabitants, but the Union generally. It will pass through a very rich coast belt indeed, and as the last speaker pointed out, it produces things most useful not only to the Union, but important for our export trade. The area through which this line will pass was one of the great wheat producing districts in the past. We still import one million bags of wheat, and experiments are being conducted which may restore this district as a great wheat producing portion of the Union. We have that fine thriving and improving port of East London which is not as well served as it might be by its Hinterland, and before long a high level bridge will be required to carry the traffic from the west to the east bank, and this bridge might be considered with the inevitable railway from East London to Peddie. If the hon. Minister will look up the records of his Department he will find very favourable reports from the Railway Board of this district. The Board has visited the district more than once, and this shows that the members of the Railway Board did not turn down the proposition. Although the reports of the Board are confidential, it would appear that the Railway Board must have been favourably impressed with the possibilities of this district. This railway will in addition serve one of the greatest beauty spots of this country&#x2014;the Keiskamma Mouth. If this line is built it will give a great impetus to the cotton production of this country. There are a great many sheltered valleys where cotton could be grown successfully to the great benefit of the producer, and it is up to us to-day to do all in our power <span class="col_53-54" refersTo="page_0068"/>to rescue the farmers of this country from their present hard lot, and to encourage the growing of cotton by providing reasonable means of transport. I hope that this amendment will commend itself to the House and that the line will be placed in the forefront of the programme of lines to be constructed in the immediate future.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rider">

<from>Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">RIDER</person>:</from>

<p>I am impressed with the local patriotism so eloquently expressed by hon. members from several centres of the Union; but in this imperfect work of railway construction I have discovered a missing link&#x2014;a missing link not in anthropology but in the Union railway system; showing lines like fishing rods. I consider the construction of this line most necessary as giving access to an exceedingly fertile region. I know most parts of the Union, but I know no part which is so entitled as this part to an extension from East London to Peddie and later on to connect with the line to Alexandria. I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fourie">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">FOURIE</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Somerset East via Pearston and Jansenville to Klipplaat.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The whole population of that part of the country is in favour of connecting line as contained in my motion and there is no need for me to say much on the matter. I am sure that the Minister will immediately send out the Railway Board to investigate the line and recommend its construction.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hugo">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">HUGO</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Jammersdrift via Hobhouse in a northerly direction.to a point on the Bloemfontein&#x2014;Modderpoort line.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I would like to say a few words in support of my motion. I do so almost formally, because it seems that the bringing up of motions asking for railway construction has become practically a farce. I wonder how many of these lines will be recommended by the Railway Board, if the members of the Board have listened to the speeches which were made here this afternoon. The line which is asked for in my motion is one which has become necessary from the existing line, and I bring in this motion with new hope now that there is a new Minister at the head of affairs.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">M. L. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#du_toit">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">DU TOIT</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Krom Rivier Station to a point as near as possible to Loxton and thence to Fraserburg.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I agree with the previous speakers that, as far as railways are concerned, the North-West has been neglected. There are practically no railways, and I hope that the Government will give that part of the country the necessary railways for its development.</p>

<p>Rev. Mr. HATTINGH seconded the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deane">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">DEANE</person>:</from>

<p>I move (on behalf of Mr. Nel), as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and that the Government be further requested to take into consideration the question of the taking over of the Utrecht private railway line and a line already surveyed extending from Sandymount to Bruyns Hills&#x2014;Sandymount branch line.&#x201D;</block>

<p>This line was built in 1909 by a coal mining company, who had the right to fix their own tariff. The condition was that the Government would take over the line after 25 years. This line retards the progress of the district&#x2014;paradoxical as it may seem&#x2014;as the tariffs are 50 per cent. to 100 per cent. higher than those of the State Railways, and in spite of this the line is not worked at a profit. I also move etc., &#x201C;and a line from Sandymount.&#x201D; This is a short line which will assist in developing a part of the country where much wattle is grown where there are a large number of small farmers. This line, which is only an extension of an existing line, will undoubtedly be a payable proposition.</p>

<p>Mr. HENDERSON seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#collins">

<from>&#x2020;*Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">COLLINS</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and an extension of the line from Lothair through Swaziland to Goba, and a line from Oogies or Kendal through Hendrina to Breyten or Estantia, and also a line from Ermelo to Standerton.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I am sorry for the Minister of Railways and Harbours, who has to listen to all these motions. The first line asked by me has a past. It is of international significance. The Portuguese allege that the Union has not carried out its part of the mutual agreement. The cause of this difficulty is because Swaziland is not a part of the Union. It ought to be part of the Union. The proposed line from Oogies or Kendal via Hendrina has already been investigated, and the report is in the hands of the Railway Board. The great possibilities of coal in this district are well known. Moreover, that is a flourishing part of the country for agriculture, and it deserves encouragement and assistance. The country produces a great deal, but the people do not know how to get their products away to the market. They need the assistance of a railway. The line from Ermelo to Standerton runs through a rich agricultural country. I have therefore much pleasure in moving this motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment. I am sure that every member who sees this district, will agree with the motion. Not only are there large layers of coal, but the railway will open a backward part of the <span class="col_55-56" refersTo="page_0069"/>Union. No district can progress if there is no railway for the conveyance of its products.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#haynes">

<from>&#x2020; *Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">HAYNES</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Middelburg to Rooikraal <i>via</i> Blinkwater.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I will say nothing of the line from Bethal, as the member for Bethal (Lt.-Col. H. S. Grobler) has already spoken on that. The rest of the line from Middelburg has already been surveyed and the report is favourable. The soil is good, the climate excellent, and all the circumstances are favourable to cotton growing. If the district is developed, there will be room for a large number of settlers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#christie">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">CHRISTIE</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brits">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">BRITS</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and a line from Potchefstroom to a suitable point on the Johannesburg&#x2014;Vereeniging <i>(via</i> Langlaagte) line.&#x201D;</block>

<p>My predecessor has already explained the importance of this line. This part of the country is one of the most important along the line. Potchefstroom is one of the finest mealiegrowing districts in the Union, and this line will run through the heart of this territory. But it is not only suited to the growing of mealies, sheep rearing and the cultivation of fruit, it is also rich in minerals.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mullineux">

<from>Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MULLINEUX</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#richards">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">RICHARDS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;a line connecting up the Greytown&#x2014;Maritzburg branch line at Mizpah with the main line at Mooi River and with a connection to Muden, and a broadening of the Weenen branch line from narrow gauge to standard gauge.&#x201D;</block>

<p>This is a very necessary line because it not only shortens the line between the large wattlegrowing and timber areas and the Rand, but would also avoid a big drop into the valley at Maritzburg and up the hill again. It is a line that has already been reported upon, surveyed and inspected, and brought to the notice of the Government on many occasions. It is one of those lines which has already commended itself to the Government, and the more they have inspected it the more they have been convinced of its necessity, but the less they have done. It is also a line which has been anticipated for many years, and hundreds of thousands of pounds have been spent in the Muden Valley in irrigation for the development of orange growing. At present these products, which are being exported to England, have to be carried 19 miles by road up a very high gradient. I hope that the Minister will give this line his early attention. It may interest the Government to mention that a portion of my constituents who are deeply concerned in this line are very strong supporters of the Government. There is another amendment I wish to move, namely, the broadening of the narrow gauge line between Estcourt and Weenen. This is a line that is subject to all the disabilities inseparable from transhipping from the broad gauge to the narrow gauge. It has outgrown its capacity and should be soon converted from the narrow to the broad gauge.</p>

<p>Mr. LENNOX seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To add at the end of the motion &#x201C;and an extension of the Milnerton line from Tygerburg to Klipheuvel <i>via</i> Durbanville.</block>

<p>I believe that if the railway were extended to Klipheuvel it would not only mean a greater development in that area but it would also be a source of revenue to the Government.</p>

<p>Mr. SWART seconded the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I welcome the discussion which has taken place, as it showed that the need for railway extension is a real and great one. It is certain that some members have exaggerated the claims of their districts, but the discussion has shown, notwithstanding, what a great need for railways there is. I am particularly pleased to have seen Mr. Jagger follow the debate throughout the afternoon. In the last three weeks the Government has received so many complaints from all sides of the bad state of affairs in the Union, and therefore it is very refreshing to hear the other side of the story and to learn that there is still prosperity in the country. I assume that much that has been said is quite true. It remains a fact, however, that there is a great need for railways, and the Administration can do a great deal to make provision for this want. I promise the House that the Railway Board will carefully consider all the representations which have been made, and I can assure members that information has already been secured by the Board in regard to many of the proposed new lines. The new lines asked for, however, without including the electrification of the Pretoria&#x2014;Johannesburg line, or the taking over of the Cape Central line, will mean the building of 3,254 miles of line, which will cost about £3,400 per mile, or, in round figures, 14 millions, while, including the cost of the electrification and the taking over of the Cape Central line, the total cost will be 18 millions. I am in favour of the taking over of the New Cape Central Railway, and steps will be taken to achieve this at the earliest possible moment. At the same time this can only be done along strict business lines and by due consideration being given to the interests of the taxpayer, and while the administration of the Cape Central takes up the attitude which it is doing at present, nothing can be done. The Government is in favour of doing everything possible to serve the needs of the pioneers of the country&#x2019;s civilization, who in the past had often been neglected in order to serve various populous centres. I am rather disappointed in not being able to promise an extension of the railway system, but I want to give the House the assurance that the Government <span class="col_57-58" refersTo="page_0070"/>thoroughly realizes the need of extending the means of conveyance in the country. The Government realizes that not enough has been done for the distant parts of the country, where the pioneers are trying to make a living. When a new programme of construction is made up the interests of those parts will receive special consideration. The Railway Administration is in favour of extending the motor service to various parts of the country without being primarily concerned with the question whether or not such a service will pay. The Government is greatly concerned with the necessity of placing producers into touch with the markets, so that products which to-day are often unpayable might in future become profitable means of livelihood of farmers in outlying districts. In connection with the conveyance of cream, milk and butter, the farmers require an easy, cheap and quick means of conveyance in order to place their products on the market, which would otherwise be wasted. To-day there is a great deal of wastage because the farmers are too far from the markets. Where the Government is unable to grant the request contained in some or other motion, it is prepared to take into favourable consideration a proposal for the establishment of a motor service. Regarding the Springbok Flats light railway, I may say that if the light railway line in those parts proves a success the Government will give favourable consideration to the question of extending the principle of those light lines. The Government in the circumstances is prepared to accept the motion and amendments before the House for consideration to be given to the building of the lines asked for.</p>

<p>The amendments were put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Motion, as amended, put and agreed to, viz.&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Government be requested to consider the advisability of constructing at the earliest possible date a line of railway from Bothaville through the districts of Hoopstad, Bultfontein and Boshof to a point at or near Paardeberg Station, on the Kimberley&#x2014;Bloemfontein line, due consideration being given to the interests of the principal villages and diamond mines in the aforementioned districts; a line from a point on the Bloemfontein&#x2014;Brandfort line to the Hagenstad Saltpans; a light line from a point on the Delagoa Bay line in the vicinity of Elandshoek Station along the Crocodile River to the farm Sterkspruit No. 757, in order to develop the part of the country known as Schoemanskloof and the neighbouring farms; a line from Pietersburg <i>via</i> Malipsdrift to Middelburg; a line from Benoni to Bronkhorstspruit and thence northwards along the Olifants River to Pietersburg, in order to develop the agricultural and mineral resources of those districts; a line from Tarkastad to Cradock; a line from Middelburg (Cape) to either Nelspoort, Biesjespoort or Hutchinson; a line from Middelburg to Rooikraal <i>via</i> Blinkwater; a line from Karino to Witrivier; a line from Worcester <i>via</i> Villiersdorp to a point on the Caledon line; a line from Ficksburg to Senekal, with due regard to the interests of Rosendal; a line from Kendal Station to Breyton Station; a line to Sutherland; an extension of the line at present ending at Ceres; an extension of the line from Somerset Strand to Gordon&#x2019;s Bay; an extension of the Nylstroom&#x2014;Vaalwater line; an extension of the Pienaarrivier&#x2014;Tuinplaats line; a line from Benoni, or the vicinity thereof, to Bronkhorstspruit and thence to the Bushveld; a line from Protem to Swellendam; a line from Douglas to Postmasburg, with due consideration to the interests of the intermediate towns; an extension of the line from Maclear to Matatiele, or alternatively, from Kokstad to Umtata; an extension of the Kimberley&#x2014;Wintersrush line to Kuruman; a line from Klaver <i>via.</i> Kokenaap to Grootvlei; a line from Klaver <i>via</i> Van Rhynsdorp to Calvinia; a line from Richmond (Natal) <i>via</i> Rosebank to a suitable junction of the Mid-Illovo line; an extension of the line from Eston to a point on the South Coast line between Illovo River and Amanzimtoti; a line from Richmond to Ixopo <i>via</i> the Umkomanzi Valley; a broadening of the Mid-lllovo line from Umlaas Road to the standard gauge; a line from Ladismith to Calitzdorp; a line from Somerset East <i>via</i> Pearston to Graaff-Reinet and Munrraysburg, and a line to Aberdeen; a line from Klerksdorp to Ottosdal; a line from Klerksdorp to Coligny; a branch line from Ventersdorp to Klerksdorp; a line from Bethal to Middelburg (Transvaal); a connecting line from Prince Albert Road or other suitable point, to Vondeling or other suitable point, in order to establish direct connection between the Western Karroo and Port Elizabeth; a line from Alexandria to a junction on the Grahamstown&#x2014;Port Alfred line; a line from Peddie to East London; a line from Somerset East <i>via</i> Pearston and Jansenville to Klipplaats; a line from Jammersdrift <i>via</i> Hobhouse in a northerly direction to a point on the Bloemfontein&#x2014;Modderpoort line; a line from Krom Rivier Station to a point as near as possible to Loxton and thence to Fraserburg; an extension of the line from Lothair through Swaziland to Goba; a line from Oogies or Kendal through Hendrina to Breyten or Estantia; a line from Ermelo to Standerton; a line already surveyed extending from Sandymount to Bruyns Hill&#x2014;Sandymount branch line; a line from Potchefstroom to a suitable point on the Johannesburg&#x2014;Vereeniging <i>(via</i> Langlaagte) line; a line connecting up the Greytown&#x2014;Maritzburg branch line at Mizpah with the main line at Mooi River and with a connection to Muden; a broadening of the Weenen branch line from narrow gauge to standard gauge; an extension of the Milnerton line from Tygerburg to Klipheuvel <i>via</i> Durbanville; and an electric line from Johannesburg to Pretoria, in order to provide work for the unemployed; and that the Government be further requested to consider the advisability of as soon as possible taking over the New Cape Central Railway and of taking over the Utrecht private railway line.</block>

</speech>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1924-07-29T17:47:00">5.47 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

