---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol1 - TUESDAY 8 APRIL 1924'
layout: debate
year: 1924
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>TUESDAY, 8th APRIL, 1924.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>The SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1924-04-08T14:23:00">2.23 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#minutes_of_cattle_conferences">

<heading>MINUTES OF CATTLE CONFERENCES.<br/>NOTULEN VAN BEESTE KONFERENTIES.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person></from>

<p>laid upon the Table&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Schedule of documents in connection with the Second Cattle Conference held in Pretoria in 1923. [<i>Vide</i> reply to Question IX, by Maj. Hunt (Turffontein), on 11th March&#x2014;page 759 of the Debates.]</block>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#south_african_society_of_accountants_(private)_bill">

<heading>SOUTH AFRICAN SOCIETY OF ACCOUNTANTS (PRIVATE) BILL.<br/>ZUID AFRIKAANSE GENOOTSCHAP VAN ACCOUNTANTS (PRIVAAT) WETSONTWERP.</heading>

<speech by="#bisset">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BISSET</person> (South Peninsula)</from>

<p>moved, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the proceedings on the <i>South African Society of Accountants</i> (<i>Private</i>) <i>Bill</i> be suspended, and that leave be granted to proceed with the Bill next session at the same stage as that at which the proceedings are now suspended.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#henderson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. HENDERSON</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#easter_recess&#x2014;cancellation">

<heading>EASTER RECESS&#x2014;CANCELLATION.<br/>PAASVAKANTIE&#x2014;INTREKKING.</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person></from>

<p>moved, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Order of the House for its adjournment from Thursday, the 10th April, until Monday, the 28th April, be discharged.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#collins">

<from>Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COLLINS</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Hon. members will see at once why I move this motion. We have accepted this motion to adjourn next Thursday, but the completion of our work depends on getting the other branch of the legislature together, and it is not quite certain that we shall be able to, although we have every hope that it will be possible. It is not quite certain that we shall be able to get the legislation, which we consider necessary, through the other place by next Thursday, and we may be thrown into the following week as a consequence. It is simply as a precautionary measure that I move that that Order be discharged.</p>

<p>Order, dated the 31st March, that the House at its rising on Thursday, the 10th April, adjourned until Monday, the 28th April, read by the Clerk.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#leave_of_absence_to_members">

<heading>LEAVE OF ABSENCE TO MEMBERS.<br/>AFWEZIGHEID VERLOF AAN LEDEN.</heading>

<speech by="#wilcocks">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILCOCKS</person> (Winburg):</from>

<p>Ek wens voor te stel as &#x2019;n onbestrede mosie&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Dat verlof tot afwezigheid verleend worde aan Andries Stephanus Naude, lid voor de kiesafdeling Wakkerstroom, voor de tegenwoordige sessie.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#eerste_minister">

<from>†De <person refersTo="hansard_za">EERSTE MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Ek wil net sê, nie met die doel om te opponeer nie, maar ek weet nie wat die regsposiesie is nie. Die lid vir Wakkerstroom het nog nie sy setel ingeneem en is nog nie ingesweer nie en nou weet ek nie seker of hy onder die omstandighede beskou moet word as lid van die Huis nie. Die regterlike posiesie is my nie duidelik nie. Ek wil nie opponeer nie&#x2014;soas gesê&#x2014;maar eenvoudig voorkom dat ons dalk &#x2019;n besluit neem, wat nie op pote staan nie.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Ons het die Konstitusie altoos so uitgelê, dat sodra &#x2019;n lid gekose is, dan is hy lid van die Huis, afgesien van die vraag of hy die eed afgelê het of nie.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_jager">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE JAGER</person> (Paarl):</from>

<p>Ek stel voor, als een onbestrede mosie&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Dat verlof tot afwezigheid verleend worde aan de Edelagbare William Arthur Deane, lid voor de kiesafdeling Umvoti, voor de tegenwoordige sessie.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#collins">

<from>Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COLLINS</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading><span class="col_1348" refersTo="page_1432"/>QUESTIONS.<br/>VRAGEN.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Telephones in Officials&#x2019; Residences.<br/>Telefoons in Woningen van Ambtenaren.</heading>

<question by="#giovanetti" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Mr. GIOVANETTI (Pretoria East)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many Government officials in the Union have telephones installed in their private houses at the cost of the State, viz., (<i>a</i>) Union officials, (<i>b</i>) Provincial officials; and</li>

<li>(2) what is the cost per annum of these connections, basing the number of calls used on the rates charged to the public, including installation and transfers, for (<i>a</i>) Union officials, (<i>b</i>) Provincial officials?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#giovanetti">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) (<i>a</i>) 293. (<i>b</i>) 17.</li>

<li>(2) (<i>a</i>) £2,380. (<i>b</i>) £130.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Investigation of Cause of Vomiting Sickness.<br/>Onderzoek naar Oorzaak van Vomeerziekte.</heading>

<question by="#coetzee" to="#minister_van_landbouw">

<num>II.</num>

<from>De hr. COETZEE (Prieska)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Landbouw:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Wat is de uitslag geweest van de onderzoekingen aan het laboratorium te Onderstepoort in verband met een zekere plant die beweerd wordt oorzaak te zijn van &#x201C;vomeerziekte&#x201D; onder schapen en bokken;</li>

<li>(2) indien de onderzoekingen gunstige uitslag gehad hebben, waarom dat niet gepubliseerd is; en</li>

<li>(3) indien ze geen gunstige uitslag hadden, of hij dan met het oog op de zware verliezen aan dieren die de boeren ieder jaar lijden ten gevolge van deze ziekte, zo spoedig mogelik verder onderzoek wil laten doen?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_landbouw" to="#coetzee">

<from>De MINISTER VAN LANDBOUW:</from>

<p>Proefnemingen te Onderstepoort Veeartsenijonderzoeks Laboratorium met bedoelde plant hebben alle negatieve resultaten geleverd, maar veldproefnemingen in Barkly West distrikt, laatste December, hebben duidelik bewezen dat dit bosje de ziekte veroorzaakt heeft. Tot dusver is alleen de oorzaak van de ziekte ontdekt; heelkundige toetsen met verschillende geneesmiddelen zijn mislukt. Het is onwaarschijnlik dat het toedienen van geneesmiddelen van veel waarde zal zijn. Een kort artikel, bevattende inlichtingen omtrent hoe de ziekte mag worden voorkomen, wordt bereid voor publikatie. Men is voornemens verdere proefnemingen uit te voeren.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Post Office at Redhill.<br/>Postkantoor te Redhill.</heading>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. CRESWELL (Stamford Hill)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs what the position is in regard to the establishment of a post office at Redhill, Natal, and when will it be ready for public use?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>A tender has been accepted for this service.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Rate of Interest charged by Money-Lenders.<br/>Rente Berekend door Geldschieters.</heading>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. CRESWELL (Stamford Hill)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether representations have been made to him of the serious evils attending the usurious rate of interest charged by money lenders in the Transvaal and other parts of the Union; and</li>

<li>(2) whether it is the intention of the Government to introduce legislation this session for the purpose of dealing with this evil?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Such representations have been made to me.</li>

<li>(2) No.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Restraint of Trade.<br/>Belemmering van Handel.</heading>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. CRESWELL (Stamford Hill)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he has made enquiries into the cause of delay by the Board of Trade and Industries in investigating the complaint made by Messrs. Biccard and Ensor as to arrangements, claimed to be in restraint of trade, insisted on by certain manufacturers of goods enjoying the benefit of a high protective tariff, and others; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he has now received any report from the Board of Trade and Industries on the subject, and, if so, whether he will inform the House of the nature of that report, and when it will be laid upon the Table?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I understand that the complaints made by the firm in question have been investigated by the Board, but owing to pressure of other business the report has not yet been completed.</li>

<li>(2) When the report is received, I propose to lay it on the Table as soon as possible.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Mr. CRESWELL:</from>

<p>Will the right hon. the Minister explain why it has taken eight months to prepare it?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I assume from the fact that no report has come forward, that the report is not likely to be favourable.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Police Station at Redhill and Greenwood Park.<br/>Politiestation te Redhill en Greenwood Park.</heading>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Mr. CRESWELL (Stamford Hill)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice whether he has further considered the subject of providing Redhill and Greenwood Park, Natal, with a police station, <span class="col_1349" refersTo="page_1433"/>and whether he will take early steps to provide this growing community with an adequate police station?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister of the interior" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR (for the Minister of Justice):</from>

<p>This question received consideration some time ago, when it was decided to provide a police station for Redhill and Greenwood Park. Its establishment, however, depends on the funds which will be voted by Parliament for buildings, and I do not know as yet whether there is any prospect of the police station being built during the current financial year.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Stevedoring Work at Union Ports.<br/>Stuwadoorswerk in Unie Havens.</heading>

<question by="#boydeld" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Mr. BOYDELD (Durban&#x2014;Greyville)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether tenders were called for by the Railway Administration for the stevedoring works at the ports of Cape Town, Durban, Port Elizabeth and East London;</li>

<li>(2) what are the names of the various firms whose tenders were accepted, or who have been engaged by the Administration to execute the stevedoring work at each of the ports mentioned;</li>

<li>(3) at what price or prices per ton have the respective firms engaged contracted to carry out the following work, viz. :

<ol>

<li>(<i>a</i>) discharging railway sleepers and any timber at per ton of 50 cubic feet;</li>

<li>(<i>b</i>) discharging rails and accessories at per ton of 2,240 lbs.;</li>

<li>(<i>c</i>) discharging other railway stores and materials at per ton of 40 cubic feet or 2,240 lbs.;</li>

<li>(<i>d</i>) loading grain and grain products at per ton of 2,240 lbs.;</li>

<li>(<i>e</i>) loading bales or bagged cargo other than grain at per ton of 2,240 lbs.;</li>

</ol></li>

<li>(4) what were the lowest and highest prices per ton tendered for each item and for each port;</li>

<li>(5) what firms tendered or applied at each port for the work; and</li>

<li>(6) whether the lowest tender in each case at each port was accepted, and, if not, what were the reasons for the rejection?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#boydell">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Tenders were recently invited for stevedoring the Administration&#x2019;s own ships, for a period of 12 months, at Durban. The steamers do not call frequently at the other ports, and arrangements are made for each cargo as occasion arises.</li>

<li>(2) African Associated Agency and Stevedoring, Ltd., Durban. At Cape Town the last cargo dealt with was stevedored by Mann George &amp; Co., Ltd.; at Port Elizabeth by Messina Bros., Coles &amp; Searle, Ltd., and at East London by East London Stevedoring Company.</li>

</ol>

<p>(3)</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>(<i>a</i>)</p></td>

<td><p>Durban</p></td>

<td><p>9d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Cape Town</p></td>

<td><p>1s. 6d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Port Elizabeth</p></td>

<td><p>2s. 1d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>East London</p></td>

<td><p>1s. 3d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(<i>b</i>)</p></td>

<td><p>Durban</p></td>

<td><p>9d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Cape Town</p></td>

<td><p>(none handled).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Port Elizabeth</p></td>

<td><p>(none handled).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>East London</p></td>

<td><p>(none handled).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(<i>c</i>)</p></td>

<td><p>Durban</p></td>

<td><p>9d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Cape Town</p></td>

<td><p>(none handled).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Port Elizabeth</p></td>

<td><p>(none handled).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>East London</p></td>

<td><p>(none handled).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(<i>d</i>)</p></td>

<td><p>Durban</p></td>

<td><p>9d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Cape Town</p></td>

<td><p>(none handled).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Port Elizabeth</p></td>

<td><p>(none handled).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>East London</p></td>

<td><p>l1d. (per 2,000 lbs.)</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(<i>e</i>)</p></td>

<td><p>Durban</p></td>

<td><p>9d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Cape Town</p></td>

<td><p>(none handled).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Port Elizabeth</p></td>

<td><p>(none handled).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>East London</p></td>

<td><p>(none handled).</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>(4)</p></td>

<td><p>Lowest Tender.</p></td>

<td><p>Highest Tender.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Durban (<i>a</i>)</p></td>

<td><p>9d.</p></td>

<td><p>1s. 3d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(<i>b</i>)</p></td>

<td><p>9d.</p></td>

<td><p>11d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(<i>c</i>)</p></td>

<td><p>8d.</p></td>

<td><p>11d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(<i>d</i>)</p></td>

<td><p>9d.</p></td>

<td><p>l1d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(<i>e</i>)</p></td>

<td><p>8d.</p></td>

<td><p>1s.</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>At the other ports tenders are not called for in this form, for the reason stated in (1).</p>

<p>(5) Durban: Storm &amp; Co.,</p>

<p>Nicoll &amp; Co., Ltd.,</p>

<p>F. Staniland,</p>

<p>African Associated Agency and Stevedoring, Ltd.</p>

<p>(6) The tender of the African Associated Agency and Stevedoring, Ltd., was accepted as this company&#x2019;s tender was the lowest for items (<i>a</i>) and (<i>b</i>) which are the only cargoes likely to be stevedored during the period of the contract.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#brown" to="#minister">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. BROWN (Three Rivers)</from>

<p>&#x2014;Question withdrawn.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Demarcation and Nationalization of Game Reserves.<br/>Afbakening en Nationalizering van Wildtuinen.</heading>

<question by="#papenfus" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. PAPENFUS (Hospital)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware that during the last twelve years the Transvaal Game Protection Association has made repeated representations in writing and by way of sending deputations to both the Union Government and the Transvaal provincial authorities urging strongly the final demarcation and nationalization in perpetuity of the Sabi and Singwitzi game reserves in the Transvaal, and that these representations have elicited very favourable views from the authorities mentioned;</li>

<li><span class="col_1350" refersTo="page_1434"/>(2) whether the Minister is prepared to introduce legislation to give effect to the object aimed at and indicated above; and, if not,</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister will give reasons and indicate the Government&#x2019;s policy in respect to the game reserves mentioned?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#papenfus">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes, frequent representations have been made and the Government is strongly of opinion that the Sabi and Shingwedzi Game Reserves should be finally demarcated and converted into a National Park in perpetuity.</li>

<li>(2) &amp; (3) The Government had hoped to introduce legislation on the lines indicated above, but unfortunately the position is complicated by the fact that the Transvaal Consolidated Lands, Ltd., and certain other companies and private individuals own approximately 254,000 morgen within the limits of the Reserve, and up to the present it has not been found possible to arrive at any satisfactory arrangement with these owners. An exchange for other Crown land was put forward by me, but met with no response.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Retention of Services of Ex-Republican Officials.<br/>In Dienst Houding van Ex-Republikeinse Ambtenaren.</heading>

<question by="#papenfus" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. PAPENFUS (Hospital)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware of a recommendation of the Select Comittee on Pensions, Grants and Gratuities which was adopted by this House and conveyed in a letter dated the 1st July, 1919, by the Clerk of the House to W. Fockens and others, ex-South African Republic officials, and which recommendation, <i>i.a.,</i> contains the following :<br/>&#x201C;The Government also agreed to retain the services of these officials for a further period of five years, thereby extending the age limit in their cases to 60&#x201D;;</li>

<li>(2) to how many officials in the postal and telegraph services did this undertaking apply, and (<i>a</i>) how many of them were retained in the service until their 60th year, (<i>b</i>) how many of them are there still in the service who have not yet reached that age, and (<i>c</i>) how many have been pensioned before reaching the age of 60 years;</li>

<li>(3) what reason does the Minister advance for not giving effect to the recommendation of the House in respect of those officials referred to in sub-paragraph (c) of the preceding paragraph; and</li>

<li>(4) what number of old Cape officials between the ages of 55 and 60 have been pensioned from and including 1919 until March, 1924; what number of the old Republican officials have been so pensioned, and what are the respective percentages compared to the total number employed in each case?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#papenfus">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>I would ask the hon. member to allow this question to stand over, as I am obtaining the information.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#papenfus" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>Mr. PAPENFUS:</from>

<p>Will I be in order in the circumstances if I ask the hon. the Minister to forward the reply to my private address?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Statement by Chairman of Transvaal Chamber of Mines.<br/>Verklaring door Voorzitter van Transvaalse Kamer van Mijnwezen.</heading>

<question by="#papenfus" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Mr. PAPENFUS (Hospital)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he has read the report of the recent annual meeting of the Transvaal Chamber of Mines, whereat the chairman stated&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(<i>a</i>) that the mining industry was subjected to an &#x201C;extortionate charge&#x201D; of about 2 per cent. by way of exchange on money (about £30,000,000) required to be remitted here to pay South African expenses;</li>

<li>(<i>b</i>) that the justification advanced by the banks for such charge was to safeguard themselves in view of a possible early return to the gold basis;</li>

<li>(<i>c</i>) that he could not possibly see how South Africa could return to such basis until Great Britain did so;</li>

<li>(<i>d</i>) that an announcement to that effect by the Government would enable the gold industry to know where it stood; and</li>

</ol></li>

<li>(2) whether the Government is in a position to make a pronouncement on the above terms, and, if not, for what reasons?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#papenfus">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) It is manifestly impossible at this stage to make a pronouncement to the effect that the existing legislation will be modified or extended in June 1925. I may say, however, that it was my intention that an expert inquiry should be held later in the present year into the question of the Union resuming the gold standard independently of Great Britain.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Protection of Pig Breeding Farmers.<br/>Bescherming van Varkens Telende Boeren.</heading>

<question by="#de_jager" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Dr. DE JAGER (Paarl)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Board of Trade and Industries has any knowledge of a subsidy being paid by the Danish Government to farmers in Denmark for the raising of pigs in that country, or to factories for bacon curing;</li>

<li>(2) if so, can the Minister inform the House what the amount of such subsidy is;</li>

<li><span class="col_1351" refersTo="page_1435"/>(3) if the Board has no such information, whether the Minister will have enquiries made to ascertain whether such is the case and inform the House of the result; and</li>

<li>(4) if such be the case, what steps the Government intends taking to protect farmers breeding pigs here against this unfair competition?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#de_jager">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) and (2) The answer to parts (1) and (2) of the question is in the negative.</li>

<li>(3) and (4) The Board is at present instituting enquiries into the matter, and until the facts are known it is impossible to say what steps can be taken.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Excise Duties on Patent or Proprietary Medicines.<br/>Aksijnsrechten op Patent en EigendomsMEDICIJNEN.</heading>

<question by="#van_niekerk" to="#minister_van_financiën">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>De hr. P. W. le R. VAN NIEKERK (Waterberg)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Financiën:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Hoeveel winkeliers aangeklaagd werden wegens overtreding van de bepalingen van de Doeane en Aksijns Wijzigings Wet van 1923 betreffende de aksijnsrechten op patent of eigendomsmedicijnen; hoevelen veroordeeld werden en wat was het bedrag van boeten opgelegd; en</li>

<li>(2) hoeveel apothekers aangeklaagd werden wegens dergelijke overtreding; hoevelen veroordeeld werden en wat was het bedrag van boeten opgelegd?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_financiën" to="#van_niekerk">

<from>De MINISTER VAN FINANCIËN:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 118 winkeliers werden aangeklaagd waarvan 102 schuldig bevonden werden en 15 berispt werden. Boeten opgelegd waren £193.</li>

<li>(2) 14 apothekers werden aangeklaagd, waarvan 12 schuldig bevonden werden en 2 berispt werden. Boeten opgelegd waren £53.</li>

</ol>

<p>Bovenstaande cijfers sluiten niet in vervolgingen op het initiatief van de politie; biezonderbeuen waarvan niet verkrijgbaar zijn.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Peace Treaty with Turkey.<br/>Vredestraktaat met Turkije.</heading>

<question by="#malan" to="#eerste_minister">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>Dr. D. F. MALAN (Calvinia)</from>

<p>vroeg de Eerste Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Of hij in de koeraruten van Donderdag, 3 April, het Reuter telegram gezien heeft waarin gerapporteerd wordt dat bij de bespreking van het Vredestraktaat met Turkije Wetsontwerp in het Britse Parlement, de heer Ponsonby, Ondersekretaris van Buitenlandse Zaken, verklaarde (<i>a</i>) dat het de bedoeling van de Britse Regering is om voortaan ieder traktaat zodra het ondertekend is, voor bekragtiging, en indien verlangd, voor bespreking aan het Parlement voor te leggen, en (<i>b</i>) dat de Britse Regering voornemens is om voortaan het Parlement in te lichten omtrent alle overeenkomsten en verstandhoudingen die op enigerlei wijze het Britse volk tot een bepaalde handelwijze onder zekere omstandigheden zouden kunnen binden;</li>

<li>(2) of hij bereio is om met betrekking tot alle traktaten die door of ten behoeve van de Unie ondertekend of medeondertekend mochten worden en met betrekking tot alle overeenkomsten en verstandhoudingen zoals in paragraaf (1) van deze vraag beschreven en die het volk van de Unie op enigerlei wijze mochten binden, dezelfde onderneming aan het Unie Parlement te geven;</li>

<li>(3) of hij gezien heeft dat in hetzelfde bovengemelde kabelgram de Britse Eerste Minister, de heer Ramsay MacDonald, gerapporteerd wordt verklaard te hebben dat Zuid-Afrika toegestemd heeft in de bekrachtiging van het Vredestraktaat met Turkije Wetsontwerp, en verder de daarin begrepen waarborg in verband met de gedemilitariseerde stroken aan de beide kanten van de Dardanellen goedgekeurd en aanvaard heeft;</li>

<li>(4) of de mededeling waarnaar in paragraaf (3) van deze vraag verwezen wordt, korrekt is, en indien wel, of de toestemming en aanvaarding daarin vermeld berekend zijn om op enigerlei wijze het volk van de Unie tot een bepaalde handelwijze onder zekere omstandigheden te binden, en indien wel, of het bedoeld was als alleen van een voorlopige aard te zijn hangende de goedkeuring van het Unie Parlement, of anders finaal te zijn; en</li>

<li>(5) of hij in ieder geval bereid is om de dokumenten in verband met het vredestraktaat met Turkije, inzoverre het de Unie moge aangaan, op de Tafel van het Huis te leggen, zowel als alle korrespondentie in verband met de zaak tussen de Unie Regering en de Britse Regering?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#eerste_minister" to="#malan">

<from>De EERSTE MINISTER:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Ja.</li>

<li>(2) Ik &#x2019;heb reeds meer dan eens verklaard dat het de politiek van het Goevernement is om belangrijke traktaten of overeenkomsten, op de Unie van Zuid-Afrika betrekking hebbende, ter bekrachtiging aan het Parlement voor te leggen.</li>

<li>(3) Ja.</li>

<li>(4) Het Parlement heeft alreeds machtiging verleend voor de ratifikatie van het traktaat van Sèvres, hetwelk vrede zou sluiten met Turkije. De veranderingen door het traktaat van Lausanne aangebracht hebben geen betrekking op de Unie of verbinden haar tot verdere aansprakelikheden, en onder de omstandigheden heeft het Goevernement gehandeld onder de reeds verleende parlementaire machtiging en behoort het laatste traktaat te bekrachtigen, zoals hij konstitutioneel gerechtigd is te doen.</li>

<li>(5) Het vredestraktaat met Turkije zal behoorlik op de Tafel van het Huis gelegd worden.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_1352" refersTo="page_1436"/>Construction of Railway from Klaver to Calvinia.<br/>Aanleg van Spoorlijn van Klaver naar Calvinia.</heading>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_van_spoorwegen_en_havens">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Dr. D. F. MALAN (Calvinia)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Spoorwegen en Havens:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Of hij in de koeranten van Donderdag, 3 April, het Reuter-telegram uit Calvinia gezien heeft vermeldende een gerucht dat de Regering besloten heeft om met het oog op werkverschaffing aan werkelozen spoedig een begin te maken met de aanleg van een spoorlijn tussen Klaver en Calvinia;</li>

<li>(2) of er enige waarheid in dit gerucht is, en indien niet,</li>

<li>(3) of zowel met het oog op de noodzaakikheid van een kortere verbinding tussen Calvinia en Kaapstad als met het oog op de heersende werkeloosheid de Regering niet spoedig de aanleg van zodanige kortere verbinding, hetzij langs de ene of de andere voorgestelde route in gunstige overweging wil nemen?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_spoorwegen_en_havens" to="#malan">

<from>De MINISTER VAN SPOORWEGEN EN HAVENS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Ja.</li>

<li>(2) Neen.</li>

<li>(3) Ik heb er geen twijfel aan dat de dan aan het bewind zijnde Regering de aanspraken van deze lijn, tezamen met andere, in aanmerking nemen zal wanneer het volgende program van spoorwegaanleg overwogen wordt.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Municipal Assessment of Government Property.<br/>Municipale Aanslag van Regeringseigendom.</heading>

<question by="#van_aardt" to="#minister_of_public_works">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Mr. VAN AARDT (for Mr. McAlister) (Germiston)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Works whether it is the intention of the Government to introduce legislaton during the present session providing for the assessment by municipalities of Government property whilst occupied by private persons?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_works" to="#van_aardt">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS:</from>

<p>A Bill was drafted with the intention of dealing with this matter during the present session, but it cannot now be introduced.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Legislation on Dumping.<br/>Wetgeving voor &#x201C;Dumping.&#x201D;</heading>

<question by="#van_aardt" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Mr. VAN AARDT (for Mr. McAlister) (Germiston)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether, in view of the Report of the Board of Trade and Industries, the Government intends during the present session to introduce legislation to deal with dumping as recommended by the Board; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he is prepared to include Germany and Canada under the Dumping Act?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#van_aardt">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The Government is not in possession of a report by the Board of Trade and Industries on dumping in general; the matter is still under investigation.</li>

<li>(2) Products from Germany and Canada will be brought under the provisions of the various laws dealing with dumping if proof is submitted to the satisfaction of the Minister that dumping exists on such articles to the detriment of any South African industries. For example: A proclamation will shortly be issued bringing cement exported from Germany under the provisions of Section 12 (1) of Act No. 23 of 1923.</li>

</ol>

<p>Enquiries are also being made by the Customs investigating officer in America as to whether Canadian cement is being dumped into the Union, and it is hoped they will soon be completed.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Medical, Dental and Pharmacy Bill.<br/>Geneeskundigen, Tandmeesters en Apothekers Wetsontwerp.</heading>

<question by="#dreyer" to="#minister_van_volksgezondheid">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Lt.-Kol. DREYER (Losberg)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Volksgezondheid:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Of hij de brief door Morris Little &amp; Son (Foreign &amp; Colonial Ltd.), Port Elizabeth, aan parlementsleden geschreven in verband met het <i>Geneeskundigen, Tandmeesters en Apothekers en Drogisten Wetsontwerp</i> (als gewijzigd in Gekozen Komitee) gelezen heeft; en indien zo,</li>

<li>(2) of hij bereid is de suggesties in overweging te nemen?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_volksgezondheid" to="#dreyer">

<from>De MINISTER VAN VOLKSGEZONDHEID:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Ja.</li>

<li>(2) De zaak is onder behandeling.</li>

</ol>

<p>Ek vrees egter, dat die Wetsontwerp nie aangeneem sal word gedurende hierdie sitting nie.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Revision of Local Allowances (S.A.R. and H.).<br/>Herziening van Plaatselike Toelagen (Z.A.S. en H.).</heading>

<question by="#boydell" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XIX.</num>

<from>Mr. BOYDELL (Durban-Greyville)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours what was the total saving in each local allowance area to the 31st March, 1924, as a result of the recent revision of local allowances?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#boydell">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Up to the 31st March last there was reduced expenditure on local allowances amounting ot £7,920 made up as follows:</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Old District II.</p></td>

<td><p>£2,250</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Old District III.</p></td>

<td><p>4,400</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Old District V.</p></td>

<td><p>1,270</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£7,920</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>The Durban special cost of living allowance granted in conjunction with the same revision resulted in an increased expenditure of £16,300.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_1353" refersTo="page_1437"/>Rights of Lower Riparian Owners along Vaal River.<br/>Rechten van Lagere Oevereigenaars langs Vaal Rivier.</heading>

<question by="#cilliers" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>XX.</num>

<from>Capt. P. S. Cilliers (Hopetown)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands what steps he proposes to take in order to prevent the Rand Water Board from impounding by means of the barrage across the Vaal River the normal flow of the said river and to safeguard the rights of lower riparian owners?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#cilliers">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>The rights of lower riparian owners are protected by Act of Parliament and I am causing enquiry to be made to ascertain whether the provisions of the Act are being carried out.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Douglas and Bucklands Irrigation Scheme.<br/>Douglas en Bucklands Besproeiing Schema.</heading>

<question by="#cilliers" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>XXI.</num>

<from>Capt. P. S. CILLIERS (Hopetown)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands what steps he proposes to take in order to improve the supply of water in connection with the Douglas and Bucklands irrigation scheme?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#cilliers">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>The Government proposes to instal a pumping plant at the weir.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Expenses of Running Branch Lines.<br/>Kosten van Eksploitatie van Taklijnen.</heading>

<question by="#saunders" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXII.</num>

<from>Mr. SAUNDERS (Natal Coast)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours what are the expenses per mile in each Province for running branch lines as distinct from main lines, sub-dividing branch lines into broad and narrow gauge?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#saunders">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Statistics for main lines are not compiled. The working expenditure per open mile on certain branch lines for which statistics are available, for 1923, was as follows :&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p><i>Province.</i></p></td>

<td><p><i>Broad Gauge.</i></p></td>

<td><p> <i>Narrow Gauge.</i></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Cape</p></td>

<td><p>588</p></td>

<td><p>424</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Natal</p></td>

<td><p>802</p></td>

<td><p>415</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Transvaal</p></td>

<td><p>414</p></td>

<td><p>No narrow gauge lines.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Orange Free State</p></td>

<td><p>514</p></td>

<td><p>No narrow gauge lines.</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Construction of George&#x2014;Knysna Railway Line.<br/>Aanleg van George&#x2014;Knysna Spoorlijn.</heading>

<question by="#brink" to="#minister_van_spoorwegen_en_havens">

<num>XXIII.</num>

<from>De hr. BRINK (George)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Spoorwegen en Havens:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Wanneer voorgesteld wordt een aanvang te maken met het bouwen van de George&#x2014; Knysna lijn;</li>

<li>(2) wat de reden van het oponthoud geweest is; en</li>

<li>(3) of de Minister zorgen wil dat de benodigde dwarsliggers en timmerhout plaatselik gekocht zullen worden?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_spoorwegen_en_havens" to="#brink">

<from>De MINISTER VAN SPOORWEGEN EN HAVENS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Het voorlopige werk zal waarschijnlik in September een aanvang nemen.</li>

<li>(2) In het 1922 aanlegprogram werd voorziening gemaakt voor de aanleg van 853 mijl nieuwe lijnen en het geheel van dit mijletal kan niet gelijktijdig ondernomen worden. Er zijn zes andere lijnen waarmede een aan vang gemaakt moet worden.</li>

<li>(3) Het gebruik van Zuidafrikaans timmerhout wordt in overweging genomen.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Construction of Avontuur&#x2014;Longkloof Railway Line.<br/>Aanleg van Avontuur&#x2014;Langekloof Spoorlijn.</heading>

<question by="#brink" to="#minister_van_spoorwegen_en_havens">

<num>XXIV.</num>

<from>De hr. BRINK (George)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Spoorwegen en Havens wanneer de Regering voornemens is een aanvang te maken met het bouwen van de Avontuur&#x2014; Langekloof lijn?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_spoorwegen_en_havens" to="#brink">

<from>De MINISTER VAN SPOORWEGEN EN HAVENS:</from>

<p>Zoals het edele lid weet, kunnen spoorwegen voor het vervoer van publiek verkeer niet aangelegd worden zonder machtiging van het Parlement, en geen machtiging is voor de aanleg van deze lijn gegeven.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Clerical Officers in Public Service.<br/>Klerkelike Beambten in Staatsdienst.</heading>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXV.</num>

<from>Mr. CRESWELL (Stamford Hill)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior what was the number of clerical officers in the public service on the 31st March, 1924, and the total salary and allowance drawn in each of the following grades, viz., (<i>a</i>) third grade, (<i>b</i>) second grade, (<i>c</i>) first grade, <i>(d)</i> senior grade, (e) principal clerks, (ƒ) administrative division above those in (<i>e</i>), <i>(g)</i> professional and technical (lower division), and (<i>h</i>) professional and technical (higher division)?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I am sorry that I have not been able to get the information asked for in this matter.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Result of Reduction of Local Allowance.<br/>Gevolg van Vermindering van Plaatselike Toelage.</heading>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XXVI.</num>

<from>Mr. CRESWELL (Stamford Hill)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance what was the saving in each of the following grades to the 31st March, 1924, as a result of the recent reduction in the payment of local allowance to single officers, viz., (<i>a</i>) third grade clerical assistant, (<i>b</i>) second grade clerical assistant, (<i>c</i>) first grade clerical assistant, and <i>(d)</i> above (<i>a</i>), (<i>b</i>) and (<i>c</i>)?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I have not got the information yet.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Cost of Living Figures and Issue of Public Service List.<br/>Kosten van Levensonderhoud Cijfers en Uitgaven van Staatsdienstlijst.</heading>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XXVII.</num>

<from>Mr. CRESWELL (Stamford Hill)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li><span class="col_1354" refersTo="page_1438"/>(1) What do the cost of living figures published by the Directeur of Census include, and how are they obtained; and</li>

<li>(2) when will the next issue of the Public Service List be published?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I am afraid the same answer applies to this. I have not the information yet.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Retirement from Service of A. E. Rowe.<br/>Afdanking van Dienst van A. E. Rowe.</heading>

<question by="#creswell" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XXVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. CRESWELL (Stamford Hill)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he will lay upon the Table all papers from the Customs Department, the Treasury and the Public Service Commission relating to the retirement from the Customs Department and the pension awarded to A. E. Rowe; and</li>

<li>(2) whether it is a fact that the years customarily added to a retiring officter&#x2019;s service in cases similar to that of A. E. Rowe have been refused to him on the ground that he had been charged with certain offences of which on enquiry he had been acquitted?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#creswell">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I am afraid the same thing applies to this also.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#pearce" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XXIX.</num>

<from>Mr. PEARCE (Liesbeek)</from>

<p>&#x2014;Question not asked.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Certificate of Insanity.<br/>Certifikaat van Krankzinnigheid.</heading>

<question by="#forsyth" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXX.</num>

<from>Dr. FORSYTH (Cape Town&#x2014;Gardens)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior whether he will lay upon the Table of the House the certificate of insanity stated by the Minister, in reply to a question by the honourable member for Edenburg on Tuesday, the 19th June, 1923, to have been signed by the District Surgeon at the Wale Street Police Station on the 15th March, 1920, upon which a member of the Cape Town Orchestra was removed from the police cells to the Valkenberg Mental Hospital?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#forsyth">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I am sorry I have not got the certificate here, but as it concerns a very important question in connection with an individual. I will communicate with the hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens) (Dr. Forsyth) when I get the information from Pretoria.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Termination of Currency and Banking Act.<br/>Be-eindiging van Betaalmiddelen en Bank Wet.</heading>

<question by="#abe_bailey" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XXXI.</num>

<from>Sir ABE BAILEY (Krugersdorp)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether the Government is in a position to state its intention with regard to the Currency and Banking Act which terminates in June, 1925, when the Union will automatically go on to a gold basis?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#abe_bailey">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The hon. member is referred to the reply given to the question, asked by the hon. member for Hospital (Mr. Papenfus).</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Officials employed in Election Work.<br/>Ambtenaren werkzaam bij Verkiezingen.</heading>

<question by="#brand_wessels" to="#eerste_minister">

<num>XXXII.</num>

<from>De hr. BRAND WESSELS (voor Gen. Muller) (Pretoria Distrikt-Zuid)</from>

<p>vroeg de Eerste Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Of de Regering bewust is dat de heer Karl Spilhaus, de handelskommissaris in Europa, geëmployeerd was met de Wakkerstroomse tussenverkiezing om propaganda te maken onder de Duitse kiezers ten gunste van de Zuidafrikaanse Partij kandidaat; en indien zo,</li>

<li>(2) welke maatregels de Regering gaat nemen om ambtenaren in de toekomst te verplichten zich te beperken tot de plichten van hun respektieve werkkringen?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#eerste_minister" to="#brand_wessels">

<from>De EERSTE MINISTER:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) De heer Spilhaus ging naar Piet Retief om een vergadering bij te wonen, voor hem bijeengeroepen in het belang van de tabaksindustrie, en het is mij niet bekend dat hij enige propaganda werk deed ten bate van een der kandidaten in de Wakkerstroom tussenverkiezing.</li>

<li>(2) De regulaties zijn zeer definitief dat Goevernements ambtenaren geen werkzaam deel in politiek mogen nemen, en ik zie geen noodzakelikheid voor enige verdere maatregelen.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#havenga" to="#eerste_minister">

<from>De hr. HAVENGA (Fauresmith):</from>

<p>Ontstaande uit die antwoord, wil ek net graag aan die edelagbare die Eerste Minister vra of hy dink, dat &#x2019;n Goewerments amptenaar in die posiesie van die hr. Spilhaus onder die omstandighede na daardie distrik moes gaan.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#eerste_minister" to="#havenga">

<from>De EERSTE MINISTER:</from>

<p>My vriend, die edele lid vir Fauresmith (de hr. Havenga) sal verstaan dat die reëling van Mr. Spilhaus voorheen gemaak was om na elke tabakdistrik te gaan. Soos ohs weet was hy besig om surplus-tabak in Europa te verkoop, en daar is &#x2019;n programma gemaak om na alle distrikte te gaan en so het hy ook op Piet Retief in die loop van sy toer gekom.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#wessels" to="#eerste_minister">

<from>De hr. J. B. WESSELS:</from>

<p>Moes hy saam gaan met die organiserende sekretaris?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Summonses for Arrear Water Rates.<br/>Aanschrijvingen voor Achterstallige Waterbelasttngen.</heading>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_van_landen">

<num>XXXIII.</num>

<from>De hr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN (Cradock)</from>

<p>vroeg de Minister van Landen:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Of hij ervan bewust is dat de cirkelingenieur van Cradock namens het Besproeiïngs Departement aanschrijvingen door prokureurs doet zenden voor achterstallige water-belastingen;</li>

<li>(2) of dit overeenkomt met de onderneming van de Minister om een kommissie aan te stellen ten einde onderzoek in te stellen naar de financiële positie van de verschillende waterschema&#x2019;s; en</li>

<li>(3) indien niet, of de Minister stappen zal doen nemen om al zulke gevallen te doen overstaan totdat de voorgestelde kommissie <span class="col_1355" refersTo="page_1439"/>rapport zal hebben uitgebracht en aanbevelingen zal hebben gedaan?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_van_landen" to="#van_heerden">

<from>De MINISTER VAN LANDEN:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) De Minister kan de funkties van raden die niet aan hun verplichtingen voldoen overnemen. Dit is gedaan in het geval van drie raden wier belasting in grote mate verlaagd waren en toch niet betaalden. Zulke stappen als nodig mogen zijn worden genomen om die verlaagde belasting in te zamelen, zonder het al te bezwaarlik te maken voor eigenaars, die werkelik hun grond ontgonnen hebben. Geen dagvaardingen zullen uitgereikt worden zonder onderzoek maar de omstandigheden van elk geval.</li>

<li>(2) Ja, daar de opgevraagde belasting slechts een klein gedeelte was van de volle belasting en ik ben overtuigd dat geen kommissie een lagere belasting zou aanbevelen.</li>

<li>(3) Zulke zaken zouden aan de voorgestelde kommissie onderworpen zijn maar tot mijn spijt maken omstandigheden het onmogelik om een Wetsontwerp ter instelling van de kommissie binnekort in te dienen.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>International Labour Conference at Geneva.<br/>Internationale Arbeidskonferentie te Geneve.</heading>

<question by="#strachan" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XXXIV.</num>

<from>Mr. STRACHAN (Pietermaritzburg-North)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries whether a further period has been decided upon for receiving nominations in respect to the workers&#x2019; delegate to the International Labour Conference at Geneva; and, if só, what is now the closing date, and whether all trade unions were informed with regard to the extension of time allowed?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#strachan">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I am not aware of any application having been made for a postponement of the date for receiving nominations. If any application is made I will consider it.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Contract between Imperial Cold Storage Co. and Administrator, S.W.A.<br/>Kontrakt tussen Imperiale Koelkamers Mij. en Administrateur, Z.W.A.</heading>

<question by="#hunt" to="#prime_minister">

<num>XXXV.</num>

<from>Maj. HUNT (Turffontein)</from>

<p>asked the PRIME MINISTER what security, if any, has been provided by the Imperial Cold Storage Company for the due fulfilment and carrying out of their contract with the Administrator of South-West Africa, as stipulated for in paragraph 14 of the agreement entered into on the 21st October, 1922?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#hunt">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I am sorry I have not the information available for the hon. member.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Cold Storage at Walvis Bay.<br/>Koelkamers te Walvisbaai.</heading>

<question by="#hunt" to="#prime_minister">

<num>XXXVI.</num>

<from>Maj. HUNT (Turffontein)</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the cost of the building of the foundations of the cold storage at Walvis Bay is being borne by the Railway Administration;</li>

<li>(2) whether a sum of £13,000 has been set aside to cover the cost of these foundations, which cost was previously estimated at £10,000;</li>

<li>(3) whether it is intended to build a retaining wall to secure these foundations and, if so, (<i>a</i>) whether the Government intends to bear the cost of same, and what is the estimated cost thereof;</li>

<li>(4) whether the building of the above-mentioned foundations is being carried out by the Railway Administration or by the Imperial Cold Storage Company; and, if by the latter, what arrangements have been made to supervise the work and expenditure entailed; and</li>

<li>(5) whether it is not a fact that the whole township of Walvis is on similar low-lying ground to that upon which the cold storage works are being built, and, if so, whether similar facilities in regard to foundations will be granted by the Administration, to all firms and individuals who have purchased business sites at Walvis Bay, also &#x201C;for the development of the mandated territory&#x201D;, as are being granted to the Imperial Cold Storage Company?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#hunt">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I am sorry the reply is the same as that to the last question.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Grain Elevator at Lindley.<br/>Graanzuiger te Lindley.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS replied to Question V, by Mr. M. L. MALAN (Heilbron), standing over from 1st April.</p>

<question by="#malan" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<heading>Vraag:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Of zijn aandacht gevestigd is op een bericht uit Lindley dat de graanzuiger aldaar niet in orde gevonden is bij toetsing;</li>

<li>(2) of een toets genomen is; en indien zo,</li>

<li>(3) wat is de uitslag van de toets?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#malan">

<heading>Antwoord:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Neen.</li>

<li>(2) &amp; (3) De in het kontrakt voorgeschreven toets is nog niet genomen, doch de kontraktant heeft personen die rondgaan en de verschillende binnenlandse graanzuigers bezoeken en voorlopige toetsen doen, met het doel kleine verbeteringen aan te brengen alvorens de officiële toets genomen wordt.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Working Hours, etc., at Grain Elevators.<br/>Werkuren, enz., aan Graanzuigers.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS replied to Question VIII, by <span class="col_1356" refersTo="page_1440"/>Maj. Hunt (Turffontein), standing over from 1st April.</p>

<question by="#hunt" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Minister is aware (<i>a</i>) that the mechanics working on the grain elevators have been compelled to work ten hours per day, (<i>b</i>) that bare time for overtime has been paid, (<i>c</i>) that mechanics have been compelled to work Sundays and holidays and have only been paid at day rates, (<i>d</i>) that if any man demurred at these conditions he was threatened with discharge;</li>

<li>(2) whether the Minister or any responsible official granted permission (<i>a</i>) to work mechanics for ten hours per day, (<i>b</i>) to pay single time for overtime, (c) to work men on Sundays and public holidays;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister is aware that the Amalgamated Engineering Union has protested by letter to the general manager against the above, and (<i>a</i>) that notices are posted now that mechanics need not work more than 8¾ hours per day, (<i>b</i>) that men are penalized if they refuse to work more than the 8¾ hours by being transferred to another elevator and then discharged, (<i>c</i>) that in regard to overtime and Sunday work, the general manager&#x2019;s reply was to the effect that he had no power to interfere with the arrangements of the contractors; and</li>

<li>(4) whether the Minister will make enquiries and see (<i>a</i>) that the hours worked by mechanics do not exceed those worked by mechanics in the Government service, (<i>b</i>) that if overtime is necessary, time and a half be paid for such work, (<i>c</i>) that Sunday work be prevented, but where absolutely essential that the usual rate of double time be paid?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#hunt">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<p>The men referred to are not employed by the Administration but by an outside contractor. The conditions of their employment are arranged between the contrator and the men concerned.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Public Service.<br/>Staatsdienst.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR replied to Question I, by Mr. Moor (Weenen), standing over from 1st April.</p>

<question by="#moor" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many established officers and employees resigned or were retired during the two years ended 31st December, 1923, from the public service, showing each department separately;</li>

<li>(2) how many established officers and employees are now under notice of retirement by the various departments; and</li>

<li>(3) how many additional established officers and employees were appointed to each departement during the abovementioned period?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#moor">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Department.</p></td>

<td><p>No. of established officers &amp; employees who have resigned or been retired during two years ended 31st December, 1923.</p></td>

<td><p>No. of established officers &amp; employees now under notice of retirement by the various departments.</p></td>

<td><p>No. of additional established officers and employees who have been appointed to each department during the two years ended 31st December, 1923.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Agriculture</p></td>

<td><p>111</p></td>

<td><p>2</p></td>

<td><p>78</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Audit</p></td>

<td><p>12</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>28</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Customs &amp; Excise</p></td>

<td><p>60</p></td>

<td><p>3</p></td>

<td><p>70</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Defence</p></td>

<td><p>820</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p>1,283</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Finance</p></td>

<td><p>16</p></td>

<td><p>3</p></td>

<td><p>8</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Forestry</p></td>

<td><p>33</p></td>

<td><p>2</p></td>

<td><p>48</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Governor-General</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Higher Education</p></td>

<td><p>37</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>93</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Inland Revenue</p></td>

<td><p>41</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>79</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Interior</p></td>

<td><p>477</p></td>

<td><p>20</p></td>

<td><p>736</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Irrigation</p></td>

<td><p>8</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p>17</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Justice</p></td>

<td><p>147</p></td>

<td><p>14</p></td>

<td><p>198</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Lands Deeds and Surveys</p></td>

<td><p>63</p></td>

<td><p>4</p></td>

<td><p>64</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Mines and Industries</p></td>

<td><p>32</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p>40</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Native Affairs</p></td>

<td><p>51</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>43</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Police</p></td>

<td><p>615</p></td>

<td><p>47</p></td>

<td><p>852</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Posts and Telegraphs</p></td>

<td><p>860</p></td>

<td><p>4</p></td>

<td><p>755</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Prime Minister</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Prisons</p></td>

<td><p>837</p></td>

<td><p>5</p></td>

<td><p>992</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Public Health</p></td>

<td><p>35</p></td>

<td><p>2</p></td>

<td><p>37</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Public Works</p></td>

<td><p>12</p></td>

<td><p>3</p></td>

<td><p>22</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Provincial Administration, Cape</p></td>

<td><p>30</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>44</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Provincial Administration, Transvaal</p></td>

<td><p>23</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p>27</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Provincial Administration, Natal</p></td>

<td><p>120</p></td>

<td><p>3</p></td>

<td><p>94</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Provincial Administration, Orange Free State</p></td>

<td><p>7</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>15</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Mandated Territory, South-West Africa</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p>22</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>*4,458</p></td>

<td><p>118</p></td>

<td><p>†5,646</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>*This number does not include deaths or dismissals.</p>

<p>†This number includes employees who were previously temporarily employed.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#second_appropriation_(part)_bill">

<heading>SECOND APPROPRIATION (PART) BILL.<br/>TWEEDE MIDDELEN (GEDEELTE) WETSONTWERP.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to apply a further sum not exceeding four million pounds on account of the service for the year ending the 31st March, 1925.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I propose, in order to save time in the business of the House, before Parliament is prorogued, to take the unusual course of making my statement on the motion for leave to introduce the Second Appropriation (Part) Bill. Just let me say, at the same time, that this statement cannot be in the nature of a Budget speech. I assume that Parliament will be prorogued in a few days, and probably will not re-assemble for some months, and that both the House and the country would like to know <span class="col_1357" refersTo="page_1441"/>of the present state of the finances. I propose, therefore, as briefly as possible, to place the particulars as clearly as may be before the House. The Bill which it is proposed to introduce is to apply a sum of 3½ million of revenue loan and £520,000 extra from loan account. The last time I introduced such a Bill was to get £7,000,000 on revenue account, and £3,200,000 on loan account, which was calculated to carry us somewhere towards the end of June. It is believed that this extra money will carry us over the end of July. When the Budget was introduced a year ago, I estimated that after bringing into revenue £525,000 of loan receipts, there would be a deficit of £200,000, which I hoped would be met by the savings on expenditure. Last month, when the additional estimates were placed before the House, I found that with the very heavy additional expenses on locusts which had been incurred, it looked as if the saving of £365,000 which we were able to make last year, would disappear. I am glad to say that, although the figures for March are not yet complete, they are sufficiently advanced to indicate an increase in revenue of £350,000 for the year, so we find ourselves in a position of having a surplus of revenue of, approximately, £100,000 to which we shall have to add any surrenders from expenditure votes, so that the surplus available for the redemption of debt will be in the neighbourhood of £200,000. In other words, we have been able to get through the year with the assistance of £300,000 from the loan fund, instead of the half million pounds which we had expected to draw. That result can be considered as highly satisfactory. It is due, in the main, first of all to increased importations, resulting in a substantial increase in the Customs duties, and secondly, a great improvement in the yield in the taxation of the gold mines.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#webber">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WEBBER</person>:</from>

<p>Hear, hear.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wilcocks">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILCOCKS</person>:</from>

<p>We are coming to diamonds.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>The yield of the general income tax and the super-tax has been, I am sorry to say, substantially less than the estimates. The House would perhaps like to have just a brief reference to one or two of the principal increases and decreases on the revenue estimates. In the matter of customs there has been an increase in the estimates of £420,000. The excise has decreased by £100,000, so that we have a net increase of £320,000 on those two heads. Posts, telegraphs, and telephones, show an increase of £77,000 on posts, an increase of £54,000 on telephones, but a decrease of £47,000 on telegraphs, which, as I have indicated before, is very largely attributed to the extent to which the telephone service itself is impinging on the telegraph service. The income tax shows a decrease of £240,000; the excess profits duty a decrease of £55,000, and the death duties a decrease of £40,000. The result achieved at the end of the financial year which has passed, indicates, and that is in itself most encouraging, substantial improvement in the country&#x2019;s condition, and that improvement is to be found in various directions.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#du_toit">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DU TOIT</person>:</from>

<p>We have turned the corner.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I hope we have.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. B. WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>Good government!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>The improvement is to be found in various directions. We have a marked improvement in commerce and business generally, which is reflected in the customs and mining taxation returns, and reflected also, as hon. members will hear in detail, in the railway traffic receipts. So far as the agricultural community is concerned, the ill-effects of the drought and locust invasion have, to a large extent, been set off by the greater prices obtained for wool. Our imports for 1923 were £57,836,000, as against £51,577,000 for 1922. That is an increase of £6,259,000, to which the majority of the items in the imports contributed. One very satisfactory feature of the returns is the increase in the imports of materials employed in development; materials such as machinery, iron and steel manufactures, timber, implements and things of that sort-materials required for developing industries. I need only just briefly refer to one rather striking feature&#x2014;if it is to be taken as an indication of increased spending power&#x2014;and that is the astonishing increase in motor cars. To a very large extent, I think the increase has taken place in the country side, and a notable indication of this is, that they have risen from 4,840 cars of a value of £926,000 in 1922, to 10,151 cars, of a value of £1,721,000. So there is evidently some money in this country still, to buy motor cars!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sampson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SAMPSON</person>:</from>

<p>For the elections.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Our exports are also very satisfactory. In 1923 we exported £73,209,000 worth of goods as against £57,075,000 in 1922. That is an increase of over £16,000,000. You may say that probably the greater part of that is, due to gold and diamonds. It is, but there are other items on the list of exports which give a most cheering indication of the improvement in our agricultural industry. As to this £16,000,000 about £9,600,000 is due to increased export of gold. I should say, here, that this figure must be adjusted if you take in the gold premium, because the customs figures are on the basis of the standard price of gold; the figure will probably be increased to some extent. Diamonds account for an increase of £2,800,000; that is due to improvement in the market. The diamond market, I am sorry to say, has not yet improved to the point at which I should like to see it. We have not yet come to anything like the level of a few years ago, still there has been improvement, and we must hope that that improvement will continue and grow in value. Now I come to wool. There has been an increase in the value of wool exported, to the extent of £1,400,000, and that figure is a striking one when I add that the quantity exported was substantially less than it was the year before. It is pleasing, therefore, <span class="col_1358" refersTo="page_1442"/>that our farmers have received that amount of money for an export which was less than that of the year before, and the reduced export is due, no doubt, to the drought and other conditions through which this country has passed. It is, therefore, a consoling feature of our agricultural industry.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wilcocks">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILCOCKS</person>:</from>

<p>Met &#x2019;n verlies van £4,000,000 daarop.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. B. WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>Met &#x2019;n verlies van £4,000,000 daarop.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Now as to maize. There has been an increase of £1,600,000, and here it is not merely a question of the increase, the quantity and the value are, both of them, more than double the previous year&#x2019;s export. [Hon. Members: &#x201C;Hear, hear.&#x201D;] Yes, the quantity and the values are both more than doubled. We exported in 1922, 272,000 tons to the value of £1,426,000 and last year 564,000 tons to the value of £3,084,000. As to the present crop, the last figures I have, show that up to the end of February last 5,800,000 bags of maize and maize products were exported. That was the highest figure yet reached. To-day, unfortunately, owing to the drought the crop is likely to be the smallest for some years, but I am happly to say that although only an equivalent to two-thirds of the entire crop of last year has been planted this season, the rains we have had since February have brought about a change for the better, and unless the early frosts intervene, the Agricultural Department is hopeful that they will still be in a position to have a small surplus. There has been an increase to the extent of £500,000 in hides and skins; that has followed, of course, the increased price of wool. As to production, the principal increases&#x2014;and that is really the most striking feature of the progress of 1923&#x2014; in the production of the country are in respect of minerals. We must bear in mind, of course, that during 1922 the position was seriously affected by the strike which took place in the early part of that year. The gold increased by 2,133,000 ounces of a value of £8,711,000. Silver increased by 151,000 ounces, of an increased value of £25,000. Diamonds show a total increase of 1,385,900 carats, of an increased value of £3,771,000. The output of coal was a record last year; it amounted to 11,915,000 tons, of a value of £3,714,000. That is an increase in the output over the previous year of 2,181,000 tons of a value of £319,000. There is one item&#x2014;though I do not want to weary the House with the various details of these things or with too many figures&#x2014;but there is one item of interest in connection with the mineral production, and that is copper. The shipments of copper increased from 659 tons, valued at £38,000, to no less than 6.856 tons, of the value of £394,000. Most of this is attributed to the increased operations in the Messina Mine. If I may just trouble the House with a few figures on the question of the direct revenue I spoke of a moment ago of the gold mines, which have contributed very largely indeed towards our comparatively happy position at the end of the year which has passed. As regards the gold mines the total direct revenue&#x2014;I won&#x2019;t trouble the House with the detailed figures&#x2014;was for 1922-&#x2019;23, £1,948,000. For the year which has passed the total direct revenue was £2,793,000, which is indeed a very heavy advance. As to diamonds, the revenue, although much greater than in 1922-&#x2019;23 and the previous year, is very little above the estimates in total, and even this favourable position is due to the profits of the Premier Mine having been abnormally large, and to the sale of a quantity of diamonds from stock. As I have said, the position of the diamond market is still a very long way below that of pre-war times, and I suppose until world conditions as a whole begin to improve materially, we cannot expect to return to those normal demands, but at the same time one welcomes the improvement that has taken place. Now I shall just proceed to give the House a few figures with regard to our loan account. I will not trouble the House with all the detailed figures, but they are available to hon. members who want to go into them and look through them; the total net sum received into the loan account was £16,157,000, and the expenditure from these funds amounted, under the Appropriation Act to £10,975,000. We raised three stock loans during the year, one locally and two in London. The local loan was designed primarily to repay the five per cent. issue of 1916. That loan, hon. members will remember was free of taxation on income; this loan which was issued in 1916. It was the first loan of any magnitude issued in this country, and in order to make a success of it, I think the Government was justified in exempting the interest from taxation. At the same time, I state quite candidly, my own view of the principle of exemption as a general principle, is that it is not sound. For instance, in the case of this loan, the effect of the five per cent. interest being free of income tax is that so far as the rich investor is concerned, the man who pays super and ordinary tax, is relieved of something like 7¾ per cent., while to the small investor it is worth 5¼ per cent. We took the earliest available opportunity therefore of extinguishing this loan, and this was done with complete success, 7½ million being re-invested, and the remainder being paid off. The total issue of this was £15,000,000, of which £8,700,000 was absorbed by conversions and repayments of Cape annuities and such issues. So of the £15,000,000 issued locally, we got £6,300,000 of new money, which I think is not unsatisfactory in view of the condition of the country. Of the London loan £9,000,000 five per cent. stock was issued in October last at 99½. This loan, which I may say met with great and immediate success on the London market, was raised in the first place for the purpose of raising money for our local works, and the repayment of treasury bills, etc. We made a further issue in February last for the purpose of converting £4,000,000 4 per cent. debentures falling due in June next. As regards temporary <span class="col_1359" refersTo="page_1443"/>loans, the result of our transactions during the year was a reduction of our floating debt by £3,759,000. That is a step in the right direction. We have found during the last year or eighteen months, that it has been cheaper to work upon short-dated money than on a long-dated loan, and we have made use of this means for raising money, but we have for some time been carrying too much of this floating debt, and it would be wise to reduce, it. The sales of Union Loan Certificates total £683,000. That is also not unsatisfactory. We have had less than before because the prices have slightly increased, but I think it is not at all unsatisfactory. Now just a word about our public debt, and a few figures. The public debt at the commencement of the year 1923-1924 amounted approximately to £199,686,000, but we have increased that during the year by the issue of stock and certificates to the extent of £28,683,000. On the other hand, we converted and repaid stock, annuities, etc., to the extent of £20,125,000. So the net increase of debt was £8,558,000, and on the 31st March last our debt was £208.244,000. That is the amount of our public debt.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>And quite enough too.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Now, I won&#x2019;t go once more into the question of how much of that debt is reproductive or not. I think the House is fairly familiar with that, but I just want to say a word in regard to our sinking fund. The sinking fund at the end of the closing year amounted to about 11¼ millions on a cash basis, and the nominal value of the Union Government stock held as investments in these sinking funds was £14,100.000. We have paid off through sinking fund operations £2,118,000 stock and debenture debt during the year under review, making with (<i>a</i>) the stock and debentures paid off by the same methods, <i>i.e.,</i> without re-borrowing, from the date of Union to the end of 1922-&#x2019;23 £8.858,000, and (<i>b</i>) the reduction of floating debt effected with the balances in hand at the date of Union £1,477,000, so the total amount of debt paid off since Union is £12,453,000. When we bear in mind that of our total debt probably only about 32 per cent. is unproductive, is not an entirely insignificant figure in respect of our public debt. Now I just want to say a word or two on this point. I have for some time thought that, in spite of the quite considerable reductions we have made, we do not make sufficient provision by sinking fund towards the redemption of our public debt.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#havenga">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAVENGA</person>:</from>

<p>At last.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think that quite sufficient provison is made, and I think that means be taken to improve that situation will be very rightly taken in the interests of the country. Now just one word with regard to the estimates of expenditure as they look for the year to come. The House has had these estimates before it for some time. They total £23,974,648. That is £95,920 less than the estimate for the year just ended, which, as I said in opening, is very close to the actual expenditure for the year. We have added to our expenditure £107,000 to cover charges for departmental telegraph and telephone services, previously rendered free by the post office, so that the true reduction in expenditure is not £95,920 but £2&#x2019;02,000. I should add that this increased expenditure is mainly for debt charges, provincial subsidies, which we have to meet, higher education grants, and things of that sort, and they have been more than covered by savings under the various votes, which, as I have pointed out, have been very considerable. As to the revenue, I have laid on the Table this afternoon the estimates of revenue for the ensuing year. Hon. members will see that these estimates reflect a revenue of £23,891,000. And the customs receipts are based in these revenue estimates upon the existing customs tariff. Now if you compare&#x2014;I will not trouble the House with details of these estimates of revenue&#x2014;if you compare this revenue with our expenditure of £23,974,000, you will find that the year looks as if it ought to come out with a deficit of only £83,000. There will be some additional expenditure, no doubt, but I cannot now indicate the amount. As a matter of fact, most of the additional expenditure, which will have to be considered by who ever has to consider it, is of so uncertain and indefinite a character that it is no use taking it into account in making a statement such as I am making to-day. You have to take beef bounties and such like, and you cannot make an estimate of how much to put down for such items or those of a similar character. Those additional estimates, as well as this small deficit of £83,000, should, I think, be met by savings. It should be possible to meet whatever we are short by saving during the ensuing year, so that it looks clearly from these figures which I have given, that the Minister of Finance who introduces the Budget later in the year should have a comparatively easy and satisfactory task. The present position for the year 1924-&#x2019;25 indicates that the Union Budget will balance, and it will balance without any increased taxation of any sort&#x2014;and it will balance without taking a penny from the Loan fund. I see on hon. member&#x2019;s faces already the pleasure with which they greet the prospect which is before them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#havenga">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAVENGA</person>:</from>

<p>It is extraordinary for this Government.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>If it is then&#x2019; fate to enjoy these results, about which I must say they seem to be a little previous, well let them enjoy them by all means. It is the position. Both these features are highly satisfactory. I wish the position, so far as taxation is concerned, had got to the point where more taxation could be remitted; but we have not got to that point yet. That is for the future, but for the present, when you remember the circumstances which we have passed through, it is particularly satisfactory that we <span class="col_1360" refersTo="page_1444"/>have been able to present a Budget which can be balanced without increasing taxation or taking a penny from the loan receipts. As to the drawings from the loan funds, the House knows perfectly well what my views have been about that. I have done it and am responsible for it; but I have done it, as I have said, over and over again, on each occasion most reluctantly. Gladly I would have avoided doing it, but if you supplement your revenue by drafts from loan funds, you cannot honestly say your are squaring your Budget. The necessity was forced upon me, simply because of the conditions under which the country was passing. We had to choose whether we would make this Budget balance, no matter what the trouble or the misery, or we had to say that we would nurse the patient back quietly to recovery by giving him artificial assistance, but not giving him enough to spoil him. We chose that course in order to meet the conditions of this country after the war, so that we should not press too heavily upon the people of South Africa at large in order to make our Budget balance at once. We made use of a small sum of loan receipts, because we desired to bring the country by gradual stages out of the position in which it was placed, to let the patient convalesce quietly, and to-day our policy has borne good fruit. We have come through with comparatively small drafts from the loan fund, and for the year to come there should be an even Budget again. Well, we have come through dark and troublesome times, and we have endeavoured simply to do our duty as well as we could to this country. In the course of that duty we have had to do unpleasant and unpopular things, but the one thing which these figures I have given the House now seem to mean is that, after the difficult and strenuous days we have been through, I believe that the light is breaking through at last. No man would be so foolish as to claim that all our trouble was over, and that we were once more set on the road to prosperity; but there are signs now that the light is breaking through, and the future condition of this country is bound to be a better one. I will conclude by saying that my only satisfaction about the part I have had to play in all these difficult and trying times is that we have been able, in spite of the difficult and unpleasant things we have had to do, to bring the country through to its present position.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#moor">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOOR</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hertzog">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HERTZOG</person> (Smithfield):</from>

<p>Ons is baie bly om vanmiddag dieselfde optimistiese toon te hoor in die toespraak van die edalagbare die Minister van Finansies, wat ons al so dikwels van hom gehoor het en ek wil van harte hoop, dat ons regtig &#x201C;round the corner&#x201D; is. Ek wil nie lank wees nie, maar net &#x2019;n paar vrae stel. Ek neem aan, dat die Huis more die geleentheid sal hê, d.w.s. as die twede lesing ook vanmiddag geneem word, om die kwessie te bespreek. Ek wens aan die edelagbare die Eerste Minister iets te vra. Ek siet n.l. uit die koerante, dat die besoek van die Prins van Wallis aan Suid-Afrika gekanselleer is en ek wens te verklaar, hoe ek dink, dat dit &#x2019;n baie wyse stap is. Ek moet ewewel dadelik sê, dat ek daarmee geenisins bedoel dat sy besoek nie deur alle seksies verwelkom sou word nie, maar onder die omstandighede kon noueliks iets anders verwag word. Ek voel, dat onteënseglik &#x2019;n sterke gevoel van teleurstelling deur vele in die land ondervonde sal word, maar hoop dat dit nie sal verskerp word deur die indruk dat hy in die geheel nie na Suid-Afrika sal kom nie. Ek hoop, dat ek namens alle seksies kan spreek as ek sê, dat indien hy goed vind om te kom, hy deur die volk uit alle seksies begroet sal word met &#x2019;n respek en hartelikheid, die sy hoë posiesie en ons volk waardig is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>Rank hypocrisy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hertzog">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HERTZOG</person>:</from>

<p>Ek wil graag van die edelagbare die Eerste Minister weet of dit so is. Ek hoop dat die tyd nie ver meer is, wanneer ons &#x2019;n fatsoenlike Huis sal hê. Ék hoop dat die Eerste Minister sal sê wat van die berigte waar is. Ten twede wens ek van die edelagbare die Eerste Minister te weet of hy ons wil sê wanneer die algemene eleksie sal plaasvind. Ek dink hy kan besef, dat onder die omstandighede sal ons bly wees om dit te verneem.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person> (Stamford Hill):</from>

<p>It is rather unusual to take the course which the right hon. the Minister has taken and to make practically a Budget speech at this stage, but, of course, his time is short. We are glad to hear that the position is as the right hon. the Minister has said, but it occurs to us on these benches that these increases are all very fine, but at what cost to a number of people have these figures been framed? It is not at all the effect of our national life that is reflected in the figures of imports and exports, and revenue and expenditure. I should like to make a remark&#x2014;I hope that the interruption of the hon. the Minister of Lands, a responsible Minister, will not be repeated outside the House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>It will be repeated.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. W. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. the Minister would not be a Minister in any other country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I am glad to see an appreciative expression on the right hon. the Prime Minister&#x2019;s face. We have our big differences, but there are some things on which we try to harmonize. [An Hon. Member: &#x201C;Why did not the hon. member second the address?&#x201D;] The right hon. the Prime Minister said that he was going to alter it for one thing, and it never entered my head. I want to say a few words on another point. I hope that the right hon. the Prime Minister will see his way to take the House into his confidence, and state precisely the arrangements which the Government contemplate with regard to the date of the general election. Surely he will give this information, which I think the country is entitled to. With these few remarks we will <span class="col_1361" refersTo="page_1445"/>delay our speeches on the Budget until tomorrow.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#abe_bailey">

<from>†Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">ABE BAILEY</person> (Krugersdorp):</from>

<p>I should like to thank the hon. member for Smithfield (Gen. Hertzog) for his appreciative remarks, but there is another side to the question. Supposing the Government had invited H.R.H. The Prince of Wales to carry out the programme, it might have been thought they were trying to make use of him for the purposes of the election. I would like to say I appreciate the hon. member&#x2019;s remarks, because they show that he now realizes that he has some responsibility. He thinks he has the Prime Ministership within his grasp, but we do not expect he will not hold it, and it shows he appreciates his position. The hon. member for Stamford Hill (Mr. Creswell) also recognizes some responsibility apparently, for we have not heard much about indentured labour from Portuguese East Africa, we have heard nothing about that lately. If there is anything in the nature of indentured labour, it is the Labour Party themselves who are indentured. They obeyed the hon. member as if they were paid mercenaries of one hundred years ago in going to the support of the Nationalists. I hope the hon. member for Smith-field (Gen. Hertzog) will also recognize the nicknamed position of the mining industry, and what it has done for this country. We have heard very much about the backbone of this country&#x2014;the agricultural industry has been nicknamed the backbone of the country, but the real backbone of agriculture is the mining industry. The right hon. the Minister of Agriculture has recently given cocktails in assisting agriculture through the Drought Distress Relief Bill, which the unfortunate farmers deserve, and with which we sympathize, but this has simply been done through the aid of the gold mining industry. If there was no gold-mining industry, there would be a poor agricultural industry. I have nothing more to say but to give the hon. member for Smith-field (Gen. Hertzog) a little advice. His ambition is evidently within his grasp&#x2014;he may be disappointed, for nature sometimes turns on people&#x2014;but if he is not he should work to promote the three prominent industries in this country, viz., the mining industry, the agricultural industry and transportation. If he does that well, we will all go ahead.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person> (Bloemfontein&#x2014;North):</from>

<p>I do not think we want to follow our friend the Republican baronet, but I would like to get on to another question which is agitating to a very large extent, the people of the Free State, particularly in my constituency. I would like to ask the hon. the Minister of Public Health whether to-morrow he will make a statement with regard to the plague position in the Free State. We regret to hear that in Bloemfontein, not in the town but in the district, there have been five or six cases of bubonic plague, and the rodents are all infected. I think before the House prorogues the hon. the Minister should make a statement assuring the farmers that matters are not so bad as they imagine; and advising them what they should do in the case of an epidemic. It would do a great deal of good, and I hope the hon. the Minister will take the opportunity to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_public_health">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH</person>:</from>

<p>I will make a statement to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I rise simply to reply to the two questions which have been put to me by the hon. the Leader of the Opposition and the hon. member for Stamford Hill (Mr, Creswell). With regard to the Prince&#x2019;s visit, the statement which has appeared in the press is quite true. As soon as the Government came to the conclusion that we should take the course which we have intimated to the House, we advised the Prince at the same time that under all the circumstances, although he would be perfectly welcome in South Africa, it would be much better to postpone his visit here. We have assured the Prince, and I think in doing so we have acted on behalf of the country, and of every shade of opinion in this country, that he will have a most royal welcome from every section of the community. The Prince is assured of that. It is only the proprieties of the case that have induced us to advise him to postpone his trip for the present. I think it would be unfair to our Royal visitor, and, unfair to the people of this country, to mix up his visit with the sort of turmoil that we have in this country, and necessarily must have, at election times. Of course, it was also open to the construction which was, unfortunately, yesterday placed upon it by the hon. member, that such a contingency as a visit of the Prince might be exploited for political purposes. I think that would be very unfair and very wrong of any Government, and I do not think any Government of this country would make use of an occasion like that for such a purpose.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>A very unworthy remark to make.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I must leave that to the good taste of the hon. member, but the hon. member has made so many unkind remarks about me that I do not feel profoundly affected.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hertzog">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HERTZOG</person>:</from>

<p>What remarks?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I remember reading a speech delivered not so long ago by the hon. member at a place not very far from here, where he was by no means complimentary to me.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heyns">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEYNS</person>:</from>

<p>As reported in the <i>Cape, Times</i>!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hertzog">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HERTZOG</person>:</from>

<p>It is practically a lie from beginning to end.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>We all agree about the Prince&#x2019;s visit, and I hope that when the elections are over the invitation will be renewed, and that the people of this country will have an early opportunity of seeing their future king here in their midst. I know that he is very anxious to come. He told me last year when I was in London that he was most anxious to see this country, and to show his personal interest in our affairs as a dominion, and I am sure that if the invitation were renewed <span class="col_1362" refersTo="page_1446"/>immediately after the elections, he would probably find an occasion to come. The hon. member for Stamford Hill (Mr. Creswell) has asked for some information about this election.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hertzog">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HERTZOG</person>:</from>

<p>What of the second question?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I am coming to that. Let me say that as at present advised, it is the intention of the Government to advise the dissolution of the House on the 9th of May. Certain preliminary work has to be got through, not in the way of electioneering, because there will be ample time. I am sorry that so much time has really to be taken before we can actually get to a poll, but the electoral rolls have to be made in order, certain legal formalities have to be complied with, and I do not think that under all the circumstances it will be safe for us to dissolve before the 9th of May. It is the intention of the Government to have the election about the middle of June. It is not possible to fix the date, but, hon. members may take it that it will be about the middle of June, three or four days either way, it is impossible to decide now, but between the 15th and the 20th June, very likely, we shall fix for the poll. That is as much information as I have at present, and I merely give it to hon. members because no doubt it is a matter of profound interest to all parties to know where they are.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#second_railways_and_harbours_appropriation_(part)_bill">

<heading>SECOND RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS APPROPRIATION (PART) BILL.<br/>TWEEDE SPOORWEGEN EN HAVENS MIDDELEN (GEDEELTE) WETSONTWERP.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That leave be granted to introduce a Bill to apply a further sum not exceeding two million five hundred thousand pounds on account of the service of the railways and harbours administration for the year ending the 31st day of March, 1925.</block>

<p>Hon. members will remember that the estimates presented to Parliament last session provided for a gross expenditure of £23,367,476 and an estimated gross revenue of £22,854,227, the estimated deficit on the year&#x2019;s working being £513,249. It will also be recalled that the accumulated deficit at the 31st March, 1923, amounted to £2,220,510, so that, after adding to that figure the deficit estimated for 1923-&#x2019;24 of £513,249, there was a prospect that at the 31st March, 1924, there would be a total accumulated deficit of £2,733,759. Now it will also be remembered that when the estimates or additional expenditure for 1923-&#x2019;24 were before the House on the 27th of February last, I informed hon; members that I expected we would probably wind up the year with the accumulated deficit at the 31st March, 1924, which would be reduced to £1,000,000. Well, Sir, I am sure the House will be glad to learn that the actual position is likely to be even better than was then forecasted and that in place of the year&#x2019;s working resulting in a deficit of £513,249, making the accumulated deficit £2,733,759, the year&#x2019;s working is likely to produce a surplus of £1,387,672, thus reducing the accumulated deficit to £832,838, and consequently indicating an improvement over the original estimates to the extent of £1,900,921. This improvement is mainly due to the actual revenue exceeding the estimated revenue by £1,599,962, while a reduction in the expenditure of £300,959 accounts for the remainder of the improvement which, as just stated, amounts to £1,900,921. This state of affairs has, of course, only been made possible by effecting economies in working, and by curtailment of services in many directions. But for the continuous efforts which have been and are still being made by the Administration and its officers to reduce expenditure, the position which I have just disclosed could not have been achieved and the prospects for the future would have caused much anxiety. It must not, of course, be forgotten that we have still a large deficit to liquidate and that being so the Administration will, I hope, continue its efforts to work the various services as economically as possible, consistent with efficiency, as until the deficit is completely liquidated the position cannot be regarded as satisfactory. From the commencement of the financial year in April, 1923, each month&#x2019;s working has resulted in a surplus. For the three months ended 30th June the surplus amounted to £220,752, for the quarter ended 30th September the total was £330,116, and for the quarter ended 31st December last the surplus rose to £553,912. So that for the nine months, April to December, 1923, the excess of receipts over expenditure was £1,104,780. It should be noted, therefore, that there was a gradual improvement in the results for each quarter up to the end of December last, the large increase in the surplus for the last of these three quarters being due in a large measure to the additional passenger revenue obtained during that period from passenger excursion traffic. The month of January has returned a surplus of £217,535, and for the months of February and March it is estimated that there will be a surplus of £65,357, which gives the total surplus for the year already stated of £1,387,672. The estimated surplus of £55,357 for the months of February and March may appear to be very low in comparison with the January surplus of £217,535, but this is accounted for by the drop in the revenue for February owing to there being only 25 working days as against 27 in January, and also by reason of the expenditure in March being above normal owing to the closing of the accounts for the financial year in that month, and to the numerous annual payments which have to be made and adjustments effected in the accounts in order to bring to debit all known expenditure pertaining to the year. In order that hon. members may be in a position to follow what I have to say regarding the salient features of the year&#x2019;s working from a financial point of view, <span class="col_1363" refersTo="page_1447"/>I will now quote the amount of the variations in the revised estimated revenue and expenditure as compared with the original estimated figures&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p><i>Revenue&#x2014;</i></p></td>

<td><p>Increase.</p></td>

<td><p>Decrease.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>£1,430,970</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>207,386</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Steamships</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>£38,394</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>£1,599,962</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p><i>Expenditure.&#x2014;</i></p></td>

<td><p>Decrease.</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>213,332</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>57,559</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Steamships</p></td>

<td><p>30,068</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£300,959</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p>Net improvement</p></td>

<td><p>£1,900,921</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>These increases and decreases, together with full details pertaining thereto, will be found in the &#x201C;Green Book,&#x201D; which will be distributed to hon. members this afternoon. The outstanding feature of the year&#x2019;s working is the increase in the revenue over the estimate by approximately £1,600,000. Of the total increase then of £1,600,000 in revenue, approximately £1,433,000 has been obtained from railways, and £207,000 from harbours; while, on the other hand, the revenue from steamships has been less than that estimated by approximately £38,000. The increase of £1,431,000 in the railways revenue is made up of&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>From main services, that is passengers, goods, coal, etc</p></td>

<td><p>£1,440,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>From receipts on net revenue account, that is interest on investments and miscellaneous receipts</p></td>

<td><p>113,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>£1,553,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Less a reduction in receipts on subsidiary services, that is, catering, bookstalls, bedding equipment, etc.</p></td>

<td><p>122,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>making the net increase</p></td>

<td><p>£1,431,000</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>Dealing first with the revenue obtained from the Main Services (Railways), it will be remembered that the revenue originally estimated to be received from this source was £20,253,200, whereas it is now estimated that the total will amount to £21,693,406, or an anticipated increase of £1,440,206. The original estimate was based on an average revenue of £388,000 per week, and in my Budget speech of last session I informed the House that that was a fairly safe estimate. Well, sir, I need hardly say that it is very gratifying to find that the total revenue of the railways for the past year has exceeded our expectations, and to such an extent that, instead of receiving an average weekly revenue of £388,000, as originally budgetled for, the average has been £413,000, or an increase of £25,000 per week. This very large increase is due to the fact that the tonnage of traffic transported during the year 1923 was the heaviest in the history of the South African Railways, being 18,441,135 tons, an increase, compared with the year 1922, of 3,632,463 tons, or an increase of 25 per cent., and an increase on the previous highest figure, namely, that for 1920, of 2,276,435 tons, or 14 per cent. Goods revenue has exceeded the estimate by approximately £1,120,000, while coal shows an increase of £425,000. On the other hand, passengers and live stock earnings show decreases on the original estimates of approximately £51,000 and £45,000 respectively, the fluctuations under the other heads being comparatively small. When it is remembered that quite a number of reductions were made in rates and fares during 1923, to which I shall refer later on, hon. members will, I think, agree that from a revenue point of view the position during 1923-&#x2019;24 has been highly satisfactory. The gross tonnage of goods traffic conveyed for the public during the year 1923 was 9,211,855 tons, which, compared with the 1922 figure, shows an increase of 1,864,599 tons, equal to am increase of 25.38 per cent. This constituted a record and was in excess of the 1920 figure, which was the previous highest tonnage, by no less than 1,780,430 tons, equal to an increase of 23.96 per cent. With one or two exceptions there were increases under all groups, the only exception of any importance being that of wattle bark, the tonnage of which fell off to the extent of approximately 73,000 tons. The principal increases were:</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Tons.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Maize, Grain and Cereals</p></td>

<td><p>348,770</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Flour and Meal</p></td>

<td><p>13,710</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Fruit</p></td>

<td><p>14,916</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Other agricultural products</p></td>

<td><p>77,646</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Sugar Cane</p></td>

<td><p>324,110</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Ores, Minerals and Gravel</p></td>

<td><p>231,815</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>New Construction</p></td>

<td><p>223,745</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Firewood and Props</p></td>

<td><p>144,842</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Rock for Milling</p></td>

<td><p>100,462</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Other Low Grade Traffic</p></td>

<td><p>154,929</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Building Materials</p></td>

<td><p>160,979</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>General Merchandise</p></td>

<td><p>137,005</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Wines and Provisions</p></td>

<td><p>15,105</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Explosives</p></td>

<td><p>4,834</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Skins and Hides</p></td>

<td><p>3,615</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1,956,483</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>The decreases were:</p></td>

<td><p>Tons.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Wattle Bark</p></td>

<td><p>73,286</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Wool and Mohair</p></td>

<td><p>6,115</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Machinery, General</p></td>

<td><p>9,315</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Machinery, Agricultural</p></td>

<td><p>3,168</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>91,884</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>or a net increase of</p></td>

<td><p>1,864,599</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>A pleasing feature of these figures is the fact that the improvement was due in a large measure to the large increases in the tonnages of South African commodities. As a case in point, the quantities of maize and maize products railed to the Union ports increased from 3,110,960 bags in 1922 to 6,227,842 bags in 1923, an increase of 3,116,882 bags, equal to 100.19 per cent. The transportation of this traffic to the ports was carried out smoothly and expeditiously, notwithstanding that the daily loadings <span class="col_1364" refersTo="page_1448"/>exceeded all anticipations. During the period of intensive maize loading from July to September the total reached no less than 100,000 bags per day. As regards coal traffic, I am pleased to be able to say that the tonnage of this traffic also rose to a total in excess of any previous year&#x2019;s figure&#x2014;another record. The tonnage of coal conveyed for the public was 9,229,280 tons, or 1,767,864 tons more than the tonnage for 1922&#x2014; equal to an increase of 19 per cent. Of the increase of 1,767,864 tons, 988,306 tons were for local consumption, while shipment coal increased by 779,558 tons. The shipment trade, particularly through Durban, was highly satisfactory, while it would appear that much of the Delagoa Bay trade, which was lost to the port as a result of the industrial disturbances in 1922, is being gradually recovered. The tonnage of coal conveyed by rail in August, 1923, was 1,068,268 tons, which constitutes a record for any one month. In the case of the passenger traffic, the total number of passenger journeys during the year 1923 was 64,442,041, which, compared with 1922, shows an increase of 3,877,984 journeys, equal to 6½ per cent. Passenger traffic throughout the year was fairly well sustained, the main feature being the very heavy bookings during the general excursion periods in June, July and December. As hon. members are aware, I have consistently advocated the reduction of rates and fares&#x2014; with due regard to financial conditions&#x2014;in cases where it has been clearly proved that such a course is necessary in order to prevent the loss of business or to stimulate the trade of the country. High rates undoubtedly restrict production, and, in a country such as South Africa where, generally speaking, traffic is conveyed long distances, the cost of transportation is a matter of vital importance to all sections of the community. From a purely Railway point of view, it is better to convey a large tonnage of traffic at low tariffs, than to deal with a small volume of business at high rates, as the former results in the development of the country and an increase in the spending power of the people which, in turn, benefits the Railways in different ways. In pursuance of this policy, I think the House will be pleased to learn that considerable reductions were made in rates and fares during the past financial year. These reductions in rates and fares, together with certain minor alterations which were made, involved a total estimated surrender of revenue of approximately £280,000 per annum. Regarding the subsidiary services (<i>i.e</i>., catering, bookstalls, grain elevators, road motor services, etc.) it is anticipated that the actual revenue from these services will be less than the original estimate to the extent of £122,238. Grain elevators show a reduction of £66,300 due to the elevators not being in readiness to handle a portion of last season&#x2019;s crop as was originally anticipated. Compared with the original estimate, there has been an increase in the revenue received from interest on investments and to the extent of £95,699. This has been attained mainly on account of the amount of monies belonging to the various pension and other funds being larger than was anticipated, resulting in an increase in the interest received from the investment of these monies with the Public Debt Commissioners. Turning now to the harbour revenue. In view of the increased tonnages of traffic conveyed to the ports for export and of the goods imported from overseas to which I have already referred, it naturally follows that there should be a corresponding increase in the Harbour revenue. This has been realized and it is anticipated that the actual revenue will exceed the amounts originally estimated, under practically all the heads, the total increase being estimated at £202,591. The dues on goods and livestock, which are levied partly on an <i>ad valorem</i> basis and partly on a tonnage basis, are expected to show an increase of £129,920, while an excess of £36,302 is anticipated in respect of dues on ships and £24,230 in respect of the coaling apparatus at Durban. The tonnage of goods landed, shipped and transhipped at the principle Harbours of the Union during the year 1923 was 6,626,116 tons, or an increase, compared with the year 1922, of 1,419,867 tons, equal to 27.27 per cent. As regards the revenue from steamships, which consists principally of freight on sleepers transported from Western Australia for the requirements of the Administration and also on coal conveyed from South Africa to eastern ports, the actual revenue is anticipated to be £38,394 less than that originally estimated, due to the reduction in the rates of shipping freight. In addition to the cargoes mentioned, two of the vessels carried full cargoes to European ports in July last which consisted of 130.000 bags of maize. And now sir, I come to the expenditure for the year that has just closed (1923-&#x2019;24). Notwithstanding the very large increase in the traffic dealt with, particulars of which I have just given to the House, it is gratifying to find that, as already stated, the actual expenditure is expected to be £300.959 less than the amount originally estimated, this amount being made up of :&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Saving in Expenditure.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>213,332</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>57,559</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Steamships</p></td>

<td><p>30,068</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total saving</p></td>

<td><p>£300,959</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>Hon. members will, I think, agree that this is very satisfactory, more particularly as the saving has been effected without having to resort to any general scheme of retrenchment of the staff. I need scarcely say, that it has only been possible to keep the actual expenditure of the past year within the Parliamentary Appropriation, by the exercise of constant and close watch on all items of expenditure. The officers of the Administration have left no stone unturned to reduce the cost of transportation without restricting the facilities to the public, and I am sure the House will appreciate the efforts which they have so successfully <span class="col_1365" refersTo="page_1449"/>made in the direction of effecting operating economies. As regards railways expenditure, the savings under main services are estimated to amount to £45,177. But for an excess of £105,938 on the provision for depreciation, due to the increase in revenue on which the contribution for depreciation is based at the rate of 7 per cent., the saving under main services would have totalled £151,115. The only two heads under railways (main services) which show increases are &#x201C;running expenses&#x201D; (£260,313) and &#x201C;cartage services&#x201D; (£10,860). In the case of the running expenses the increase is due entirely to the additional mileage which has been necessitated by the exceptionally heavy traffic dealt with, the additional engine mileage run during the ten months ended January last being 6,549,603 miles more than the estimated mileage. The increase m the cartage expenditure is accounted for by the additional tonnage of traffic carted to and from stations. A considerable increase in the tonnage of traffic inevitably results in increased expenditure under these heads. In the case of the subsidiary services (railways), the saving is estimated to be £108,041. Catering expenditure will be approximately £37,000 under the estimated figure, the decrease being mainly due to less expenditure being incurred in connection with the stores which have been provided to meet the requirements of the staff employed on lines under construction. The expenditure on grain elevators will be approximately £68,000 less than that originally estimated on account of the delay in completing certain elevators, with the result that they have not been employed in handling a portion of last season&#x2019;s maize crop, as was anticipated when the original estimates were framed. The expenditure on net revenue account, namely, &#x201C;interest on capital&#x201D; and &#x201C;miscellaneous expenses&#x201D; is expected to be approximately £60,000 under the estimate. Interest or capital will show a saving in the neighbourhood of £102,000. owing to the expenditure out of loan funds being less than was anticipated, and to a reduction in the rate of interest on these monies from 5.907 per cent. to 4.538 per cent., with effect from 1st April, 1922. On the other hand, miscellaneous expenditure is expected to exceed the original estimate by £41,915, the principal increases being (<i>a</i>) the cost of living allowance to staff stationed at Durban (£13,233), proportion of High Commissioner&#x2019;s office expenses in excess of 1 per cent. on the value of material shipped (£5,380), and additional expenditure in respect of the original cost of assets withdrawn from service and written out of capital account (£20,976). With regard to harbour expenditure, the saving, as already mentioned, is estimated to be £57,559. This is very largely due to reduced payments in respect of interest on capital (£47,877) on account of the issues from loan funds being less than was expected and to a reduction in the rate of interest on loan issues with effect from 1st April, 1922, the adjusting entry for the overpayment in 1922-&#x2019;23 having been made in the 1923-&#x2019;24 accounts. The expenditure on the maintenance and upkeep of the jetties and wharves and other harbour works shows a saving of £22,727. On the other hand, there is an excess under miscellaneous expenses of £7,622, which is partly due to the payment of the cost of living allowance to the staff stationed at Durban. Concerning the steamships expenditure, which is anticipated to be £30,068 under the original estimate, the saving is principally due to reductions in the prices and quantities of stores consumed. The figures relating to the working of the railways and harbours in South-West Africa are included in those I have quoted, in terms of Act No. 20 of 1922, which provides for these railways and harbours forming an integral part of the Union railways. Statistics of the revenue and expenditure of the railways and harbours in the mandated territory are, however, kept for record purposes. For the nine months ended 31st December last the loss on working was £45,875. The transfer of the railways and harbours in the Protectorate, in terms of Act 20 of 1922, has been recorded in the capital account of the Administration at a valuation of £2,881,327 16s. 6d., which has been certified as correct by the Controller and Auditor-General. The entire equipment of the railways in rolling stock at the 31st December, 1923, was&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>No.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Locomotives</p></td>

<td><p>1,867</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Carriages</p></td>

<td><p>3,075</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Wagons and Vans</p></td>

<td><p>32,871</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>The new stock brought into service during 1923 was&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Additional new stock.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Locomotives</p></td>

<td><p>30</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Carriages</p></td>

<td><p>66</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Wagons and Vans</p></td>

<td><p>817</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>while the stock scrapped or sold was&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Scrapped or sold.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Locomotives</p></td>

<td><p>6</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Carriages</p></td>

<td><p>33</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Wagons and Vans</p></td>

<td><p>301</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>Improvements were effected during the year by converting one class into another and by fitting stock with additional conveniences and more up-to-date appliances. The capital expenditure in equipping the railways with rolling stock at the 31st December, 1923, was £18,496,168, or an increase during the year of £149,748. In addition to the capital expenditure a sum of £376,566 out of renewals fund was spent on rolling stock during 1923 to make good depreciation on stock at present in service. The gross expenditure on rolling stock during the year 1923 was, therefore, £526,314, and the total original cost of engines and rolling stock in service at the 31st December, 1923, was £30,407,008. Five road motor services are established in the Union, covering a total mileage of 133 miles, viz.&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p><span class="col_1366" refersTo="page_1450"/></p></td>

<td><p>Miles.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pietersburg&#x2014;Haenertsburg</p></td>

<td><p>39</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bot River&#x2014;Hermanus</p></td>

<td><p>20</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bellville&#x2014;Durbanville</p></td>

<td><p>5½</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Johannesburg&#x2014;Rivonia (Edenburg Village)</p></td>

<td><p>12</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pietersburg&#x2014;Zoetdoorns&#x2014;Waldberg</p></td>

<td><p>56½</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>133</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>The Gordons Bay&#x2014;Strand service was discontinued at the end of April, 1923. For the year ended 31st December, 1923, the services were worked at a profit of £1,735, the results of working being as follows&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Earnings.</p></td>

<td><p>Expenditure.</p></td>

<td><p>Profit.</p></td>

<td><p>Loss.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bot River&#x2014;Hermanus</p></td>

<td><p>8,993</p></td>

<td><p>6,656</p></td>

<td><p>2,337</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bellville&#x2014;Durbanville</p></td>

<td><p>2,151</p></td>

<td><p>2,037</p></td>

<td><p>114</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pietersburg &#x2014; Haenertsburg</p></td>

<td><p>1,048</p></td>

<td><p>1,274</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>226</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pietersburg&#x2014;Zoetdoorns &#x2014;Waldberg</p></td>

<td><p>193</p></td>

<td><p>455</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>262</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Somerset Strand&#x2014; Gordons Bay</p></td>

<td><p>448</p></td>

<td><p>640</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>192</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Johannesburg&#x2014;Rivonia</p></td>

<td><p>2,599</p></td>

<td><p>2,635</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>36</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>15,432</p></td>

<td><p>13,697</p></td>

<td><p>2,451</p></td>

<td><p>716</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Net Profit</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£1,735</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>Motor services have undoubtedly benefited the districts served, but the working of these services under present-day conditions is very difficult and costly owing to the absence of suitable roads for mechanical transport. Notwithstanding that representations have been made to the responsible authorities in regard to the unsatisfactory state of roads, the problem is still as acute as ever; as a matter of fact, the condition of some roads is actually becoming worse. This means of transport hangs solely on the provision of good roads, and while the policy of the Administration is to introduce services wherever the traffic justifies this course, it is unreasonable to expect the Administration to do so in the absence of good roads. The total number of staff employed on railways and harbours, open lines and construction, including South-West Africa, as at the 31st December, 1923, was 80,088. In addition to these 1,759 convicts were employed. These figures do not include 1,137 white labourers employed on relief works. The following details show the distribution of the staff on that date&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p><i>Europeans.</i></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>34,698</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>1,003</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Construction</p></td>

<td><p>1,110</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>36,811</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p><i>Europeans (Casuals).</i></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>112</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>197</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Construction</p></td>

<td><p>28</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>337</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Gross Total&#x2014;Europeans</p></td>

<td><p>37,148</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p><i>Coloured.</i></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>3,920</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>358</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Construction</p></td>

<td><p>31</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>4,309</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p><i>Coloured (Casuals).</i></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>1,204</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>90</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>1,294</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Gross Total&#x2014;Coloured</p></td>

<td><p>5,603</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p><i>Indians.</i></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>1,988</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>164</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Construction</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>2,152</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p><i>Natives.</i></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>28,052</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>947</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Construction</p></td>

<td><p>4,083</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>33,082</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p><i>Natives (Casuals).</i></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>1,771</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>332</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>2,103</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Gross Total, Natives &amp; Indians</p></td>

<td><p>35,185</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Grand Total</p></td>

<td><p>80,088</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p>The following convicts were also employed:</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p><i>Convicts.</i></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>176</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>934</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Construction</p></td>

<td><p>649</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>1,759</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Grand Total</p></td>

<td><p>81,847</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>31st <i>December,</i> 1923.</p>

<p>Summary.</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>European.</p></td>

<td><p>Coloured.</p></td>

<td><p>Indians</p></td>

<td><p>Natives</p></td>

<td><p>Total.</p></td>

<td><p>Convicts.</p></td>

<td><p>Grand Total.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>34,810</p></td>

<td><p>5,124</p></td>

<td><p>1,988</p></td>

<td><p>29,823</p></td>

<td><p>71,745</p></td>

<td><p>176</p></td>

<td><p>71,921</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>1,200</p></td>

<td><p>448</p></td>

<td><p>164</p></td>

<td><p>1,279</p></td>

<td><p>3,091</p></td>

<td><p>934</p></td>

<td><p>4,025</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Construction</p></td>

<td><p>1,138</p></td>

<td><p>31</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>4,083</p></td>

<td><p>5,232</p></td>

<td><p>649</p></td>

<td><p>5,901</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>37,148</p></td>

<td><p>5,603</p></td>

<td><p>2,152</p></td>

<td><p>35,185</p></td>

<td><p>80,068</p></td>

<td><p>1,759</p></td>

<td><p>81,847</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p><span class="col_1367" refersTo="page_1451"/>31st <i>December,</i> 1922.</p>

<p>Summary.</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>European.</p></td>

<td><p>Coloured.</p></td>

<td><p>Indians</p></td>

<td><p>Natives</p></td>

<td><p>Total.</p></td>

<td><p>Convicts.</p></td>

<td><p>Grand Total.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>34,975</p></td>

<td><p>4,274</p></td>

<td><p>2,035</p></td>

<td><p>27,193</p></td>

<td><p>68,477</p></td>

<td><p>99</p></td>

<td><p>68,576</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>1,262</p></td>

<td><p>113</p></td>

<td><p>158</p></td>

<td><p>2,467</p></td>

<td><p>4,000</p></td>

<td><p>1,273</p></td>

<td><p>5,273</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Construction</p></td>

<td><p>434</p></td>

<td><p>7</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>1,351</p></td>

<td><p>1,792</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>1,792</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>36,671</p></td>

<td><p>4,394</p></td>

<td><p>2,193</p></td>

<td><p>31,011</p></td>

<td><p>74,269</p></td>

<td><p>1,372</p></td>

<td><p>75,641</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>The total capital expenditure on open lines (railways) including £3,044,091 in respect of assets acquired and reconstruction and new works in South-West Africa and also the loss in working the railways in that territory was £111,310,372, being an increase of £6,882,212, as compared with the total capital expenditure at the end of 1922 of £104,428,160. The total capital expenditure on harbours and lighthouses including £12,206 in respect of loss in working Luderitz harbour and Dias Point lighthouse in South-West Africa was £12,414,953, being an increase of £752,270, as compared with the total capital expenditure at the end of 1922 of £11,662,683. The combined railways and harbours capital expenditure at the 31st December, 1923, was therefore £123,725,325. These figures include expenditure out of revenue on capital account amounting to over £18,000,000 in addition to the expenditure out of loan funds. The estimated expenditure for 1924-&#x2019;25. The mileage in the Union and in South-West Africa of open lines of railway, owned by the Government or privately owned, in respect of each province, and the number of miles of line to each 100 square miles of territory, and to the white, coloured and total population are&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td rowspan="2"><p></p></td>

<td colspan="3"><p>Mileages as at 31st March, 1923.</p></td>

<td rowspan="2"><p>No. of miles of line per 100 sq. miles of territory.</p></td>

<td colspan="3"><p>No. of miles of line per 10,000 inhabitants.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Government Lines</p></td>

<td><p>Private Lines</p></td>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>European descent.</p></td>

<td><p>Other</p></td>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Cape of Good Hope</p></td>

<td><p>4,254</p></td>

<td><p>453</p></td>

<td><p>4,707</p></td>

<td><p>1.70</p></td>

<td><p>70.27</p></td>

<td><p>21.54</p></td>

<td><p>16.49</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Natal</p></td>

<td><p>1,416</p></td>

<td><p>33</p></td>

<td><p>1,449</p></td>

<td><p>4.11</p></td>

<td><p>99.12</p></td>

<td><p>10.82</p></td>

<td><p>9.76</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Transvaal</p></td>

<td><p>2,644</p></td>

<td><p>7</p></td>

<td><p>2,651</p></td>

<td><p>2.40</p></td>

<td><p>46.50</p></td>

<td><p>16.46</p></td>

<td><p>12.15</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Orange Free State</p></td>

<td><p>1,342</p></td>

<td><p>4</p></td>

<td><p>1,346</p></td>

<td><p>2.67</p></td>

<td><p>69.51</p></td>

<td><p>29.19</p></td>

<td><p>20.56</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>South-West Africa</p></td>

<td><p>1,331</p></td>

<td><p>74</p></td>

<td><p>1,405</p></td>

<td><p>0.44</p></td>

<td><p>72.30</p></td>

<td><p>67.45</p></td>

<td><p>61.69</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Gross Total</p></td>

<td><p>10,987</p></td>

<td><p>571</p></td>

<td><p>11,558</p></td>

<td><p>1.45</p></td>

<td><p>72.28</p></td>

<td><p>19.91</p></td>

<td><p>15.61</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>The estimated mileage of new lines under construction to he opened for traffic during 1924-&#x2019;25 is 423 miles.</p>

<p>The estimated expenditure for 1924-&#x2019;25 is £23,769,496. The revised estimated expenditure for 1923-&#x2019;24 is £23,066,517, so that an increase is contemplated of £702,979, which is sub-divided as follows&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways (increase)</p></td>

<td><p>£680,763</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours (increase)</p></td>

<td><p>14,766</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Steamships (increase)</p></td>

<td><p>7,450</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£702,979</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>At first sight it may appear that the Estimates for 1924-&#x2019;25 have been framed on an unduly generous scale but I may at once say that this is not the case. The estimated expenditure has been based on the actual expenditure of the past year, to which has been added the estimated cost of working the new lines to be opened during 1924-&#x2019;25, the provision for new services, and other additional unavoidable expenditure, which I shall refer to later. I will now analyse briefly the railway estimates of expenditure which account for no less than £680,763 of the total increase of £702,979. In the first place, provision has been made for increments to the salaried and daily paid staff in accordance with the new scales of pay, the amount provided in this connection being £206,000. Another very large item is the additional amount of £233,000 in respect of grain elevators, provision having been made to meet the cost of purchasing a large quantity of grain bags and also operating the terminal elevator at Cape Town and 34 country elevators, for nine months of the year. Then the contribution for depreciation of railway assets, which has again been calculated on the basis of 7 per cent. of the estimated railway revenue from main services, shows an increase of £201,000, while the amount to be paid in respect of interest on capital is estimated to exceed the payment made for the past year by £191,076. These items alone more than account for the total increase in the estimated expenditure, and but for the success that has attended the efforts of the responsible officers in effecting savings in working costs, reference to which has already been made, there would have been a much larger increase in the estimated expenditure for 1924-&#x2019;25. In order that hon. members may appreciate to what extent the estimated expenditure for 1924-&#x2019;25 varies with the revised Estimates for 1923-&#x2019;24, I think I cannot do better than detail the main items making up the net increase of £680,763, which are as follows&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p><i>Increases.</i></p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Increments to daily-paid staff</p></td>

<td><p>149,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Increments to salaried staff</p></td>

<td><p>57,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>206,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Working of grain elevators</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>233,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Depreciation of railway assets</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>201,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Interest on capital</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>191,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p>Additional quantities of rails, sleepers and other material</p></td>

<td><p>155,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Opening of hew lines</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>45,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p><span class="col_1368" refersTo="page_1452"/>Additional repairs to buildings</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>40,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Increased provision for catering service</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>38,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Additional contributions to pension and superannuation funds</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>28,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p>Total increase</p></td>

<td><p>£1,137,000</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>From this amount falls to be deducted the following decreases&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Reduction in provision for writing down the value of stores to current prices</p></td>

<td><p>150,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Reduced amount under running expenses for coal and water</p></td>

<td><p>23,000</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Saving in overtime, reduction of staff and various sundry savings</p></td>

<td><p>283,237</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>456,237</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p>Net increase</p></td>

<td><p>£680,763</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>Concerning the provision for depreciation or renewals, it will be remembered that last session I stated that I considered the provision which had been made by the application of the rate which had been in operation since 1917, namely 2.86 per cent. of the capital cost of the wasting assets, erred on the side of liberality, and that, after considering the matter carefully I decided to adopt the basis employed on the Argentine railways for a number of years, namely, to calculate the contribution for depreciation at the rate of 7 per cent. of the estimated revenue from railways (main services). I intimated also that this basis was in the nature of a trial, and that the effect of it would be closely watched. Further, that the new basis has the merit of making the contributions fluctuate according to the rise or fall of the revenue. Well, sir, this matter has formed the subject of further consideration, and as a result of the experience of the past year I see no reason for departing from the new basis, at any rate for the present. The new method has not been sufficiently long in operation to justify a definite opinion as to its soundness or otherwise, and that being the case, I propose to continue to employ the 7 per cent. rate until circumstances and the results secured point to a change being necessary I feel sure the House will be interested to learn how the fund now stands, and what the probable position will be at the end of the year 1924-&#x2019;25. I have therefore to state that the credit balance at the 31st March, 1923, was £2,038,683, contributions to the fund during 1923-&#x2019;24 were £1,564,058, making a total of £3,602,741. Against this the estimated expenditure during 1923-&#x2019;24 will be £1,308,735, thus giving a balance at the end of March, 1924, of £2,294,006, or, say roughly, £2,300,000. During 1924-&#x2019;25 the approximate contributions to the fund will amount to £1,700,000, thus giving a total amount available in the fund during 1924-&#x2019;25 of £3,994,006. Against this sum the estimated commitments at the 31st March, 1924, total £1,948,495, so that even if all the commitments require to be met during 1924-25 there will still be a sum available in the fund amounting to £2,045,511. All of the commitments, however, will not require to be met during 1924-&#x2019;25 as many of them will not be paid until later years, and from this hon. members will appreciate that the renewals fund is in quite a satisfactory position. It is estimated that the position of the betterment fund at the 31st March, 1924, will be as follows&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Credit balance at 31st Match, 1923</p></td>

<td><p>£210,129</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Receipts during 1923-&#x2019;24</p></td>

<td><p>250,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£460,129</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p><i>Less</i> expenditure during 1923-&#x2019;24</p></td>

<td><p>211,003</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Approximate credit balance at 31st March, 1924</p></td>

<td><p>£249,126</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>The contemplated contribution from revenue for the year l924-&#x2019;25 is £250,000, so that during 1924-&#x2019;25 there will be available to meet proposals for works involving expenditure out of betterment, £499,125. The commitments against the fund at 31st March, 1924, are estimated to amount to £294,863, so that the net balance available for subsequent expenditure will be £204,263. This fund is now called upon to bear the cost of certain classes of work which have in the past been charged to working votes. The subject is a somewhat complicated one, and I do not propose to burden the House with details in connection with it at this stage. With regard to the provision for writing down the value of stores stock, I may remind the House that two previous contributions have been made for the purpose stated, the first amounting to £500,000 being made in 1922-&#x2019;23, and the second to £250,000 in 1923-&#x2019;24. The provision made in the 1924-&#x2019;25 Estimates is considered sufficient to write down the value of the various items of stock to the approximate current market prices, although, of course, the position changes from time to time, in consequence of the fluctuation in prices. The writing down of stores stock valuations has been of undoubted advantage to the Administration, in that it has prevented the inflation of the working accounts by including charges for stores at prices in keeping with current market rates, and has also reduced the cost of capital works, including new lines, on the cost of which interest has to be paid in perpetuity. Regarding the additional provision of £45,000 for the working of new lines to be opened during 1924-&#x2019;25, the sections to be opened for public traffic and the probable dates of opening are&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>To be opened.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Raapenberg to Vygekraal</p></td>

<td><p>April, 1924.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Franklin to Kokstad</p></td>

<td><p>May, 1924.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Franklin to Matatiele</p></td>

<td><p>May, 1924</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Windhoek to Ondekaremba</p></td>

<td><p>July, 1924.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Heilbron to Petrus Steyn</p></td>

<td><p>July, 1924.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Lydenburg to Olifantspoortje</p></td>

<td><p>July, 1924.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Hercules to Magaliesberg</p></td>

<td><p>September, 1924.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Oudtshoorn to Calitzdorp</p></td>

<td><p>September, 1924.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Touws River to Ladismith (first portion)</p></td>

<td><p>September, 1924.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Touws River to Ladismith (second portion)</p></td>

<td><p>March, 1925.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Rustenburg to Boschhoek</p></td>

<td><p>October, 1924.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Fort Beaufort to Balfour</p></td>

<td><p>December, 1924.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Ermelo to Lothair</p></td>

<td><p>March, 1925.</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p><span class="col_1369" refersTo="page_1453"/>The total mileage of the lines to be opened in 1924-&#x2019;25 is 423 miles. The estimated expenditure on harbours for 1924-&#x2019;25 is £1,064,456, which is £14,766 more than the actual expenditure for 1923-&#x2019;24. This increase is entirely due to additional interest on expenditure out of loan funds, the increase in this provision being £28,096. The fluctuations under the other heads of expenditure are so small as to call for no special comment. As regards steamships, it is estimated that the expenditure for 1924-&#x2019;25 will amount to £158,310 as against an actual expenditure for 1923-&#x2019;24 of £150,860 or an increase of £7,450 only. This increase is mainly due to provision for additional repairs of a light nature. I will now deal with the estimates of revenue for 1924-&#x2019;25, and in this respect I may state in a few words that the gross revenue from railways, harbours and steamships is estimated to be £24,051,852, made un of&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>22,571,330</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>1,312,083</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Steamships</p></td>

<td><p>168,439</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>£24,051,852</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>It will be remembered for the year that has just closed (1923-&#x2019;24), the revenue is estimated at £24,454,189. From that it will be seen that the revenue for 1924-&#x2019;25 is anticipated to be less than that of 1923-&#x2019;24 by £402,337, this amount being made up of&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>A decrease from railways of</p></td>

<td><p>383,798</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>A decrease from harbours of and</p></td>

<td><p>33,965</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>An increase from steamships of</p></td>

<td><p>15,426</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Giving a total net decrease of</p></td>

<td><p>£402,337</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>Particulars of the estimated revenue for 1924-&#x2019;25 and of the revised estimated revenue for 1923-&#x2019;24, under the various heads, will be found in the &#x201C;Green Book&#x201D; which will be distributed to hon. members this afternoon. Taking railways first, the total estimated revenue from the various services for the year 1924-&#x2019;25 is £22,571,330, this amount being subdivided as follows&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Main services</p></td>

<td><p>£20,994,510</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Subsidiary services (<i>i.e</i>., catering, bookstalls, grain elevators, etc.)</p></td>

<td><p>1,099,850</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Interest on investments and miscellaneous</p></td>

<td><p>476,970</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>£22,571,330</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>In the case of the main services, it is anticipated that, compared with 1923-&#x2019;24, the revenue to be received during 1924-&#x2019;25 will show a reduction of £698,896, this amount being made up as follows&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Increase.</p></td>

<td><p>Decrease.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Passengers</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>192,982</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Parcels</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>9,344</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Goods and minerals other than coal</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>496,640</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Coal</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>17,140</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Livestock</p></td>

<td><p>1,378</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Other traffic receipts</p></td>

<td><p>20,101</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Miscellaneous</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>4,269</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total net decrease</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>£698,896</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>The reasons for estimating a falling off in the revenue, to the extent of £698,896 per annum, are two-fold. The first is the reductions in rates and fares, which as I have already intimated to the House, are being brought into operation forthwith. These will involve a surrender of revenue of approximately £500,000 per annum. The second is the unlikelihood, owing to the drought, of traffic being again experienced equal in tonnage to the record tonnage of 1923-&#x2019;24. On the other hand an increased revenue of £107,000 is expected in respect of new lines to be opened during the year. The average weekly revenue received from railways (main services), from the 1st April, 1923, to the 22nd March, 1924, that is, for the whole of the year with the exception of the last nine days, was £412,828 per week, whereas the revenue for 1924-&#x2019;25 has been estimated at £402,600 per week. After allowing for the reduction of rates and fares to be brought into operation forthwith it may be of interest to hon. members to know that the additional revenue obtained by reason of the rates and fares being higher than pre-war rates and fares will be as follows&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Additional revenue per annum.</p></td>

<td><p>Increase per cent. over pre-war.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Passengers</p></td>

<td><p>£911,168</p></td>

<td><p>22.82</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Parcels</p></td>

<td><p>136,309</p></td>

<td><p>32.35</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Goods, minerals and local coal</p></td>

<td><p>3,368,426</p></td>

<td><p>43.25</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Shipment coal</p></td>

<td><p>437,145</p></td>

<td><p>44.87</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Livestock</p></td>

<td><p>151,300</p></td>

<td><p>38.37</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>£5,004,348</p></td>

<td><p>36.87</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>With regard to the subsidiary services (railways), the total revenue for the year is estimated at £1,099,850, the total in respect of each service being&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Catering</p></td>

<td><p>£605,810</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bookstalls</p></td>

<td><p>178,500</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bedding equipment of trains</p></td>

<td><p>52,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Grain elevators</p></td>

<td><p>244,755</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Road motor services</p></td>

<td><p>18,785</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>£1,099,850</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>Compared with the revised estimated revenue for 1923-&#x2019;24, it shows an advance of £296,850&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote"><span class="col_1370" refersTo="page_1454"/>this increase being very largely due to the anticipated additional revenue to be obtained from the grain elevators service (£230,755) and to an anticipated increase in the catering revenue of £60,810. Interest on investments and miscellaneous receipts are estimated to amount to £476,970, giving an increase of £18,248, which is due mainly to the increased amount of monies to be invested on behalf of the superannuation and pension funds. In the case of harbours, the total revenue from main services is estimated to amount to £1,278,083, which, compared with 1923-&#x2019;24, shows a decline of £32,965. For the period 1st April, 1923, to the 22nd March, 1924, that is practically the whole of the past financial year, the average weekly revenue from harbours was £25,324. For the year 1924-&#x2019;25, the weekly revenue has been estimated at £24,500, or a reduction on the previous year&#x2019;s figure of £824 per week. This estimate has also been based on the actual revenue received during the past year after making allowance for the lesser quantity of agricultural produce to be shipped during 1924-&#x2019;25 in consequence of the drought. Revenue from the subsidiary service of lighthouses and miscellaneous receipts are estimated to yield £40,000, which represents a slight decline, due to an estimated lesser number of ships calling during the year. The steamships revenue for 1924-&#x2019;25 is estimated to amount to £168,439, which is £15,426 more than the actual revenue received during the year 1923-&#x2019;24. This is mainly due to slightly larger cargoes being anticipated during 1924-&#x2019;25. Hon. members will now realize that I have given particulars of the estimated revenue and expenditure for 1924-&#x2019;25, and the reasons for the variations between that year&#x2019;s figures and those for 1923-&#x2019;24, and in order that the position may be clearly understood, I will now summarize the totals and give the net result anticipated for the year. The gross revenue from railways, harbours and steamships is estimated at £24,051,852. The estimated expenditure on these services amounts to £23,769,496, thus showing that an estimated surplus of £282,356 is anticipated for 1924-&#x2019;25. Assuming that that estimated surplus is realized, and also that the surplus for 1923-&#x2019;24 is realized, the position at the end of March, 1925, will be as follows: Accumulated deficit to 31st March, 1923, £2,220,510. Deduct surplus for 1923-&#x2019;24, £1,387,672, and surplus for 1924-&#x2019;25, £282,356, total £1,670,028; leaving a total estimated deficit at 31st March, 1925, of £550,482. That, sir, is the financial position of the railways and harbours to-day, and while a good deal of leeway still remains to be made up, before the finances of the Administration can be regarded as being on a sound footing, I do not consider that, in all the circumstances, any real grounds exist to-day for pessimism. As I have already indicated, the improvement in the position has been brought about by the remarkable advance in the revenue and by the exercise of economies in all possible directions, and unless the revenue takes an unexpected and decided downward turn, or the policy of rigid economy is departed from, a satisfactory year&#x2019;s working in 1924-&#x2019;25 may be confidently anticipated.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_jager">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE JAGER</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person> (Stamford Hill):</from>

<p>I have on the Order Paper for this afternoon a motion for a Select Committee to be appointed, which obviously it will be absurd to move in the circumstances in which we find ourselves, but I think that this would be a suitable opportunity just to ask the hon. the Minister of Railways to do what seems to us a piece of common justice. The facts are these. It will be within the recollection of the House that in Committee on the Part Appropriation, Bill of the Railways last year, the hon. the Minister of Railways made certain quite clear and serious allegations.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-speaker">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>It seems that the hon. member is anticipating the next motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, but in the circumstances, as that motion cannot come forward, I think you will permit me to take this opportunity.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-speaker">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>But there is no evidence before the Chair that the motion cannot come forward, and in the circumstance I cannot allow this discussion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Then I shall speak on the next motion.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading tomorrow.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#adjournment">

<heading>ADJOURNMENT.<br/>VERDAGING.</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person></from>

<p>moved&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the House do now adjourn.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_eeden">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN EEDEN</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I would ask the right hon. the Prime Minister in common decency, in view of the ruling which Mr. Deputy-Speaker has just given, which closes my mouth on a matter which does not concern members of this House, but many people outside this House, to allow me to avail myself of this opportunity to try and get redress in regard to the matter which has been raised. I have had to forego my rights, or the right which I should have as the mover of this motion, to bring up this question, and I hope that he will withdraw his motion for the adjournment so as to allow this motion to be discussed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I would suggest to the hon. member that the proper course would be for him to withdraw his motion, which is a blocking motion. The hon. member realizes that it is no use putting this motion, which is for the appointment of a Select Committee, which will never sit. He is therefore blocked from raising his own motion. My suggestion out of the difficulty is that the hon. member should withdraw his motion. Leave can easily be given for that, and then on the second reading of this Bill he can raise this point. He will understand that he cannot raise it just now, because so long as his motion is on the paper this matter cannot be discussed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from><span class="col_1371" refersTo="page_1455"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I am afraid that I cannot agree to this suggestion. The circumstances are these: That motion is not a blocking motion. If you, Mr. Deputy-Speaker, in your discretion, knowing perfectly well that it will not come on, will permit the discussion to take place, you will be permitted to do so under the rules of the House. As I am situated to-day, I may be equally blocked to-morrow as I was just now, because when I ask for the withdrawal of this motion to be allowed, any hon. member of this House can object. I therefore hope that you will grant me latitude in allowing me to discuss this matter now. I wish to call the attention of the House and of the country to the action which the right hon. the Prime Minister has taken, in order to prevent me in my representative capacity from trying to make one last appeal before this Parliament closes to the hon. the Minister of Railways to take that course which our long experience of him entitles us to expect from him.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I suggested a course out of the difficulty.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>There is no difficulty, and I never was in any difficulty. The only difficulty I see is that Mr. Deputy-Speaker ruled that owing to the existence of that formal motion, which is obviously merely formal, and which we may never reach, I cannot speak. Any hon. member may object to have it withdrawn, and there the motion will stand. The Government business, is done for the day, and there is nothing to prevent the right hon. the Prime Minister from withdrawing his motion for the adjournment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-speaker">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I might point out to the hon. member that if an hon. member wishes to withdraw his motion, he is entitled to do so, and no one can prevent him. It is entirely within the power of the hon. member to do so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush, with such a very astute tactician as the right hon. the Prime Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>This is most unfair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRESWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I am entitled to discuss matters on which we want some information. I shall go on until I am ruled out of order. I want the House and the country to realize that the privileges of this House are very precious to us, but the privileges of this House should not be allowed to enable us to persecute any person outside this House by making serious and damaging charges against him. On the second reading of this Bill it will be competent for me to raise the question. We know, and I am still resisting the adjournment of the House, we know perfectly well that in such a debate as that, this matter may form a mere item. We know also that this House is desirous of getting through the business as soon as possible, the ordinary Government business, in order to enable Parliament to be prorogued. Under these circumstances the right hon. the Prime Minister&#x2019;s attempt to smother this motion here, will bear only one interpretation. Members&#x2019; convenience is not studied. This is private members&#x2019; day, and the Government have taken an unprecendented course. They have taken a course unprecedented as far as I know, certainly, since Union, in the proceedings of this House. The rules of the House give precedence even on private members&#x2019; day to move the introduction of a Bill. Customarily and ordinarily these Bills are dealt with formally, and do not take up the time of the House, and for the right hon. the Prime Minister to block a matter of this sort is unworthy of the right hon. the Prime Minister, and I am sure it is unworthy of the hon. the Minister of Railways to sit there and not join in the protest against this adjournment, and the discussion being blocked. There is no time limit this afternoon. If the House desires to sit and discuss this matter, it is a matter for the House, and I object to the House adjourning just to prevent a discussion on this matter, and so blocking a private member in a motion which he wishes to move. I have material here showing the steps that have been taken by this person. Every possible step has been taken, by denial in the public press, by letter to the right hon. the Prime Minister, by letter to the hon. the Minister of Railways, for some opportunity to clear his character. We want to use the privileges of this House with a due sense of responsibility, and I shall divide the House against the adjournment, and against the manifest injustice which, in my opinion, is being done in preventing us from getting the hon. the Minister of Railways to give that which he ought to give&#x2014;a frank, clear, statement, that he was in the wrong. I call upon any hon. member who has got any sense of fair play to have this matter discussed before Parliament prorogues, and get the hon. the Minister of Railways to substantiate a serious charge against the person outside this House, or for him to withdraw the same.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#keyter">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KEYTER</person> (Ficksburg):</from>

<p>Ek hoop die edelagbare die Eerste Minister sal hier geleentheid gee om my formele onbestrede mosie te stel vóór die Huis verdaag.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Die voorstel is om die Huis te verdaag.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#keyter">

<from>De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KEYTER</person>:</from>

<p>Ja juis, maar ek vra die edelagbare die Eerste Minister &#x2019;n bietjie te wag met die verdaging tot tyd en wyle die formele mosie gestel is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>†De hr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. W. MALAN</person> (Humansdorp):</from>

<p>Dis nie my plan om op die meriete van die mosie van die edele lid vir Stamford Hill (de hr. Creswell) in te gaan nie, maar ek wil ook graag &#x2019;n beroep doen op die edelagbare die Eerste Minister om die Huis geleëntheid te gee om die mosie van die edele lid volledig te bespreek vanmiddag. Dis maar kwart voor vyf en die Huis het nog een uur en een kwartier. Dus hoop ek dat die edelagbare die Eerste Minister en die edelagbare die Minister van Spoorwee verstaan, dat wat ook al gedink mag word van die metodes van die persoon in kwessie, dat daar &#x2019;n ernstige beskuldiging teen die persoon gemaak is en dat dit nie meer as reg is van die <span class="col_1372" refersTo="page_1456"/>kant van die Huis en edele lede nie om die persoon geleëntheid te gee om sy saak te stel by wyse van mosie. Dis waar, dat onder die besondere omstandighede beteken dit nie veel in die praktyk nie, want al word &#x2019;n Selekt Komitee aangestel so kan dit tog nie prakties uitgevoer word nie, maar met &#x2019;n bietjie bespreking sal die edelagbare die Minister geleentheid kry om &#x2019;n verklaring te maak, wat nie meer dan billik is teenoor die persoon nie. Elkeen kan die posiesie verstaan dat wat die man ook al gedoen mag het, wanneer &#x2019;n beskuldiging van so&#x2019;n ernstige aard gemaak word, dat dit nie meer dan reg is, dat die Huis die man die geleëntheid moet gee om sy saak te stel. Dis waar die edelagbare die Minister sê dat die saak more by die Addisionele Begroting ter sprake gebring kan word, maar ons voel dat ons hier graag die saak in konkrete vorm voor die Huis wil bring, om die edelagbare die Minister geleëntheid te gee om die saak te behandel. Ek hoop dat die edelagbare die Eerste Minister die saak nog eens sal oorweeg en die edele lid vir Stamford Hill (de hr. Creswell) geleëntheid sal gee om sy mosie voor te stel.</p>

</speech>

<p>Motion for the adjournment of the House put, and the House divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;52.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Bisset, M.</p>

<p>Brown, D. M.</p>

<p>Buchanan, W. P.</p>

<p>Burton, H.</p>

<p>Cilliers, P. S.</p>

<p>Claassen, G. M.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coetzee, J. P.</p>

<p>Dreyer, T. F. J.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Fitchat, H.</p>

<p>Fourie, J. C.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Greenacre, W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Henderson, R. H.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Jordaan, P. J.</p>

<p>King, J. G.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Malan, F. S.</p>

<p>McAlister, H. S.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Moor, J. W.</p>

<p>Nel, T. J.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Nixon, C. E.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Purcell, I.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Scholtz, P. E.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Stuart, W. H.</p>

<p>Van Aardt, F. J.</p>

<p>Van Eeden, J. W.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, B. I. J.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Webber, W. S.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R.; De Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;39.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>Enslin, J. M.</p>

<p>Forsyth, R.</p>

<p>Fourie, A. P. J.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Jansen, E. G.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Le Roux, P. W.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Malan, C. W.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pienaar, B. J.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. v. W.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, C. A.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. H. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Sampson, H. W.; Wilcocks, C. T. M.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly agreed to.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1924-04-08T16:55:00">4.55 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

