---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol2 - MONDAY 28 JULY 1924'
layout: debate
year: 1924
month: JULY
month_slug: Jul
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>MONDAY, 28th JULY, 1924.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1924-07-28T14:22:00">2.22 p.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#new_members">

<heading>NEW MEMBERS.</heading>

<p>Mr. G. A. LOUW, introduced by Dr. de Jager and Mr. Sephton, made, and subscribed to, the affirmation, and took his seat.</p>

<p>Mr. PAPENFUS, introduced by Col.-Cdt. Collins and Lt.-Col. N. J. Pretorius, made, and subscribed to, the oath, and took his seat.</p>

<p>Mr. MADELEY, introduced by the Rev. Mr. Mullineux and Dr. H. Reitz, made, and sub scribed to, the oath, and took his seat.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#standing_orders_committee">

<heading>STANDING ORDERS COMMITTEE.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER appointed the following members to constitute, with Mr. Speaker, the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders, viz., the Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Defence, Gen. Smuts, Mr. Krige, Sir Thomas Smartt, Mr. de Waal, Dr. de Jager, Mr. Sampson and Mr. Close.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#printing_committee">

<heading>PRINTING COMMITTEE</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER appointed the Prime Minister and Gen. Smuts a Committee to assist Mr. Speaker in regard to the printing of the House.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#asiatic_problem">

<heading>ASIATIC PROBLEM.</heading>

<p>By direction of Mr. SPEAKER, the Clerk-read a letter, dated the 28th May, 1924, from His Honour the Administrator of the Province of Natal forwarding the following address:</p>

<block name="quote">To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly of the Union of South Africa&#x2014;</block>

<block name="quote">The Provincial Council of Natal respectfully transmits the following resolution, which was unanimously adopted on the 13th May, namely&#x2014;</block>

<p><span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0046"/>That this Council resolves, in terms of Section 87 of the South Africa Act, to recommend strongly to Parliament that, in the opinion of this Council, the Asiatic problem presents a serious menace to the Union, and recommends:</p>

<ol>

<li><i>(c)</i> That no further acquisition of land by purchase, lease, or other means by Asiatics be allowed.</li>

<li>(<i>b</i>) That the Provincial Councils be authorized to pass legislation that no further licences be issued to Asiatics, and no transfer of existing licences, and that the licence of any Asiatic who becomes bankrupt or compounds with his or her creditors shall be cancelled.</li>

<li>(c) That the sum of £5 be increased to Indian: emigrants under the voluntary repatriation scheme.</li>

<li>(d) That fair and reasonable compensation be paid to Indians who own property and wish to leave the country.&#x201D;</li>

</ol>

<p>Alex. J. McGibbon, Chairman.</p>

<p>Fred. C. Loney, Clerk of Council.</p>

<p>Provincial Council, Pietermaritzburg, Natal, 19th May, 1924.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#third_appropriation_(part)_bill">

<heading>THIRD APPROPRIATION (PART) BILL.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF FINANCE was granted leave to introduce the Third Appropriation (Part) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 30th July.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#financial_relations_(teachers&#x2019;salaries)_bill">

<heading>FINANCIAL RELATIONS (TEACHERS&#x2019;SALARIES) BILL.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF FINANCE was granted leave to introduce the Financial Relations (Teachers&#x2019; Salaries) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 30th July.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_of_the_house">

<heading>BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE, I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Notices of Motion Nos. III and IV stand over until after Notices of Motion Nos. V to XVII have been disposed of.</block>

<p>Mr. VERMOOTEN seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#evening_sittings">

<heading>EVENING SITTINGS.</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Standing Orders, on and after Monday, the 4th August, if the business under discussion be not concluded at Six o&#x2019;clock p.m. on Mondays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, the proceedings of this House shall at that hour be suspended on those days and shall be resumed at Eight o&#x2019;clock p.m.</block>

<p>If is hardly necessary to point out that during this short sitting of Parliament it is necessary to get forward with the work as speedily as possible.</p>

<p>Mr. B. J. PIENAAR seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>&#x2020;Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>I do not object to the Prime Minister taking more of the time of the House than is permitted by our rules at this stage of the session. We are all agreed that we want to shorten the proceedings as much as possible. We have already sat for some months this year, and we are looking forward to another session next year, and we are all agreed to help the Government as far as possible and not prolong this special session unduly. But I would submit to the Prime Minister that if we are to give facilities, and if we are to help to make this special session as short as possible, the Government should confine their work to matters which are really special and of urgent public importance. We on our side are prepared to help, but I claim that we should confine our attention in this session to the special matters of urgent public importance. Now, if I look at what the Government have already brought forward, and what the Government still threaten to bring forward, I am afraid that we are going to have a lengthy session, and that we are going to deal with a number of matters which are not of special importance or of urgent importance. Take the last two Bills which we have here this afternoon, one of which has just passed first reading, the Bill to repeal certain clauses of the Financial Relations Act relating to uniform teachers&#x2019; salaries. The Prime Minister knows, and every member of this House knows, that this is a contentious matter, that it is a matter over which we fought almost two months last session, and if this matter is brought forward now it opens a wide field of contention again. I assume that it is the policy of the Government to reverse the decision which was come to last year, and not to go on with this idea of making teachers&#x2019; salaries uniform. I think all that is necessary in that case would be to stay the proceedings of the Public Service Commission. The Public Service Commission is charged with the task of consulting with the teachers and making recommendations to the Government, which will lead to uniform salaries. All that is necessary at this stage is simply to stay those proceedings, to see that the Public Service Commission does not go on with its inquiry, or if it does go on with its enquiry, that the Government does not do anything further this session. Next year when we meet, in January, we shall have ample time to go into this whole question, and, if necessary, the Provincial question at large. I am very much afraid that the Prime Minister will find next session that the question is a very important and a very difficult one, that there is a great deal to be said on both sides, and if the Prime Minister allows himself time to consider, it is quite possible that he may even change his mind, and that next session he may find that this matter may have assumed a different form, and he himself may then have gathered doubts <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0047"/>which he cannot now have. I think he ought to give the Minister of Finance some time. It is a most difficult matter; it is not a mere Party measure; it is part of the finances of this country, and I think the Government should not do itself an injustice. It is not giving itself a proper chance in this hurry. I think that, knowing that this is a contentious matter, that we are going to wrangle over this matter of the Financial Relations Act, knowing that it is a matter that requires careful thought on the part of the Government, they may repent at leisure at a later stage any step they take now in haste. No serious harm would be done by delay. I am not discussing the Act of last year at all. I am simply giving reasons why no precipitate action should be taken now, why the time should be given to necessary business. We are simply going to occupy the time of the House unduly by pressing this matter unnecessarily at this stage. The matter is entirely in the hands of the Government, and it is simply for them to say that they are going to take these matters later. Now, take number 3: the establishment of the office of a Government Attorney.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>That has not yet been moved, I want to remind the hon. member.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fourie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FOURIE</person>:</from>

<p>Is the hon. member in order in discussing the details of the Bill?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member has a right to deal fairly broadly with the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>No, but it is going to be moved. I am trying to help the Government. Here is a matter which is going to be very contentious. It is going to lead to a great deal of discussion and take a great deal of time, and there is no urgency about it. I have heard a great deal about unemployment, but it is news to me that the appointment of a Government Attorney is part of the Government&#x2019;s policy to solve unemployment. I seriously advise the Prime Minister not to proceed with this matter, which can very well be dealt with at our next ordinary session. We look upon this as a special session, which we want to get through as quickly as possible. Under those circumstances I would ask the Prime Minister to drop matters which are not really urgent. We shall have time next year to deal with this matter of a Government Attorney. Let me mention another matter. I see in the King&#x2019;s Speech a proposal to render uniform native taxation throughout the Union. I do not believe from my experience that anything more contentious can be brought before this House than a measure which is intended to render uniform native taxation. It brings to the front vital differences between the Provinces; it brings to the front not only the question of native taxation but the related questions of coloured and white taxation as well. During the five years I was Minister of Native Affairs I continually went into this matter with a view to bringing it before Parliament. It is one of the most important matters that Parliament can deal with, but I felt it was a very contentious matter and would take much time. I would ask the Prime Minister&#x2014;because I appreciate the importance and the far-reaching effect of this matter&#x2014;I would ask the Prime Minister to let that matter stand over also to next session. Let us confine this session to what is really urgent and important. If the Government wants to introduce anything of real urgency, they will find nothing but assistance from this side of the House, but I would appeal to them not to raise large matters of policy which are very contentious. I am not raising these points in any contentious spirit, but because I am convinced in my own mind that if the programme as it is now before us is carried out, we shall be sitting here for months. That is not the intention of the Prime Minister, I am sure, nor of those who are supporting him. It is our wish that the Government should as soon as possible get to grips with their serious tasks. It is impossible for the Government whilst they have to sit here in Parliament, and meet the necessary fighting and sniping which takes place in Parliament, to give their attention to the very serious questions which confront them. Let us make the session short. It is in the interests of the country that it should be short, and the Government should have a chance to deal with the subjects which are entrusted to their charge. I warn my hon. friend that with the best intentions in the world he has embarked upon a programme which is going to keep Parliament here for months. We have done without a Government Attorney&#x2019;s department for a long time, and I hope we shall continue to do so a little longer.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>We have got him.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>The teachers&#x2019; question can stand over. The Prime Minister need only say that no scheme of uniformity will be put forward. As soon as we start on this native taxation the Prime Minister will find all over the Union the natives do not understand what this matter means. There will be a great deal of unrest and misunderstanding, and in his laudable effort to do justice to the native, he will do just the opposite. He will create a temper among the natives which will prejudice very much the carrying out of any fair native policy in the future. I have no objection to urge against the motion, but I would very seriously ask you to pause before going on with this programme, and to jettison these jim-jams; especially to jettison a matter like native taxation, which is far too important to be dealt with during a short session like the present. I can assure you that we on this side of the House will use every endeavour to expedite the work of the Government as much as possible&#x2014;on condition that these matters are left over.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I am quite sure that the leader of the Opposition will find out that the Government is just as anxious that the session be a short one. I can assure him that the matters introduced will be found to be of the utmost urgency. I hope to show that the matters raised by my Department <span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0048"/>are very urgent, and both intimately affect the financial position of the country. Let us take the question of teachers&#x2019; salaries. Last session a measure was introduced by the late Government which took up a great deal of the time of this House. Its object was to give a uniform scale for teachers&#x2019; salaries. The measure was passed, but unfortunately the position to-day is that the teachers have not got uniform salaries. What did the late Government do? They gave themselves the powers and then merely proclaimed the existing scales! We have taken away the rights of the Provinces to deal with teachers&#x2019; salaries, and we cannot possibly leave the question as it stands at present. This Government is not prepared to undertake the responsibility of leaving matters in their present state in view of the attitude which we took up in Opposition. We propose to restore to the Provinces their former rights. The Provinces cannot balance their budgets. They are coming to us for assistance, and the Union Government will not assist them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member cannot enter into the merits of the case, but should confine himself to the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>The right hon. member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts) has tried to show to the House that this is not an urgent matter, and I am trying to show that this is a very urgent matter to the Provinces. We must at least restore their powers, and the hon. member (Gen. Smuts), will agree that this is a very urgent matter. When I took Office I found that the Government had promised to provide £100,000 on the Estimates for the development of Native education. They had also made provision for the past year, but they had not provided the necessary funds from native sources which the Act contemplated. The late Government had promised to provide £100,000 for the same purpose this year. Does the hon. member for Standerton (Gen-Smuts), expect me to provide the money? If I must follow his suggestion, then I must decline to find the amount referred to. I do not think that we can ask the white people of this country to make this sacrifice for the natives.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>They did last year.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>They did last year on the distinct understanding that it would be recoverable from this year&#x2019;s taxation. Well, that being so, I think that the sense of the House will not deny that if we do not introduce this Bill, I will be compelled to withdraw the amount from the Estimates.</p>

<p>The motion was put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_on_fridays">

<heading>BUSINESS ON FRIDAYS.</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the following be a Sessional Standing Order:</block>

<block name="quote">Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Standing Orders of this House, on and after Friday, the 8th August, Government business shall have precedence on Fridays, such precedence, however, to have effect only after notices of question already on the Order Paper for such days have been disposed of: Provided that if in the opinion of the Government it is desirable that special facilities be granted on such days for the discussion of any order of the day of which a private member has charge, precedence may be given to such business; and provided further that the Government may intimate on the order paper for the day the time allotted for the discussion thereof, and if not concluded within the allotted time, such business shall be treated as interrupted business in the manner set out in sub-sections (1), (3) and (4) of Standing Order No. 27.</block>

<p>I move the motion for the same reason as for the preceding one.</p>

<p>Mr. HEYNS seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>&#x2020;Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>I only want to say this&#x2014;After what has fallen from the Minister of Finance, I am afraid that this is going to be &#x201C;some&#x201D; session! I take it from what he has said that the Government is determined to go on with these things, but I am afraid that some of them will eventually have to be dropped. I would ask the Prime Minister this: If the Government thinks it is necessary to take Fridays from private members, let us make the sacrifice, but I wish to have an assurance from the Prime Minister that it will be helpful. Take the Accountancy Bill, which is a bit of private legislation which has been a very, very difficult piece of work. Unless this Bill is allowed to pass its remaining stages this session, I am afraid a grave injustice will be done to the interests concerned. If the Prime Minister will give an undertaking to fairly consider any measure privately introduced on Fridays I will make no opposition. If this were a short session I should not mind.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to support the suggestion made by the right hon. gentleman. I happen to be in charge of the South African Society of Accountants Bill, which went through Select Committee last session. A great deal of money has been spent on the Bill, a great deal of thought has been given to it, and there has been considerable co-ordination between the societies of the four Provinces in order to secure harmony on the subject. I wish to ask the Prime Minister to give real consideration to the claims of that Bill. It is not an ordinary private Bill, it is really a public Bill, and affects the interest of the whole community.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I would like as much as possible to avoid unnecessary expense, and I am not sure, but I think that unless the Accountants Bill is brought on again this session it lapses, and in that case it would have to be started <i>de novo.</i> If possible I shall be only too pleased to assist in having it brought on. At the same time I hope it is not very <span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0049"/>contentious&#x2014;I am afraid it was so at the start, but I hope it is less so since it came out of Select Committee. In regard to any other matter which really is important and is reasonable, we shall always give the necessary opportunities, but I do wish to say this to the right hon. the Leader of the Opposition, I think he unnecessarily fears the extension of the session. We are all very anxious to have it as short as possible, and we are not going to detain hon. members any longer than is absolutely necessary. With regard to native taxation I was under the impression that I was going to do a great favour to my right hon. friend. I got that Bill ready, and I believe it was drafted under his &#x04D5;gis with the quite unanimous opinion of all those who were consulted by him.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>It is a most contentious thing.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I am very sorry to hear it. As pointed out by the Minister of Finance, it is an important measure, because we feel rather in this position, that we have been committed to rather large sums of money by my hon. friend on the other side, and I hope that he will be quite prepared to assist us in getting the necessary source from which to derive the money requirements to meet these demands.</p>

<p>The motion was agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#election_of_deputy-speaker">

<heading>ELECTION OF DEPUTY-SPEAKER.</heading>

<p>*Mr. J. B. WESSELS moved&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Mr. Jan Hendrik Hofmeyr de Waal be appointed Deputy-Speaker and Chairman of Committees of the Whole House.</block>

<p>There is no precedent involved in the motion, and as a matter of fact precedents are only granted when it suits one. I feel sure that Mr. de Waal will occupy the position with the same dignity and decorum as was done by Mr. E. Rooth in the last Parliament. Mr. De Waal is an old and popular member of the House, has made himself thoroughly conversant with the duties of his office, and, as Chairman of the Cape Parliamentary Debating Society he has occupied a somewhat similar office with great distinction.</p>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>I have great pleasure in seconding the motion. I believe with his past experience the hon. member will be a credit to the position.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#election_of_deputy-chairman">

<heading>ELECTION OF DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</heading>

<speech by="#pirow">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PIROW</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Mr. Arthur Godfrey Barlow be appointed Deputy-Chairman of Committees of the Whole House.</block>

<p>Most members know the hon. member better even than I do, and they are doubtless well convinced of his capacity for the office.</p>

<p>Rev. Mr. MULLINEUX seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#public_accounts_committee">

<heading>PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a Select Committee on Public Accounts be appointed; the Committee to have power to take evidence and call for papers.</block>

<p>Mr. B. J. PIENAAR seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railways_and_harbours_committee">

<heading>RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS COMMITTEE.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a Select Committee on Railways and Harbours be appointed; the Committee to have power to take evidence and call for papers.</block>

<p>Mr. C. A. van NIEKERK seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#pensions_committee">

<heading>PENSIONS COMMITTEE.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a Select Committee be appointed to consider and report upon all Minutes recommending special pensions and all petitions for pensions, grants and gratuities not authorised by law which may from time to time be referred to it; the Committee to have power to take evidence and call for paper.</block>

<p>The question of war pensions was discussed during the last session, and there is a con-census of opinion that the matter should be further investigated. Consequently I shall move to-morrow that petitions and complaints in respect of war pensions be referred to this Committee, and I suggest that the House specially concern itself with war pensions relating to the Boer war as well as the late war.</p>

<p>Mr. B. J. PIENAAR seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>Before you put this motion I thought the Minister would have informed this House that all petitions which stood over from last session relating to pensions would also be referred to the Committee:</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, that is so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>May I appeal to the Minister to reconsider his decision. It is a very important question and we ought to go into the evidence very fully, so that the matter can be gone into thoroughly, and I would appeal to the Minister to appoint a special committee so that there can be a thorough enquiry.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member can deal with that when the motion comes up.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I only wish to say that I approved of the adoption of this course, because this was the course recommended by the House last session&#x2014;that this matter should be referred to this Committee, when it was realized that it was difficult to obtain the service of members on <span class="col_17-18" refersTo="page_0050"/>a special committee. I will consider this question whether on this occasion the matter referred to should not go to a special committee. I only wish to say that if the matter is properly thrashed out, and if the hon. members of this committee can be got together, and they can conveniently do the work, there will be no objection. I shall discuss the matter with hon. members who are interested.</p>

<p>Mr. BLACKWELL rose to speak&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The debate is closed on the matter.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>No opportunity was given to other hon. members to stand up when the hon. member for Cape Town, Harbour (Maj. G. B. van Zyl), sat down.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I am very sorry, but the hon. Minister has already replied.</p>

<p>The motion was agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petitions_from_last_session">

<heading>PETITIONS FROM LAST SESSION.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petitions from J. Acton, M. Adelaar, J. W. Allen, R. J. Anderson, K. J. Anstensen, R. H. Arnold, W. H. Atherstone, I. Ayres, J. R. Bain, A. Ballantyne, F. Baratz, M. H. Barlow, J. C. Barnard, S. R. Barter, A. E. Basden, R. Batty, J. H. Beard, V. H. Begley, Alexandrina Bell, J. H. Bellis (2 petitions), C. P. Bester, F. R. Bezuidenhout, H. H. Birch, J. P. Borrius, J. W. Bosman, J. H. Botha, J. J. Botha, W. J. Botha, R. F. HareBowers, Avice B. Boyes, A. O. E. Bradshaw, G. Breedt, C. H. Brent, E. J. Brown, J. Brown, Susannah M. Brown, Lady Browne, W. H. Buchanan, W. H. Buckerfield, A. H. Budden, L. A. Burnell, Kathleen A. M. Butler, T. J. Byrne, J. V. Cantlay, F. J. Carter, G. M. Celliers, P. E. Clay, Gertruida S. Combrink, J. Connolly, C. H. Cooper, Annie Corrigan, J. Corry, Cornelia D. F. Craig, Alice Crosby, C. K. Danielson, S. T. Davie, A. A. Davies, S. J. Davies, E. H. Davisworth, J. J. de Beer, J. J. de Burger, A. M. de Kock, A. F. de Villiers, S. W. de Witt, B. Delport and 9 others, M. Delport, R. Dick, E. H. Dobson, N. J. Dorfling, J. E. Douwes, D. Drummond, W. Dufton, G. A. Dunkley, G. E. Dunn, H. J. du Plessis, P. J. du Plessis, S. C. du Plessis, P. J. Durieux, A. S. du Toit, Rosa Dyer, R. G. Eales, Martha M. Edgecombe, Maria M. Enslin, F. S. Erdis, May E. E. Evans, Florence M. Every, A. Ferguson, W. D. G. Ferguson, J. Fleming, Maria J. H. Fourie, W. E. Fry, F. M. Fulton, Mrs. C. Gibson, S. C. Gouws, A. E. Gower, R. J. Green, E. W. Greenslade, F. T. R. Griesbach, J. A. N. Grobbelaar, D. C. S. Grobler, P. J. C. Grobler, M. G. Grogan, G. Haar, H. A. E. Hall, G. W. Hall, H. Hamel, Anna S. Hanekom, R. E. Hardwich, T. H. Hartley, G. Hatch, D. W. Hattingh, F. A. Hatton, J. Haughton, Maggie J. Heath, F. W. Henley, F. T. Henning, M. J. Henning, J. J. Heyneke, W. Hignett, H. Hirschman, Florence I. Holliday, E. A. J. Housiaux, A. J. Humphreys, G. Hunt, C. Hutton, J. W. Ingle, H. Jansen, C. G. C. Jensen, D. F. Jooste, A. Karlson, R. Kass, M. Kavanagh, J. Keast, C. King, R. Kirkel, Katherine F. M. Kisch and 2 others, T. Kroon, L. S. Kruger, C. Kuyper, M. K. Lambrecht, A. J. Larpent, R. J. Latham, J. Leneapa, Sophia D. le Roux, F. E. Lewis, A. J. Liebenberg, T. J. B. Linder, F. G. Ling, C. O. Linscott, T. W. Lister, J. A. Louw, W. J. H. Luxton, M. Mabaso, Cathrina E Malan, A. J. Mason, A. McArthur, J. McConnachie, H. J. McDonald, D. McIntyre, Jessie J. C. McLaggan, J. McLaren, T. W. McMahon, J. J. McMenamin, Susanna S. Meerholz, G. Menheniot, N. Mills, J. Mill and 9 others, Johanna C. Moore, R. G. Morris, Ethel D. Mountain, W. Muscott, H. L. Neale, C. H. Nel, S. J. D. Nell, Margaret Nesbitt, Wilhelmina F. Nicholas, P. H. Niemand, Mary L. Norris, W. A. North, Cornelia S. Nortje, J. J. Nortje, C. F. A. Oberlander, J. O&#x2019;Connell, A. D. Oosthuizen, A. A. Orsmond, H. B. Otzen, G. P. Pardy, W. J. T. Parker, E. B. H. Parkes, P. H. Parsons, A. Patience, F. T. Patterson, O. Paulsen, W. Pennel, Bertha Peringuey, J. E. Perks, J. J. Pettit, W. G. Pierce, F. W. Pietersen, T. A. J. Place, E. G. Polden, Martha S. Pretorius, J. Price, W. Price, C. J. Rabie, A. Rapp, H. J. Rattray, R. F. Rattray. C. D. J. Rauch, C. H. S. Reid, R. J. G. Rodgers, H. Rogers, F. G. F. Roodman, M. E. Ross, T. W. Ross, A. J. Rossouw, P. Russo, W. A. Royffe, Betrix G. M. Saayman, I. Sanders, W. C. Savage, W. J. C. Schultze, T. E. Sephton, J. D. Shannon, N. Sinuka, J. H. Smit, S. R. J. Smit, J. P. Snyman, R. Speirs, T. W. Stainthorpe, B. R. Stapelberg, C. E. Stead, L. M. Stella, P. P. Stephenson, J. J. H. Steyn, S. J. Steyn, P. J. Steynberg, M. C. Stoop, C. W. Stumbles and 40 others (in support of F. A. Hatton), Catharina F. Swart, Helen Seton-Tait, F. G. W. Taylor, J. H. R. Taylor, W. A. Terry, J. H. Timme, B. R. Tomkins, D. M. Tomory, M.D., L. A. Townes, A. B. du T. Truter, Hilda Turner, J. P. van der Berg, P. J. van der Merwe, P. J. van Niekerk, R. A. van der Spuy, Anna J. J. van Rensburg, M. L. J. van Rensburg, A. M. van Rooyen, H. L. Velloen, J. T. Venables, A. Venter, P. J. Venter, Susanna E. Viljoen, W. A. Visser, C. L. G. von Below, H. Vos, J. J. Walker, R. E. N. Walker, W. M. Walshe, A. Warriner, J. Wells, W. J. Wessels, J. H. White, J. A. Whitehead, T. C. Wilhelm and H. C. Yeates, presented to this House during the last session of Parliament, 1924, be laid upon the Table of the House.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. A. VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>I second the motion. Will the petition, which was dealt with by the previous Select Committee, be reconsidered?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The House will have an opportunity of discussing their report.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from><span class="col_19-20" refersTo="page_0051"/>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister of Finance, in his anxiety to be courteous to this side of the House, rose too quickly to reply to the hon. member for Cape Town, Harbour (Maj. G. B. van Zyl). May I, with your leave, put my point in the form of a question to the hon. Minister, and ask him and the Prime Minister whether a deputation did not see the Minister during the recent election campaign from the Military Pensioners Organization&#x2014;and whether that body did not ask the Prime Minister to institute a special Commission, not a Select Committee, to enquire into the administration of war pensions. Certainly the statement appeared in the press.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I want to point out to the hon. member that the motion before the House is one simply dealing with petitions dealt with last session by the Select Committee&#x2014;petitions that stood over, and the question of military pensions is not germane to the particular motion before the House now. The hon. member must take some other opportunity of bringing this matter forward.</p>

<p>The motion was agreed to.</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that the petitions were upon the Table.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petitions be referred to the Select Committee on Pensions.</block>

<p>Mr. C. A. VAN NIEKERK seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#crown_lands_committee">

<heading>CROWN LANDS COMMITTEE.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a Select Committee be appointed to consider and report upon all such recommendations for the disposal of Crown lands, or of servitudes thereon, or conditions connected therewith, as may be submitted by the Government under the provisions of any Act or law requiring Parliamentary approval; the Committee to have power to take evidence and call far papers.</block>

<p>Mr. C. A. VAN NIEKERK seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#native_affairs_committee">

<heading>NATIVE AFFAIRS COMMITTEE.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a Select Committee on Native Affairs be appointed; the Committee to have power to take evidence and call for papers.</block>

<p>Mr. VERMOOTEN seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#internal_arrangements_committee"> 

<heading>INTERNAL ARRANGEMENTS COMMITTEE.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_public_works">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a Select Committee be appointed on Internal Arrangements and on the management and superintendence of the Parliamentary Buildings and Grounds; the Committee to have power to confer with a similar Committee of the Senate.</block>

<p>Mr. C. A. VAN NIEKERK seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#parliamentary_library_committee">

<heading>PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY COMMITTEE.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_education">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF EDUCATION</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a Select Committee be appointed on the management and superintendence of the Parliamentary Library; the Committee to have power to confer with a similar Committee of the Senate.</block>

<p>Mr. VERMOOTEN seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#native_affairs&#x2014;second_report">

<heading>NATIVE AFFAIRS&#x2014;SECOND REPORT.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Second Report of the Select Committee on Native Affairs [S.C. 9&#x2014;&#x2019;24], presented to this House on the 3rd April, 1924, be laid upon the Table.</block>

<p>Mr. B. J. PIENAAR seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that the Report (Annexure No. 419&#x2014;&#x2019;24) was upon the Table.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Report be now considered.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>What is this report that is referred to in the motion?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>You have had three months to consider it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, but we were not expecting that it would be considered this afternoon. I submit that we should have an opportunity of refreshing our memory with regard to the contents of this report, which was printed three months ago. I hope that the Minister will allow us at least a day to consider the report.</p>

<p>The MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS thereupon moved that the report be set down for consideration on Wednesday, July 30.</p>

<p>Mr. C. A. VAN NIEKERK seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#native_affairs&#x2014;fourth_report">

<heading>NATIVE AFFAIRS&#x2014;FOURTH REPORT.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Fourth Report of the Select Committee on Native Affairs (S.C. 9a&#x2014;&#x2019;24), presented to this House on the 9th April, 1924, be laid upon the Table.</block>

<p>Mr. B. J. PIENAAR seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that the Report (Annexure No. 452&#x2014;&#x2019;24) was upon the Table.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<from><span class="col_21-22" refersTo="page_0052"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the House go into Committee on the Report on Wednesday.</block>

<p>Mr. B. J. PIENAAR seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#government_attorney_bill">

<heading>GOVERNMENT ATTORNEY BILL.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE was granted leave to introduce the Government Attorney Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time.</p>

<p>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE moved that the Bill be read a second time on 30th July.</p>

<speech by="#collins">

<from>Col.-Cdt. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COLLINS</person>:</from>

<p>I think that date is very soon; we have not got time to study this Bill properly. Surely the Minister is not going to rush it through on Wednesday.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>The reason why I moved Wednesday is that probably we shall have time during the course of the afternoon which will not be otherwise occupied, and I wish to fill in that time by dealing with this Bill in the House, though the second reading debate itself will probably be at a later stage. After the purport of the Bill has been explained to the House there will be no objection to the debate being postponed to a later stage to give the House an opportunity of dealing with the matter. We do not wish to have a part of the afternoon lost. I will certainly agree to the further debate being adjourned after I have introduced the Bill into the House.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#rents_acts_extension_bill">

<heading>RENTS ACTS EXTENSION BILL.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE was granted leave to introduce the Rents Acts Extension Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 30th July.</p>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1924-07-28T15:45:00">3.45 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

