---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol12 - FRIDAY 1 FEBRUARY 1929'
layout: debate
year: 1929
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 1st FEBRUARY, 1929.</heading>

<narrative>

Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1929-02-01T14:22:00">2.22 p.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

<debateSection name="#committee_on_standing_rules_and_orders">

<heading>COMMITTEE ON STANDING RULES AND ORDERS.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders had appointed the following members to serve on the Select Committees mentioned, viz.:</p>

<block name="quote">Internal Arrangements.&#x2014;Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Public Works, Maj. Ballantine, Dr. de Jager, Messrs. Hugo, Stuttaford and Vermooten.</block>

<block name="quote">Library of Parliament.&#x2014;Mr. Speaker, Messrs, Krige, O&#x2019;Brien, Reyburn, Robinson, Dr. Stals and Dr. van der Merwe.</block>

<block name="quote">Public Accounts.&#x2014;The Minister of Finance, Messrs. Blackwell, Brown, Brig.-Gen. Byron, Dr. D. G. Conradie, Messrs. J. <span class="col_163-164" refersTo="page_0118"/>H. Conradie, Jagger, McMenamin, Sir William Macintosh, Messrs, Munnik, Tom Naudé, Nel, B. J. Pienaar and Stuttaford.</block>

<block name="quote">Railways and Harbours.&#x2014;The Minister of Railways and Harbours, Messrs. Bates, Basson, Duncan, Giovanetti, Lennox, le Roux, G. A. Louw, Maj. Richards, Mr. Snow, Dr. Stals, Messrs. Strachan, Swart, te Water, Maj. G. B. van Zyl, and Dr. Visser.</block>

<block name="quote">Native Affairs.&#x2014;The Minister of Native Affairs, Mr. Conroy, Sir Drummond Chaplin, Messrs. Marwick, Moffat, the Rev. Mr. Mullineux, Messrs. Nieuwenhuize, Payn, Steytler, Lt.-Col. Terreblanche and Mr. van Niekerk.</block>

<block name="quote">Crown Lands.&#x2014;The Minister of Lands, Messrs. Bergh, Deane, Gilson, M. L. Malan, Mostert, Nicholls, Col. D. Reitz, Messrs. Struben, I. P. van Heerden and Waterston.</block>

<block name="quote">Pensions, Grants and Gratuities.&#x2014;Messrs. Bawden, Brink, Buirski, Cilliers, de Wet, Fordham, Geldenhuys, Gibaud, J. P. Louw, van Rensburg and Vosloo.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#murray_park_(private)_bill">

<heading>MURRAY PARK (PRIVATE) BILL.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER laid upon the Table&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Report of the Examiners on the petition for leave to introduce the Murray Park (Private) Bill (presented to this House on the 29th January), reporting that the Standing Orders of the House have been complied with.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#rand_mines_power_supply_company_additional_water_supply_(private)_bill">

<heading>RAND MINES POWER SUPPLY COMPANY ADDITIONAL WATER SUPPLY (PRIVATE) BILL.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER laid upon the Table&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Report of the Examiners on the petition for leave to introduce the Rand Mines Power Supply Company Additional Water Supply (Private) Bill (presented to this House on the 28th January), reporting that the Standing Orders of the House have been complied with.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: American and German Engines.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol><li>(1) How many of the following types of engines, built in Germany, are in use on the South African Railways, and what was their capital cost:

<ol><li>(a) Maffei articulated &#x201C;U&#x201D; type,</li>

<li>(b) three-cylinder (Class 18) by Henschel &amp; Sohn,</li>

<li>(c) G.H. type by Maffei,</li>

<li>(d) H.F. type by Henschel &amp; Sohn;</li></ol></li>

<li>(2) what was the combined aggregate number of days for which the said engines were out of service from their coming into use until the 31st December, 1928;.</li>

<li>(3) what is the estimated amount of consequential damage suffered by the Administration, based upon the number of days each engine was out of service at the earning power per day, on the lines of the claim made out by the general manager in the case of the defective 23 American class 15 C. Locomotives supplied by an American company; and</li>

<li>(4) whether it is the intention of the Administration to make any claim against the contractors who supplied the engines referred to in (1)?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>It is not possible at this date to reply to the question of the hon. member, as the whole matter is now under consideration. I propose to deal comprehensively with the subject, in the House, at an early date.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Can the Minister tell us whether the Committee which was appointed by the Railway Board in August last has completed its report on the subject of these engines?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I am not prepared at this stage to carry the matter any further.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Can the Minister tell us why a departmental committee was appointed instead of one representative of the public?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Naval Contribution.</heading>

<question by="#strachan" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. STRACHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol><li>(1) What was the amount of the yearly contribution voted by the South African party Government towards the maintenance of the Imperial navy; and</li>

<li>(2) when and why was the contribution discontinued?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#strachan">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The Government of the late Colony of the Cape of Good Hope made an annual contribution of £50,000 per annum towards the British navy and a sum of £35,000 was similarly voted by the Government of the late Colony of Natal. These contributions were continued by the Union Government in the shape of a subsidy of £5,000 per annum up to 1921.</li>

<li>(2) The subsidy was discontinued in 1922, when the Union Government took over responsibility for land defences of the Cape Peninsula and of the Simon&#x2019;s Town naval base and undertook: (a) to expand the South African division of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve by increasing the general section and forming a mine-sweeping and a war reserve section; (b) to carry out a hydrographic survey of South African waters; and (c) to provide two oil fuel storage tanks together with 24,000 tons of oil and to meet the cost of erecting workshops and other storage accommodation at the dockyard, Simonstown, at an approximate total expenditure of £328,450.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#strachan" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. STRACHAN:</from>

<p>Do I understand the subsidy was stopped by the South African party Government?</p>

</question>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS:</from>

<p>What is the present cost?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#strachan">

<from><span class="col_165-166" refersTo="page_0119"/>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>If the hon. member will put that on paper I will give a reply. I have not the figures in my head, but I think the cost of coast defence and forces maintained and so on is somewhere about £60,000, but I won&#x2019;t pledge myself to that.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Was not the reason for so small an appropriation towards the Union naval fleet under S.A.P. regime, the strained financial position consequent in the great war?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#strachan">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>I would suggest your addressing that question to the right hon. the member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts). I can only tell you the facts. I cannot give the reasons.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is it not a fact that the present Government has been so niggardly&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<p>[Question disallowed.]</p>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>What extra appropriation has been set apart for increasing the Union naval services by the Pact out of the extensive surpluses?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>I am not a walking encyclopoedia. The hon. member must put that question on paper.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is it not a fact that the Minister in order to provide funds for defence and naval services proposes to sell a public park at Muizenberg?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member is now giving information and not seeking it.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Sandilats Deviation.</heading>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. STRUBEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether the Administration has under consideration the deviation of the railway line between Sandflats and Alicedale Junction, with a view to the Avoidance of the Bellevue Bank;</li>

<li>(2) what is the estimated cost of the necessary deviation;</li>

<li>(3) what is the estimated saving in cost of haulage over the section of line in question were the said deviation to be made;</li>

<li>(4) what is the estimated extra weight of loads which could be carried over the section, if the Bellevue Bank were avoided;</li>

<li>(5) what is the estimated saving in time taken by trains between Sandflats and Alicedale over such deviation as against the present heavy-grade route;</li>

<li>(6) what is the estimated saving in engine-mileage over the section in question which such deviation would make possible by reason of the haulage of full instead of broken loads as at present; and</li>

<li>(7) what is the estimated saving in engine-power which would accrue from such deviation owing to the withdrawal of banking engines and the haulage of heavier loads over the section in question?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#struben">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) £192,000.</li>

<li>(3) This information is being taken out and will be supplied to the Hon. Member as early as possible.</li>

<li>(4) 100 per cent., or 450 tons for each goods train worked by the largest type of locomotive now employed over the section.</li>

<li>(5) Up trains per trip:<br/>Passenger 30 minutes.<br/>Goods 50 minutes.<br/>Down trains per trip:<br/>Passenger 20 minutes.<br/>Goods 30 minutes.</li>

<li>(6) 150,240 miles per annum.</li>

<li>(7) Three main line locomotives.</li></ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Pagter Scheme.</heading>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. STRUBEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol><li>(1) What is the total number of &#x201C;pagters&#x201D; who have been placed with farmers since the initiation of the scheme;</li>

<li>(2) in which Provinces have such &#x201C;pagters&#x201D; been placed, and what are the respective numbers in each;</li>

<li>(3) what is the total cost to date of the &#x201C;pagter&#x201D; scheme to the State;</li>

<li>(4) how many of the &#x201C;pagters&#x201D; placed with farmers are still continuing to work the land as &#x201C;pagters&#x201D;;</li>

<li>(5) how many of such &#x201C;pagters&#x201D; are considered to be a success;</li>

<li>(6) what is the total amount of money which has been lost by the State in carrying out the &#x201C;pagter&#x201D; scheme;</li>

<li>(7) what has been the main cause of failure of the said scheme; and</li>

<li>(8) whether the scheme has been relinquished, or is the Minister persisting in its continuance?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#struben">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol><li>(1) 556.</li>

<li>(2) Transvaal 471<br/>Natal 41<br/>Orange Free State 1<br/>Cape 43</li>

<li>(3)

<ol><li><i>(a)</i> Subsidies chargeable to revenue and non-recoverable &#x2026; £57,829</li>

<li><i>(b)</i> Loans recoverable (six years free of interest) &#x2026; &#x2026; &#x2026; &#x2026; 46,269</li></ol></li>

<li>(4) Of the 556 placed, 125 have been transferred to the department&#x2019;s extension scheme, 38 were returned to relief work, 41 were dismissed, 3 died, 240 left voluntarily and 109 remain.</li>

<li>(5) Between 80 and 90 are definitely considered to be a success.</li>

<li>(6) Of the total amount of £46,269 referred to in paragraph 3 (b) above, an amount of £29,258 has already been recovered, and £2,439 written off, leaving a balance of £14,599 outstanding most of which is not yet due for payment.</li>

<li><span class="col_167-168" refersTo="page_0120"/>(7) The failure of a number of tenant farmers to make good may be attributed to a variety of causes. In many cases it was found that the tenant farmer and the owner could not work together harmoniously or effectively. In other cases the failure was due to drought and also land not proving suitable. Furthermore, the cost of exercising the necessary supervision over tenant farmers in scattered areas appeared to be unjustifiably heavy and the majority of those retained are concentrated in smaller areas.</li>

<li>(8) No further tenant farmers are being placed under this scheme and none of the original tenant farmers are now in receipt of subsidy. Supervision is being exercised until the balance of the loans outstanding has been liquidated.</li></ol>

<p>It might be mentioned that of the 56 pagters placed with farmers by the previous Government at a cost of nearly £2,000 three remain.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister say why this scheme should not be entrusted to the Minister of Lands, with some better chance of success?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Personally I will be glad if it is transferred to the Minister of Lands, if he would like to have it.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. STRUBEN:</from>

<p>Will the Minister give up schemes of land settlement after the fiascos of his &#x201C;pagter&#x201D; scheme and Doornkop?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I will deal with that in debate. The reasons for it not being a successful scheme are quite obvious.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>Will the Minister tell us whether a full enquiry has been made beforehand?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#close">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Every effort was made in that direction as far as we are concerned.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Departmental Enquiries.</heading>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. STRUBEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether he will take into sympathetic and favourable consideration the provision of a regulation in the Railway Department whereby any record against a servant of the Administration, consequent on his conviction by a departmental court of enquiry for any misdemeanour or technical misconduct, shall be annulled and expunged from the entries in his record in the event of such servant being brought to trial before a Supreme Court of the Union for the same alleged offence and being acquitted thereby?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#struben">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The question, as put by the hon. member would appear to suggest that a departmental charge, and a criminal charge upon which a servant may have to stand his trail before a Supreme Court are identical.</p>

<p>A servant may not be charged departmentally with the same offence for which he is brought to trial before the court and acquitted. In terms of the Railways and Harbours Service Act, a servant, if he has failed to comply with a departmental regulation, rule or general or specific instruction, may, however, be charged departmentally with misconduct, notwithstanding his acquittal on a criminal charge arising out of the same incident.</p>

<p>To annul the finding on a departmental charge and expunge the entry from the record of a servant acquitted by the court on a criminal charge would be to treat him more leniently than a servant the seriousness of whose offence is not such as to call for criminal prosecution.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. NEL:</from>

<p>May I ask what is the position of a railwayman who has been found guilty by a Departmental Court, and who, when he appealed to the Appeal Board, had his appeal upheld by such board?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#nel">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>This is not a question we can deal with in this way. If the hon. member will raise the matter in debate we can deal with the whole question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. NEL:</from>

<p>In the case of a railwayman&#x2019;s appeal being upheld by the Appeal Board, is the sentence of the departmental court set aside?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#nel">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>As I said before, the matter cannot be dealt with in this way.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is it not a fact that in certain cases Durban railwaymen whose appeal to the Appeal Board has been upheld have still been subjected to the punishment imposed upon them by the system manager?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>If the hon. member will raise specific cases I will deal with them.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Police: Departmental Services of</heading>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Mr. STRUBEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice whether, in view of the reports of the Commissioner of Police for the Union and of the known increase of crime and lawlessness in the Union during the past few years, and of the fact that the police force is largely employed in the discharge of duties for other departments of State, the Minister will debit to such departments the costs of his department of such services, and utilize the saving in the cost of the police so made in providing for a substantial increase in the personnel of the police force and so enable it to carry out staisfactorily the proper functions of police, namely, the prevention and detection of crime and the maintenance of law and order?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#struben">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>There would be no advantage in debiting other departments with the cost of the services rendered to them by the Police Department. Any amounts which would be paid by other departments under such a scheme would be paid into the Consolidated Revenue Fund and any increased expenditure for personnel of the police force would nevertheless <span class="col_169-170" refersTo="page_0121"/>have to be voted by Parliament under the Police Vote. Such a scheme would merely result therefore in a fictitious increase of both the expenditure and income accounts and would, without assisting the Police Vote in any way, involve considerable clerical work.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. STRUBEN:</from>

<p>Do I understand that there are sufficient police, in the opinion of the Minister, to carry out efficiently their duties?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#struben">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I think I have expressed the opinion more than once that this country is justified in paying sufficient for its police force, but I do not think that Parliament or the country would increase the expenditure incurred.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. STRUBEN:</from>

<p>I want the Minister to understand that I do not want an increase, but that the police should be left free to carry out their proper duties instead of doing so much work for other departments.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Police Remounts.</heading>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Mr. STRUBEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether it is a fact that considerable difficulty is experienced in obtaining suitable remounts for the police and defence forces in sufficient numbers; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether he will collaborate with the Minister of Defence and the Minister of Agriculture in formulating and submitting to the Government a scheme calculated to encourage and foster the breeding by farmers of horses of the right type for police and military purposes?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#struben">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The answer to each of these questions is in the affirmative.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Local Self-Government.</heading>

<question by="#struben" to="#prime_minister">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. STRUBEN</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether the Government has been approached by any or all of the provinces of Natal, Transvaal and Orange Free State on the subject of the establishment in any or all of those provinces of a system of local self-government on the basis of the divisional council system in force in the Province of the Cape of Good Hope?</li>

<li>(2) if so, what is the result of such approach or approaches; and</li>

<li>(3) if not, whether the Government will use its influence and powers to secure the establishment of such a system of local self-government in those provinces, in view of the democratic principle involved and the value thereof in educating the people in local self-government and the responsibilities attached thereto?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#struben">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol><li>(1) No.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

<li>(3) Local self-government is at present a provincial matter and the Government can intervene only if and when the whole question of the system of provincial administration comes under review.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Natives: Medical Training.</heading>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_public_health">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. STRUBEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Health whether he has considered the report of the committee appointed to enquire into the training of natives in medicine and public health, and whether it is the intention of the Government to carry out without delay recommendation No. 13 of Chapter VII, more fully set out in section 63 of Chapter V of the report?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_native_affairs" to="#struben">

<from>The MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS:</from>

<p>I wish to refer the hon. member to my reply to question No. XV on page 8 of the Votes and Proceedings of the 25th ultimo asked by the hon. member for Hospital (Mr. Papenfus).</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>East Coast Fever.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol><li>(1) How many outbreaks of east coast fever occurred in the Province of Natal between the 1st of January, 1928, and the 31st December, 1928, and in what districts of Natal did such outbreaks occur; and</li>

<li>(2) how many farms infected with east coast fever were there in Natal on the 31st December, 1928, and in what districts are such farms situate?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) 46 Outbreaks, viz: in districts of Richmond 15, Krantzkop 9, Ixopo 4, Port Shepstone 3, Maritzburg 2, Eshowe 2, and one in each of the districts Paulpietersburg, Camperdown, Lions River, Umvoti, New Hanover, Nkandhle, Pinetown, Utrecht, Newcastle, Polela and Umzinto.</li>

<li>(2) 82 Farms and locations were still infected on 31st December, 1928, viz: in the districts of Richmond 15, Krantzkop 14, Port Shepstone 7, Ixopo 5, Eshowe 5, New Hanover 5, Polela 4, Mtunzini 4, Nkandhla 4, Umzinto 2, Lions River 2, Maritzburg 2, Vryheid 2, Estcourt 1, Ngotsche 1, Paulpietersburg 1, Camperdown 1, Impendhle 1, Umvoti 1, Ingwavuma 1, Pinetown 1, Dundee 1, Utrecht 1, Newcastle 1. In addition to above large number of farms previously infected is still kept in quarantine and under observation.</li></ol>

</answer>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN:</from>

<p>Does the Minister intend taking stronger measures to combat east coast fever?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#van_heerden">

<from>*The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>No, the measures are strong enough.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Scab in Natal.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture how many scab-infested flocks of sheep were there (a) in Natal and (b) in the divisions of Klip River and Bergville, Natal, and what were the percentages on the 31st of December, 1928?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#anderson">

<from><span class="col_171-172" refersTo="page_0122"/>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>The question is not clear and may be interpreted in two ways.</p>

<p>In the first place for month of December, 1928, four infested flocks were reported in Natal and none in the divisions of Klip River and Bergville. The percentage of infected flocks for December only calculated on the number of flocks in Natal is 0.006.</p>

<p>In the second place, total number of infected flocks in Natal excluding contacts for whole year was 293 and the percentage calculated as above is 0.44. Total in Klip River is 3 and percentage on district flocks is 0.44. Bergville reported clean throughout year.</p>

<p>I may point out that the percentage based on infections occurring one month only is of practically no value.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Production Foremen.</heading>

<question by="#o&#x2019;brien" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Mr. O&#x2019;BRIEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol><li>(1) What are the specific duties of a production foreman;</li>

<li>(2) how many such officers have been appointed by the Administration;</li>

<li>(3) where do their duties lie;</li>

<li>(4) whether such officers have got assistants; if so; how many; and</li>

<li>(5) what are the salaries of each production foreman and of their assistants?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#o&#x2019;brien">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Compiling bonus work schedules; scrutinising bonus work times submitted from workshops; suggesting improvements in equipment and methods and advising on matters of standardisation; checking bonus work vouchers and quality of work, and arranging time studies and other matters incidental to bonus work.</li>

<li>(2) Seven.</li>

<li>(3) At the headquarters of the mechanical department and in the workshops.</li>

<li>(4) No.</li>

<li>(5) 1 at £540; 3 at £560; 2 at £580: 1 at £600.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#barlow" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BARLOW:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware that the appointment of these men has caused great dissatisfaction, and that they are looked upon as detectives?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#barlow">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>It is true that there has been a certain amount of dissatisfaction at the beginning, but the men now appreciate that the object for which these appointments were made is being achieved.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#barlow" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. BARLOW:</from>

<p>Where do you get your information from?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#reyburn" to="#barlow">

<from>Mr. REYBURN:</from>

<p>This matter caused so much dissatisfaction that in Durban there was almost a strike on the railways.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#jagger" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. JAGGER:</from>

<p>Why does not the Minister tell us quite frankly when these officers were appointed?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I am sorry I cannot give you the date, because it is not available at the moment.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is it not necessary when any artisan is engaged upon working overtime, that the reduction foreman has to be present as well?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>That is a question of which the hon. member must give notice.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Maj. RICHARDS:</from>

<p>Inasmuch as these inspectors are looked upon as Government spies, will the Minister give instructions for their withdrawal?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#richards">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Certainly not.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Liquor Act, 1928.</heading>

<question by="#de_villiers" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>Mr. W. B. de VILLIERS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice whether he intends during the present session to introduce a Bill to amend the Liquor Act, 1928, in order to repeal certain impracticable provisions and to amend certain inconsistent provisions?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#de_villiers">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>No, it will not be possible to introduce legislation during this session to amend the Liquor Act of last year. I do not know of any impracticable or inconsistant provisions in that Act.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware of the fact that the Minister of Justice has stated publicly that the liquor law will have to be amended by the new Government, and is he aware of the dissatisfaction that exists regarding the administration of the Act.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I am aware that my colleague, the Minister of Justice, is reported to have made such a statement. It is naturally to be expected that in such a complicated measure there would be difficulties, but they are not such as to make the Act unworkable.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Boreholes in Barkly.</heading>

<question by="#de_villiers" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>Mr. W. B. de VILLIERS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture whether he intends during the present session to make provision for more bores for the electoral division of Barkly?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#de_villiers">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I regret I cannot increase the number of boring machines in the Barkly electoral division owing to the great demand in all parts of the Union.</p>

<p>There are at present two boring machines allocated for 23 applications from farmers and 6 from lessees. There are also two other machines working on vacant Crown lands.</p>

<p>The allotment in the above district is better in comparison with other districts.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Does the Minister intend having several boreholes in Namaqualand?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#reitz">

<from>*The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>The matter is being investigated.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_173-174" refersTo="page_0123"/>Justice: Medical Man and Native Female.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Upon what charge were a European medical man and a native female arrested at Bethlehem on the 18th April, 1928;</li>

<li>(2) whether the Attorney-General declined to prosecute the European medical man; if so, upon what grounds, and upon what date did he intimate his decision not to prosecute;</li>

<li>(3) by whom were representations in this case made to the Attorney-General;</li>

<li>(4) whether a preparatory examination against the European medical man was held before the magistrate; and</li>

<li>(5) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table a copy of the Attorney-General&#x2019;s reason for declining to prosecute in this case, together with a copy of the evidence adduced against the native female accused?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>Will the hon. member allow the question to stand over? I have not got the reply yet.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>I think the reply has been sent to me in mistake. [Document handed to Minister of Finance.]</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#hon._member">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The hon. member is apparently in possession of information which I have not got.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#hon._member" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>An HON. MEMBER:</from>

<p>Take it as read.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>Yes, we will take it as read.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>May I ask that the answer be read?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I have not seen the proposed reply to the question at all. The hon. member seems to be in possession of the answer, but I have not had it.</p>

</answer>

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Iris Gordon.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Upon what charge was one Iris Gordon arrested by the police at Johannesburg on the 8th September, 1927;</li>

<li>(2) whether she was released by order of the Attorney-General, and, if so, what were the grounds for her release;</li>

<li>(3) whether her case was brought before the magistrate;</li>

<li>(4) by whom were representations in this case made to the Attorney-General; and</li>

<li>(5) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table a copy of the Attorney-General&#x2019;s grounds for ordering the release of the accused?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Iris Gordon was not arrested. A dress had been delivered to her by mistake by a laundry and she was accused of the theft thereof.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

<li>(3) No.</li>

<li>(4) The papers do not show that any representations were made to the Attorney-General other than by the police.</li>

<li>(5) Falls away. I may add, however, that the papers were submitted by the police at the time to the present Attorney-General&#x2019;s predecessor in office, who instructed that no proceedings were to be taken because he considered that it would be impossible to obtain a conviction.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>It is true that this woman retained a solicitor or advocate to interview the Minister or Attorney-General in order to secure withdrawal of any prosecution?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The hon. member must give notice of that.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is it true or not that this woman within six months of her previous arrest was convicted of the theft of £124 worth of clothing?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>That does not arise out of the question.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Technical Schools.</heading>

<question by="#stals" to="#minister_of_education">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Dr. STALS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Education:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What technical schools existed in January, 1924, and what was the number of pupils in attendance at each;</li>

<li>(2) what technical schools were in existence in December, 1928, and what was the number of pupils in attendance at each; and</li>

<li>(3) what were the total numbers of pupils at technical schools in January, 1924, and December, 1928, respectively?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_education" to="#stals">

<from>The MINISTER OF EDUCATION:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Apart from vocational schools administered under the Children&#x2019;s Protection Act the only institutions providing technical education and under the control of the Union Education Department in January, 1924, were the Cape Technical College, Cape Town, and the Natal Technical College, Durban, with 2,126 and 1,493 pupils respectively, both part-time and full-time.</li>

</ol>

<p>A number of other vocational institutions since transferred to Union control were then still administered by the Provinces. To give their enrolment figures for January, 1924, would for purposes of comparison with the position in December, 1928, be misleading, since there was under provincial control in many cases no clear discrimination between these and other provincial schools, and furthermore since some of them have under Union control been made constituent parts of larger institutions.</p>

<p>These difficulties can be well illustrated by reference to the situation on the Witwatersrand. Several so-called vocational institutions were administered by the Transvaal provincial <span class="col_175-176" refersTo="page_0124"/>authorities on the Rand in January, 1924, but some of them, in addition to doing day vocational work, also prepared candidates for matriculation, and since their transfer to Union control they have all been absorbed in the Witwatersrand Technical Institute, which confines itself to vocational instruction.</p>

<ol><li>(2) The following technical colleges under Union control were in existence in December, 1928, the number of pupils (part-time and full-time) being,</li></ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>The Witwatersrand Technical Institute, Johannesburg</p></td>

<td><p>8,265</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>The Cape Technical College, Cape Town</p></td>

<td><p>4,891</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>The Pretoria Technical College, Pretoria</p></td>

<td><p>2,380</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>The Natal Technical College, Durban</p></td>

<td><p>2,016</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>The Port Elizabeth Technical College, Port Elizabeth</p></td>

<td><p>1,083</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>The East London Technical College, East London</p></td>

<td><p>753</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>The Pietermaritzburg Technical College, Pietermaritzburg</p></td>

<td><p>519</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>19,907</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<ol><li>(3) Falls away.</li></ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Barberton, Settlement at.</heading>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Col. D. REITZ</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Government intends shortly introducing a considerable number of European families brought from elsewhere into the districts of Barberton and Bethal; if so,</li>

<li>(2) how many such families are to be placed in each of the districts named and what is the nature of the work upon which they are to be employed;</li>

<li>(3) where are these families being brought from;</li>

<li>(4) what rate of pay will be received by the workers so introduced;</li>

<li>(5) what housing accommodation is being provided for; and</li>

<li>(6) when will the work of transferring these families be commenced?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) No. It is however the intention of the Government to put families on two new settlements near Sabie, district Pilgrimsrest.</li>

<li>(2) (a) About 250 families; (b) Afforestation.</li>

<li>(3) From Namaqualand and other drought-stricken areas.</li>

<li>(4) Six shillings and fourpence per diem.</li>

<li>(5) First twenty houses expected to be completed end of February.</li>

<li>(6) As soon as accommodation is available.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister when he expects the general election &#x2019;</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Convict Labour at Bethal.</heading>

<question by="#grobler" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XIX.</num>

<from>Lt.-Col. H. S. GROBLER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice whether it is not possible to have more convicts available at Bethal for employment by private individuals, whereby the scarcity of labour will be lessened?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#grobler">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I am sorry but there is not sufficient accommodation in the gaol at Bethal to permit of more prisoners than at present being detained there.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Forest Labourers&#x2019; Huts.</heading>

<question by="#de_villiers" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XX.</num>

<from>Mr. W. B. DE VILLIERS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware that several of the forest labourers at La Motte, Division of Paarl, live in corrugated iron huts; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he is prepared during the present year to make provision for the erection of brick houses for those labourers &#x2019;</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#de_villiers">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Yes. There are altogether 114 settlers&#x2019; houses at La Motte of which 69 are permanent buildings. The balance of 45 are dwellings of two to three nissen huts, the sleeping accommodation of which is bricklined.</li>

<li>(2) On completion of planting at La Motte the labour strength will be considerably reduced, requiring about 60 permanent buildings only. To replace these nissen huts by permanent buildings means additional costs to the State. I am, however, prepared to have this question investigated to enable me to consider what steps can be taken.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Natives Arrested at Barberton.</heading>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XXI.</num>

<from>Col. D. REITZ</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether the action of the police in raiding all farms and mines in the district of Barberton for the purpose of arresting natives originating from Portuguese territory has the sanction and is the considered policy of the Government;</li>

<li>(2) whether he is aware that this action and policy is seriously depleting farm and mine labour in the said district; and</li>

<li>(3) whether he will give instructions to the police to cease the action complained of?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) The action of the police in Barberton was not directed specifically against natives originating from Portuguese territory but was taken in the course of ordinary police work in connection with the collection of native taxes.</li>

<li>(2) It is not correct to say that by their action the police are seriously depleting farm and mine labour in that district. What the police did was necessary in the ordinary course of their duties.</li>

<li>(3) No.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Is the police action the result of the Portuguese treaty?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>It has nothing to do with the Portuguese treaty, but was carried out in the ordinary course of duty. Similar action was taken at places close to the Swaziland border in order to see that the pass laws were being carried out.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#rood" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from><span class="col_177-178" refersTo="page_0125"/>*Mr. ROOD:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister if he will see that steps are taken about the illegal residence of Portuguese kaffirs, and especially women, especially at North Kaap. A crowd of natives live there&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#reitz">

<from>*Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member cannot give information, he must ask questions.</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#rood">

<from>*The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The matter is one for the Department of Native Affairs.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Prof. Clark Powell and Citrus Industry.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture whether any expenditure in connection with the tour of Professor Clark-Powell, of the Transvaal University College, round the world for the study of the citrus industry is being borne by the Department of Agriculture?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>The answer is in the negative.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister to speak a little louder as we cannot hear him?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>The answer is in the negative.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Why has not the Department of Agriculture assisted in any way this very worthy mission?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I do not know that we did not assist.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Who is paying the expenditure connected with this world-tour of Professor Clark-Powell?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>It is a question for the Imperial Marketing Board.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Has the Minister received a report from Professor Clark-Powell on his tour round the world in the interests of the citrus industry?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>The hon. member can put the question on the paper.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Lamont, Economics Division.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXIII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether Mr. Lamont, the Chief of the Division of Markets and Economics, has been transferred to Europe for other duty; if so,</li>

<li>(2) in what capacity is Mr. Lamont to be employed, and where is he to be stationed; and</li>

<li>(3) what instructions have been issued for his guidance in connection with his new duties?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) and (2) Mr. Lamont&#x2019;s services have been loaned to the Central Tobacco Co-operative Society for 12 months in the first instance at the conclusion of which the position will be considered anew. This has been done in view of the very serious position brought about by the very heavy surplus production of tobacco over our domestic requirements and the urgent need for finding new markets. Mr. Lamont has accordingly proceeded to Europe for this purpose. The expenses connected therewith are being borne by the producers, but in consideration of the importance of the matter, the Government has agreed to bearing the cost of his ordinary emoluments for one year.</li>

<li>(3) Mr. Lamont will act under the instructions of the co-operative society, but naturally the society has the advice of the department on the matter.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Why has Mr. Lamont been instructed to go to the Argentine?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>Because it is in the interests of the tobacco farmers.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Has he been instructed to keep in close touch with the Empire Marketing Board?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Cedara School of Agriculture.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXIV.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the students at the School of Agriculture, Cedara, Natal, are now required to take 50 per cent, of their lectures in Afrikaans; if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether the Minister is aware that there has been a considerable diminution in attendance in consequence of the inability of the students to understand Afrikaans;</li>

<li>(3) of the 18 students in attendance, how many are conversant with the Afrikaans language;</li>

<li>(4) what are the names of the students at present in residence at Cedara;</li>

<li>(5) of the successful students in last year&#x2019;s examinations, what percentage were settlers introduced under the aegis of the 1820 Settlers&#x2019; Association with capital from overseas; and</li>

<li>(6) what proportion of such settlers passed with distinction last year?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) No. The staff of the school is in a position to do so should this be justified by circumstances. The hon. member will remember that I undertook last year that this matter would be dealt with with full consideration to circumstances which might prevail. In view of the fact that the students enrolled are with one exception not conversant with Afrikaans, instructions were issued that the full course should be given in English, provision for full instruction in Afrikaans medium, however, to be made for students requiring such.</li>

<li>(2) Yes. I am aware of the small number of enrolments but cannot say whether it is due to the reason given by the hon. member. This matter is being investigated with a view to stimulating enrolment in the school.</li>

<li>(3) One.</li>

<li>(4) Payn, Hall, F. Grieves, W. Grieves, Handury, Arkels, Green, Court, Piccioni, Bartholomew, Forde, Shaw, Webb, Reinstorf, Napier, Larsen, Diazadede, De Souza.</li>

<li><span class="col_179-180" refersTo="page_0126"/>(5) 10 per cent.</li>

<li>(6) 33⅓ per cent.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Commissie Poort Irrigation.</heading>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXV.</num>

<from>Brig-Gen. BYRON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) By whom was the expropriation value of the land for the Commissie Poort (Rustenburg) Irrigation Scheme arrived at; and</li>

<li>(2) whether the valuator was an official of the Lands Department or Irrigation Department?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The answer to this question was given on Tuesday, 29th January, in reply to Section (1) of Question No. XII.</li>

<li>(2) No Government official of the Lands or Irrigation Departments made a valuation of the land, but a Mr. Theo. Weinholdt, a Land Bank Valuator and member of the Irrigation Board, valued the land.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Table Notice No. 1687.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXVI.</num>

<from>Mr. SWART</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether he is prepared to lay upon the Table Notice No. 1687, of the 21st February, 1927, issued by the general manager to the railway staff?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#swart">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I lay upon the Table the notice referred to by the hon. member.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: W. C. Raath, Appeal by</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXVII.</num>

<from>Mr. SWART</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether he is prepared to lay upon the Table the papers in connection with the trial and appeal in the case of W. C. Raath in regard to his action at Harrismith station as relieving foreman on the night of the 5th May, 1928?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#swart">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I regret I am unable to lay upon the Table the papers in connection with the charges made against, and the appeal by, W. C. Raath.</p>

<p>In any case, the matter is at present under consideration by the Railways and Harbours Board.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Lourenco Marques, Union Agent at.</heading>

<question by="#miller" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXVIII.</num>

<from>Maj. MILLER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol><li>(1) What is the Government&#x2019;s intention with regard to the appointment of the Union agent at Lourenco Marques;</li>

<li>(2) when is an appointment likely to be made; and</li>

<li>(3) whether such appointment, when made, will carry wider powers than has been the case in the past?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_external_affairs" to="#miller">

<from>The MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The Government intend appointing a counsul-general instead of an agent.</li>

<li>(2) Probably towards the middle of the year.</li>

<li>(3) The consul-general will have wider functions than his predecessor.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Diamonds: Air Transport.</heading>

<question by="#miller" to="#minister_of_defence">

<num>XXIX.</num>

<from>Maj. MILLER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence:</p>

<ol><li>(1) What sum is paid the air force for the operation of the service from Cape Town to Port Nolloth; and</li>

<li>(2) what is the operating cost of the service, and how is it arrived at?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#miller">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) £4,000 as initial cost for steel hangars Port Nolloth and Cape Town and clearing emergency landing grounds en route and £800 per month for one service a week.</li>

<li>(2) The sum of £800 per month is calculated on the average flying costs per hour of the S.A.A. force including all overhead charges, this being considered the most practical basis to adopt.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Posts: State Shipping.</heading>

<question by="#giovanetti" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>XXX.</num>

<from>Mr. GIOVANETTI</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether a memorandum on State shipping has been prepared by the department: and</li>

<li>(2) whether he will lay the memorandum upon the Table, or whether he intends to publish it for the information of members?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#giovanetti">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>This question, of course, has arisen from time to time for many years and I believe that memoranda were prepared about the time of Union. They are, however, not now available. I understand that some votes were prepared for my predecessor&#x2019;s personal use, but not in the form of an official departmental memorandum.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Magistrate Hime.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XXXI.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he has had his attention drawn to an article in &#x201C;Die Afrikaner,&#x201D; of the 18th January, 1929, under the heading of &#x201C;Chief Magistrate Hime&#x2019;s slim political dodge (streek),&#x201D; in which, referring to the magistrate&#x2019;s judgment in the Revision Court, the article declares that he has been influenced in an extraordinary judgment by strong political prejudice against the Government, and proceeds to make the further statements: (a) That magistrate Hime is a S.A.P. and that his astonishing uninvited South African party criticism of the Government which he serves fully shows this, (b) As an example the article quotes the magistrate&#x2019;s remark that &#x201C;It is disgraceful that the Government should offer these labourers such a wage; it is not even a living wage.&#x201D; (c) That magistrate Hime had no right to express his opinion on the case that it was undesirable, uninvited, and <span class="col_181-182" refersTo="page_0127"/>outside the scope of his jurisdiction. (d) That magistrate Hime in striking off 37 Nationalist voters&#x2019; names from the Pietermaritzburg (North) roll was influenced by a desire that they should not be qualified to vote at the next ensuing election on which so much depends; and</li>

<li>(2) what steps does the Minister propose to take with a view to the magistrate being afforded an opportunity of defending himself against the gross charges made against him?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I must ask the hon. member to let that question stand over.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>A reply to this question and two others have been handed to the Minister of Finance, and I cannot understand why there should be this secrecy. The reply of the Minister of Justice is in the hands of the Minister, and he asks me to let it stand over.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I am merely replying to questions on behalf of the Minister of Justice, and if the hon. member has already a reply to the question in his possession, it was probably given him by the Minister of Justice.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>No, it was not.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>Then I must decline to reply to it.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Do I understand the Minister declines to reply to the question, because if so I shall move the adjournment of the House at the proper time to draw attention to his refusal.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The Minister asked that the question should stand over.</p>

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over].</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Public Service Commission.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXXII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior&#x2014;</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether there is any truth in the reported proposed retirement from the staff of the Public Service Commission, Pretoria, of one of the two senior Public Service Inspectors at a date many years in advance of this officer&#x2019;s normal retiring age; if so,</li>

<li>(2) what are the grounds for effecting such proposed retirement;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table copies of correspondence, if any, which has passed between the Commission and the said Inspector on the subject and state if there is any evidence of collusion by way of private arrangement disclosed in such correspondence;</li>

<li>(4) what is the officer&#x2019;s present age and what is his normal retiring age; and</li>

<li>(5) what will be the cost to the State Pension Funds by way of pension and probable gratuities from all sources on the proposed retirement being effected?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes, nine years in advance of this officer&#x2019;s normal retiring age.</li>

<li>(2) Re-organization involving reduction of the inspection establishment and of the officer being in receipt of a personal salary in excess of the present scale of his post.</li>

<li>(3) The only correspondence between the commission and the said inspector is a letter of intimation to that officer. There has been no collusion.</li>

<li>(4) The officer&#x2019;s present age is fifty years ten months and his normal retirement age is sixty years, and</li>

<li>(5) Pension £641 13s. 4d. per annum and a leave gratuity of £547 19s. 1d.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Can the Minister give the name of the officer who was retrenched ten years before the retiring age?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>If the hon. member wanted a reply to that question he could have put it in his question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister tell us whether there is any fault to find with this officer&#x2019;s discharge of his duties? Is he not recognized as one of the most efficient men in the service to-day?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>There is no complaint against him as far as I know.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Native Repatriations.</heading>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<num>XXXIII.</num>

<from>Mr. BLACKWELL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Native Affairs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is a fact that the Government has initiated a policy of repatriation of non-Union natives; if so,</li>

<li>(2) in what manner and to what extent is this policy being carried out, and what is the reason for the policy; and</li>

<li>(3) what is being done in the case of natives of long service with their present employers who wish to retain their employment and whom their employers wish to retain?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_native_affairs" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No.</li>

<li>(2) and (3) Fall away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Public Service Inspectors.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXXIV.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many Public Service Inspectors have been appointed within the past twelve months;</li>

<li>(2) what are their names, the date of their appointment, and rate of pay; and</li>

<li>(3) from what posts were they promoted, respectively?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Four.</li>

<li>(2) Messrs. G. D. P. Mentz and F. Fleck from the 1st May, 1928, F. C. M. Voigt from the 12th August, 1928, and J. H. de Wet from the <span class="col_183-184" refersTo="page_0128"/>1st September, 1928. The rate of pay in each case is £800 per annum on the reduced scale £800-30-950.</li>

<li>(3) Messrs. Mentz and Fleck were promoted from posts of second grade magistrate at Klerksdorp and Zastron, respectively, Mr. Voigt from that of first grade professional assistant to the Attorney-General, Cape Town, and Mr. de Wet from that of second grade chief clerk, Department of the Interior.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>How does the Minister reconcile the retrenchment of the official in regard to whom he has just replied, with the fact that four other inspectors have been appointed within the twelve months immediately preceding his retrenchment?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>Four were appointed to magistracies. That was before the whole question as to the number of inspectors was considered by the commission. The question of whether so many inspectors were necessary was considered only at a later date. It was considered at that later date, after it was decided by the commission to use the secretary of the commission on as many occasions as possible for inspection work.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is it not a fact that the secretary is due to retire in 18 months&#x2019; time, and therefore it would be quite easy to retain the present senior inspector until that retirement takes place?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I do not see that has anything to do with the reply.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>It arises out of the Minister&#x2019;s answer.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>Not at all.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Bunker Coal Freights.</heading>

<question by="#papenfus" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXXV.</num>

<from>Mr. PAPENFUS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he has seen the statement in the press that five P. and O. liners will discontinue making Cape Town a port of call and will sail via the Suez Canal, and that the alleged reason for doing so is the great railage cost on bunker coal; and</li>

<li>(2) whether, with a view to the encouragement of the use of Union ports, it would not be advisable to reduce railway freight charges on bunker coal?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#papenfus">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I understand the diversion of shipping to which the hon. member refers is due, not to bunker coal prices, but to a general reorganization of the Australian shipping services and to conditions peculiar to the Australian wheat trade.</li>

<li>(2) The question of regulating the railway rates on bunker coal, with a view to encouraging the development of the South African coal trade, is one which the Railway Board keeps constantly in view.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS:</from>

<p>Arising out of that question, would the Minister tell us where he got this information from?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#nicholls">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I am not prepared to give the sources of my information to the hon. member. If he can prove the information to be wrong he can do so on a suitable occasion.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS:</from>

<p>Surely it is a simple question. Will the Minister not tell the House?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#nicholls">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS:</from>

<p>I suppose it is very secret information only in the possession of the Government?</p>

</question>

<question by="#barlow" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BARLOW:</from>

<p>Would the Minister give the House the rates to-day and what they were before the war?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#barlow">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The hon. member must give notice of that question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#barlow" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BARLOW:</from>

<p>The Minister does not seem to know anything about his department.</p>

</question>

<question by="#allen" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. ALLEN:</from>

<p>From what country is the coal obtained for vessels taking on at Suez?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#allen">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>From different countries.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#barlow" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BARLOW:</from>

<p>Will the Minister say most of it comes from Natal?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#allen">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>No, that is not correct.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>German Treaty.</heading>

<question by="#robinson" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XXXVI.</num>

<from>Mr. ROBINSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries whether, in concluding the treaty of commerce and navigation which was entered into between the Government of the Union of South Africa and the German Reich on the 1st September, 1928, he was in the first instance approached by the German Reich verbally or by correspondence; and, if by the latter means, whether he will lay all such correspondence and replies (if any) upon the Table?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#robinson">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>The Government was approached verbally by the German Government.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#robinson" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ROBINSON:</from>

<p>Will the Minister state whether, subsequent to the verbal arrangement, any correspondence passed between the Union Government and Germany?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#robinson">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>When the Government came into power, my hon. friend, the Minister of Finance, was approached by various countries with a view to concluding treaties. These negotiations were initiated, I understand, verbally, and for a considerable period they were carried on by the Minister of Finance.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Where?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#marwick">

<from><span class="col_185-186" refersTo="page_0129"/>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>Here: and I continued them afterwards. Any further questions the hon. member may have, he may reduce in writing.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#robinson" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ROBINSON:</from>

<p>What I want to ask the Minister is whether he will have any objection to telling us that subsequent to these verbal negotiations any correspondence passed between the Union Government and Germany?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#robinson">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>The hon. member can give notice.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#jagger" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Mr. JAGGER:</from>

<p>Was Clause 8 submitted to the Minister of Defence?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#jagger">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I do not think the hon. member realizes what he is asking.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#barlow" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BARLOW:</from>

<p>Did his colleague, who is sitting alongside of him, agree with what he did?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#barlow">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I must give the same answer to the hon. member as I gave to the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger).</p>

</answer>

<question by="#robinson" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ROBINSON:</from>

<p>If the Minister will look at my question, he will find that I do ask whether subsequently there was any correspondence between the Union Government and Germany, and he has not answered that question yet. I ask whether any subsequent correspondence, if any, will be laid on the Table of the House?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#robinson">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>The question was how I was approached in the first instance, and I answered that fully.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>Might I ask whether the negotiations were continued by the Minister of Railways and Harbours when he paid that visit to Germany?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#close">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I am not prepared to answer stupid questions.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, I ask whether a Minister of the Crown is entitled to make that retort to an hon. member when he is asking questions arising out of a question put by an hon. member?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I think that the Minister should not use language of that kind, although I am not prepared to rule it out of order.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>Was the Minister of Defence present in the Cabinet when this was drafted and did he offer any objection to it?</p>

</question>

<question by="#barlow" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Mr. BARLOW:</from>

<p>If the Minister will lay all the correspondence on the Table, will he lay the correspondence on the Table which appeared in the &#x201C;Cape Times&#x201D; this morning?</p>

</question>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Who made the first approach on behalf of the German Government?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I was not present when that approach was made.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Was it Germany or South Africa?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Hospitals and Radium.</heading>

<question by="#rockey" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XXXVII.</num>

<from>Mr. ROCKEY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether the Government is prepared to consider the advisability of providing in the Estimates or the Vote-on-account a sum of money to be advanced on the £ for £ principle to the general hospitals within the Union for the purchase of radium?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#rockey">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>As hospitals fall under the provincial councils it is a matter for the latter to deal with.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Frank Shaw, Transfer of.</heading>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXXVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether Mr. Frank Shaw, the prospective National Council candidate for Pietermaritzburg (North), who is employed as a guard on the South African Railways, has been transferred from Pietermaritzburg to Estcourt; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether this transfer was effected at Mr. Shaw&#x2019;s request, or at the request of any other person?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Guard Shaw has been transferred to Estcourt.</li>

<li>(2) The transfer was made to meet departmental requirements.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Was this transfer made after Mr. F. Shaw had been nominated as National Council candidate to oppose the present sitting hon. member for Pietermaritzburg (North) (Mr. Strachan)?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I am not aware of it. I am not prepared to interfere with the action of the departmental officers. Employees who think that they are aggrieved by the action of their officers can appeal to the Railway Board, and if Mr. Shaw thinks he has that right, he can appeal but I will not interfere with the action of the railway officials.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reyburn" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. REYBURN:</from>

<p>Has Mr. Shaw appealed?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#reyburn">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I have heard he has appealed, but the appeal has not come up yet.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister that when that appeal does come up, will it receive sympathetic consideration?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I do not know whether Mr. Speaker is going to allow this question to be put, but if it is put, I have no hesitation in saying that it is an impertinent question to which I am not prepared to reply.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, is the Minister entitled to say that?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#byron">

<from><span class="col_187-188" refersTo="page_0130"/>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I think the Minister should not use language of that kind. There is a tendency, in asking questions, to make them a kind of inquisition and to score points off Ministers. I think it would be far better for all hon. members if that tendency were curbed. It would then make the position of Mr. Speaker less difficult than it is at present.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>On a point of order [inaudible].</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member must realize that if the appeal is to come before the board, it is a serious way of putting a question to ask whether that appeal would get sympathetic consideration.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#barlow" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BARLOW:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister a question. It is a matter of importance whether the Minister, as chairman of the Railway Board, will see that Mr. Shaw&#x2019;s case is taken up now, and not after the elections.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#barlow">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>When the appeal of Mr. Shaw comes up, it will be dealt with in the ordinary way by the board.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister whether there has been any complaint with regard to the discharge of Mr. Shaw&#x2019;s duties?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>That is a question of which the hon. member must give notice&#x2014;I am not the general manager.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Drought and Seed Corn.</heading>

<question by="#de_waal" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXXIX.</num>

<from>Mr. DE WAAL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture whether the Government is prepared to assist the corn farmers of that part of the division of Piquetberg which suffered the most during the three years of drought, by supplying them with seed corn and otherwise?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#de_waal">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I am causing this matter to be investigated without delay in order to see what assistance will be required.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Drought and Oats.</heading>

<question by="#buirski" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XL.</num>

<from>Mr. BUIRSKI</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware that owing to the drought the weight per bushel of oats is below the standard grade of 36 lbs.;</li>

<li>(2) whether he is aware that large quantities of oats are being thrown on the hands of the farmers by speculators and others; and</li>

<li>(3) whether, in view of the above circumstances, the Minister will consider the urgent necessity of reducing the grade temporarily to 32/33 lbs. bushel?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#buirski">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>Representations have been made to me in regard to this matter. I am aware of its urgency and have already instituted investigations with a view to reducing the grade temporarily as may be justified by the results of the investigation.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Road Transport.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF FINANCE replied to Question XIV, by Mr. Papenfus, standing over from 29th January.</p>

<question by="#papenfus" to="#minister_of_finance">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether, in consequence of the motion adopted by this House on the 10th March, 1925, in regard to the proper construction and maintenance of a system of highways and roads for transportation purposes, the Government has consulted the provincial authorities of the Union;</li>

<li>(2) if not, why not; and</li>

<li>(3) whether any steps have been taken to give effect to the resolution of the House, and, if so, what steps?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#papenfus">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<p>The question of improved roads is constantly engaging the attention of the Union Government and the Provincial Administrations. A Departmental Committee, appointed by the Minister of Mines and Industries, to make recommendations regarding a future road policy reported in May, 1925, but its report was not acceptable, and was not adopted. During the last four years the Union Government has rendered greatly increased financial assistance to the provinces for the purpose of road construction. It has made a grant to them of £500,000 from the surplus accumulated by the Custodian of Enemy Property, has increased its advances from loan funds for capital expenditure on roads, and has also assisted road development by way of grants for unemployment relief.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#parys-vredefort_railway_route_adjustment_bill">

<heading>PARYS-VREDEFORT RAILWAY ROUTE ADJUSTMENT BILL.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Order of the Day No. III for to-day&#x2014; Second Reading,&#x2014;Parys-Vredefort Railway Route Adjustment Bill [A.B. 4&#x2014;&#x2019;29]&#x2014;be discharged and the Bill withdrawn.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#brink">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BRINK</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#no-confidence_motion">

<heading>NO-CONFIDENCE MOTION.</heading>

<p>Second Order read: Adjourned debate on motion of no-confidence, to be resumed.</p>

<p>[Debate, adjourned yesterday, resumed.]</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I listened with much interest to the leader of the Opposition when he introduced this motion, and I was very pleased to hear him once again make a prophecy. The leader of the Opposition states that the people in South Africa have lost confidence in this Government.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>He stated a case, not a prophecy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I want to bring home to hon. members some of the previous utterances and prophecies of the leader of the Opposition which have not come true, <span class="col_189-190" refersTo="page_0131"/>and which have shown clearly that he has been, and will again prove to be, a false prophet. For example, he said: &#x201C;I will never lose Pretoria West.&#x201D; He did. He also said he was convinced that this unholy alliance would never be returned to power. He was wrong. He went further and said that if we were returned to power we would not last more than six months; and again he was wrong. After eighteen months had passed, when the leader of the Opposition was thinking about a lecture tour in the United States of America, he said, according to his own press: &#x201C;I cannot leave South Africa because we are on the eve of a general election.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Never.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>He said further that if the Pact came into power trade and industry would be stagnant throughout South Africa. Since we took over the reins of Government there has been a phenomenal increase in both trade and industry. In 1924 he said that if the Pact came into power capital would leave South Africa. But what is the position? There is more capital coming into the country than ever before.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Where did you get that from?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>From his speeches as reported in his press, and from which I can quote extracts. He also said that the money markets of the world would be closed to the Pact Government. I only mention these things because I was pleased to hear the leader of the Opposition laying such emphasis upon the fact that this Government had lost the confidence of the country. Why was this motion moved? It was moved&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Window-dressing.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I think it was a bait thrown out in order to catch the members over there on the cross-benches with a view to them and the South African party presenting a united front. But it drew a blank, because, while hon. members on the crossbenches over there were prepared to wound, they were afraid to strike the blow. The amendment was moved to get our friends over there out of the dilemma in which the South African party thought it had placed them. A significant feature of the debate during the last two or three days has been that practically every speech from the minority Labour movement has been applauded, appreciated and beamed upon with satisfaction by every member of the South African party. Why? I will tell you. They are not relying upon the help of hon. members over there in Parliament; there is something far bigger at stake. What they are banking upon is the help they hope to get from that section when they start their vote-splitting campaign. The members of the Weinstock section are going out to split the vote of the Labour party. That is why there is such satisfaction in the ranks of the South African party. The hon. member for Springs (Mr. Allen) is, I understand, going on a vote-splitting campaign in Brakpan, and I also understand that the member for Pretoria (West) (Mr. Hay) is also going on a similar work. Well, they are welcome. The hon. member for Pretoria West, who went in with such a flourish of trumpets, is going down to Greyville to help the South African party. The hon. member is welcome to do the dirty work of the vote-splitters and wreckers in Greyville.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>Talk like a Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Bloemfontein (North) (Mr. Barlow) is getting fidgety. The hon. member for Durban (Umbilo) (Mr. Reyburn) made an attack on the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs. He made an insulting suggestion to one who holds a trade union record second to none in South Africa, a record extending over a quarter of a century. Since the hon. member for Jeppe (Mr. Sampson) occupied a ministerial position the Typographical Union has publicly expressed gratification at his appointment. The insult of the hon. member for Durban (Umbilo) is, therefore, an insult to the Typographical Union. The hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley)&#x2014;I am sorry he is not here&#x2014;in moving his famous amendment, said that his late colleagues, the other Labour Ministers, had failed the labour movement. He told us that he had succeeded, but that we had failed. But what was his supreme effort? It was that he had raised the wages of the building trade labourers to 8s. per day. In December, 1924, twelve months before the member for Benoni came into the Cabinet, an instruction was given by me, as Minister of Public Works, for 8s. per day to be paid to unskilled labourers on building contracts in the case of tenders accepted on a civilized basis. We called for alternative tenders in order to promote our policy of civilized labour, and when I was asked by the Labour Department to agree to that I did. Originally there was no rate laid down. The master builders came to me and asked what was the use of their being requested to quote unless they were told what the rate was to be on a civilized labour basis. I issued an instruction that 8s. a day should be the rate. That was the policy until August, 1926, when the hon. member for Benoni became Minister of Public Works. The master builders Then came along again. They said: &#x201C;We don&#x2019;t like this calling for alternative tenders.&#x201D; They asked for uniformity, and the hon. member for Benoni took the next step. He did away, at the request of the master builders, with the alternative tenders, and left the wage of 8s. per day as I had fixed it. This was the supreme effort of the hon. member for Benoni, on which he says he was turned out of the Cabinet. Well, the hon. member for Benoni says we have failed. He says that I have failed. Yes, I have failed to join in the miserable, underground, intriguing attack on our leader, made upon him in order to pull him down. I stood by the man they were doing their best to pull down. That is my crime and my failure, in common with the other Labour members who sit on this side of the House. We refused to join in the attack led by Karowsky and others. If the hon. member for Benoni was so keen on raising the wages, <span class="col_191-192" refersTo="page_0132"/>why did he not take the opportunity he had in connection with something else he controlled. When I took over as Minister of Posts and Telegraphs there were 500 white men working as civilized labourers on telephone construction. They were getting 5s. per day. I said it was too little, and I increased that rate to 6s. 6d. per day, and I increased the number from 500 up to 1,450. I would have thought that if the hon. member had been so keen on his 8s. a day when he saw the pay of these men was being raised from 5s. to 6s. 6d., he would have said that the increase ought to be 8s. per day. I left the department to the hon. member who now boasts that he was the one who raised the wages, and when I inquired, I found, to my surprise, that the number employed had decreased and the wage was exactly as I left it. I now wish to deal with the two main criticisms which have been levelled at me in connection with the Wage Act and unemployment. I am sorry the leader of the Opposition is not here, for I would like to ask him, if he comes into power, will he repeal the Wage Act, and leave the working man to the mercy of the sweaters? The Transvaal congress of the South African party sent me a letter last October stating that the congress passed a resolution strongly protesting against the Wage Act, under which they alleged that farmers suffered in every respect. I ask any farmer in the House if he has suffered as a result of the Wage Act. As a matter of fact, the Wage Act excludes farming operations, but this is the South African party pretext for doing away with the Wage Act. The leader of the Opposition stated on one occasion that he was going to repeal the Wage Act, and the next day the &#x201C;Bloemfontein Friend&#x201D; came out with a slashing attack on him, stating that if he talked like that, what hope had he of returning to power?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>Where did he say that?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>He said that last August in Cape Town.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>Then the women&#x2019;s conference of the South African party sent me a letter urging that the Wage Act be repealed. Let us see what all the trouble is about. Both the leader of the Opposition and the hon. member for Gardens (Mr. Coulter) are hopelessly at sea in regard to what the Wage Act is doing and the difference between it and the Industrial Conciliation Act. They have both praised the latter, but in the next breath they attacked the wage boards for things with which they have nothing to do, but which have to do with the Industrial Conciliation Act. The hon. member for Gardens asserted that builders have been thrown out of employment as a result of the Wage Act. The Wage Act has never touched the building industry. If I wanted a lawyer, I reckon I should waste my 6s. 8d. if I went to the hon. member for Gardens. He said the Wage Board is laying down rates of wages which cannot be paid by the sweet manufacturers, and he quoted figures to try to prove that the wages determined by the Wage Board would be too high for the manufacturers to pay. Yet the biggest sweet manufacturer in the Transvaal said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The Wage Board has proved itself one of the blessings of the country; if for nothing else we have to thank the present Government for instituting wage boards, for employers and employees alike will benefit.</block>

<p>Then one of the largest sweet manufacturers in the Cape Province, who carries on business at East London, says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In spite of all the talk there has been throughout the country, we do not consider we would be unduly handicapped by being obliged to pay the rate of wages laid down by the board. We consider they are fair; in fact, they are very much lower than we pay at present for skilled labour, but higher for unskilled labour.</block>

<p>What happens is that when there is a slackness of work in the sweet industry and people are thrown out of employment, the country is told that this is due to the Wage Act. We had a case of 60 employees being put out of work by a Cape Town sweet factory. On investigation it was found that in the corresponding month of the previous year, when there was no Wage Board in existence, this factory had to dismiss 90 employees, sweet-making being a seasonal occupation. The hon. member for Gardens shed crocodile tears about what was happening in the clothing industry. I made enquiries into this industry yesterday through our inspectors, and found that there are more workers in the clothing industry to-day than there were twelve months ago, when there was no wage determination. Of course, there had been dismissals on account of the weeding out of the inefficient. You cannot have efficiency if you are overloaded with a lot of people not suited to perform the class of work in question. The hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger) should not be opposed to efficiency in industry, as South Africa is one of the least efficient countries in the world. The Labour Department informs me that it has found employment for dozens of people displaced on account of wage determinations on account of inefficiency. Recently I went through four clothing factories at Germiston. If I had been the villain of the piece, do you think they would have asked me to open a clothing factory there a few months ago? There was an industrial council for that industry before the Wage Board came into force; it was a sweated industry. Let me just read a letter. The clothing industry of the Transvaal has an industrial council governing the wages, and the secretary and agent happens to be in Cape Town for a few days. He saw in the papers the attack by the hon. member for Gardens (Mr. Coulter), and this is the letter I had from him yesterday&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Dear Mr. Boydell&#x2014;I notice by the press that the industrial and wage board legislation is being attacked, and it is alleged that many employees engaged in the clothing industry are thrown out of employment. Speaking as secretary and agent for the clothing industry council of the Transvaal, I am in <span class="col_193-194" refersTo="page_0133"/>the position to refute such accusations. The industrial agreement at present in force in the Transvaal is being rigidly observed by both employers and employees, and, in spite of the fact that wages in the Transvaal are 25 per cent, to 30 per cent, higher than those laid down by the Wage Board for Cape Town and the coastal areas, the industry is expanding rapidly and many new factories during the last few months have sprung up. The demand for workers cannot be met, and I could place 300 girls at 50s. to 60s. a week if I were in the happy position to obtain them.</block>

<p>This is the industry that is being ruined! Does the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger) know that in the next few months will be finished and started in Cape Town the biggest clothing factory in South Africa, accommodating 1,000 workers? The building and land have cost £30,000. The machinery has been ordered, and this factory was decided upon after the Wage Board determinations were known. The owner of the factory told the chief inspector that if he could not get the employees he required, then he was going to offer them 10 per cent, more than the wages laid down by the Wage Board. But we will hear soon about two factories closing down at Woodstock. One is condemned, and the other has been bought by this man, and he is transferring the machinery and employees to the new factory. It is no good hon. members on that side talking about things they do not understand and do not take the trouble to inquire into. The hon. member for Gardens spoke as a lawyer. He took no trouble to get at the facts, and all he tried to do was to hit the Government and particularly the Department of Labour. Would the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) not agree that our factories in South Africa should be on a properly organized and efficient basis? Mr. Simon Collier, a well-known man, has said one thing the Wage Act has done has been to make employers take stock of their position and reorganize and bring their businesses up to date.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#william_macintosh">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILLIAM MACINTOSH</person>:</from>

<p>He said it was going ahead much too fast.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>If there is one town in South Africa where industrial development is expanding phenomenally, it is the hon. member&#x2019;s town, Port Elizabeth.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#william_macintosh">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILLIAM MACINTOSH</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, and Three Rivers showed you what they thought of you.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I will deal with Three Rivers later. South Africa is one of the least efficient countries in the world. Let me give some figures from the year book. The value of production per employee in factories is as follows: Australia, £866 a year; New Zealand, £1,047 a year; Canada, £1,070 a year and South Africa £439 a year. When we come to wages, what do we find? In Australia the average wage of the employee in the manufacturing industry is £193 a year, New Zealand £195, Canada £221, and South Africa £116. Half the wages! That is the reason for our inefficiency&#x2014;low wages and cheap, inefficient workers. What some of the members over there want is protection for industry but no protection or assistance for workers engaged in industry. I come to another industry mentioned by the hon. member for Gardens, and again he is hopelessly at sea. He talks about the furniture industry, and he says the Wage Board has thrown tens of thousands on to the street. The wage determination, as far as furniture is concerned, does not apply to the Cape. It is governed by the Industrial Conciliation Act. My difficulty is not to defend the work of the Wage Board on its merits, but to get members over there to understand what they are talking about. There is not a single member on that side who takes the trouble to understand how the Wage Act is applied and how the Industrial Conciliation Act is applied. The right hon. the member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts) said the Industrial Conciliation Act should be applied to organized workers and the Wage Act to sweated workers. I say the Wage Act has been applied in 90 per cent, of cases investigated solely for the sweated workers, and when it has been applied for more skilled and semiskilled trades, it has only been applied at the request of an industry in order to cover up the defect in the Industrial Conciliation Act. It is defective in one important respect, and I would welcome it if members over there would put through an amending Bill which would make it unnecessary for me to supplement the industrial conciliation agreements. The Industrial Conciliation Act does not apply to pass carrying natives, and the good employers come to me and beg me to protect them against the bad employers. Am I to allow the Industrial Conciliation Act to become a dead letter? I say no. I supplement what the wage agreement lays down by saying any person not covered by the industrial agreement shall be covered by the wage determination. We have had twenty-four wage determinations. I hope the hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens) (Mr. Coulter) would read some of the technical objections that some of these industries have been putting up in order to try to beat the Wage Act&#x2014;most trifling things. Under that Act the Minister can ask the board to investigate and report, under one clause. Under another clause the Wage Board has to be asked by employers or employees to make an investigation and a recommendation to the Minister. Along comes a brainy magistrate and says that the board can make a report, but if it includes a recommendation the Minister cannot give effect to it when the board has not been instructed to make a recommendation under that particular clause of the Act. What is the good of a report without a recommendation&#x2014;one implies the other. One magistrate has upset it on a technicality like that. Another determination was upset because no objection date was mentioned. Good employers do not object to the Wage Board at all&#x2014;they welcome it. <span class="col_195-196" refersTo="page_0134"/>The bad employers get an army of lawyers to find little technical flaws, in order to upset the decisions. [Time limit extended.] I think I have said enough to show that the Wage Board is doing good. I now want to come to the question of unemployment, and here we are faced with one of the most difficult things any Minister or Government could meet. Never in my life have I said that I could find a cure for or completely eliminate unemployment under the present economic system, which is production for profit and not for use. That cannot be done under the present economic system.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reyburn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REYBURN</person>:</from>

<p>Why not change the system?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>If I can convince my colleagues here to change over from capitalism to socialism it would give me a good deal of pleasure. But even under communism in Russia, I see they have one and a half million of unemployed. We have a little unemployment in Cape Town, which I regret, and I am trying to do what I can every day to meet the position. The local offices put into employment over 6,000 last year, over 500 last month. But some of the men unemployed would not take the work, and said that the wages were too low. I agree; in many cases I would like to see them higher, and I would like to make them higher. Others have been placed in work, but will not stick to it. Others object. As fas as it is possible, we are trying to place the genuine one in employment. What has the Government done? I need not refer to the railways. There would be 15,000 more out of work if the South African party was in power.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person></from>

<p>made an interjection.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Duncan) does not mean to say that they would retain all the civilized railway workers, although I hope they would and increase the wage. I think the wages are small, and as a Labour Minister I hope they will be increased. The policy of hon. members opposite, however, was not to put them in but to push them out and to put the kaffir in. Their policy was to transfer men from branch lines to main lines, and put the kaffir in their place on the branch lines.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>You do not understand it; talk about what you understand.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>Other departments have absorbed about 1,500, and when we look at industries generally, in the last three years there has been an increase in employment in primary industries of 14,500 Europeans under our industrial development, and of nearly 6,000 non-Europeans. The Government does its best to provide work for civilized workers, but does not get the co-operation of the provincial or the town councils.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>What about Bloemfontein?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>Bloemfontein is one of the exceptions.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>It has a good member.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>On roadwork three of the provincial councils last year spent £1,000,000, and there were 40,000 non-Europeans and 62 Europeans. Road-work lends itself to the type of man, especially piece work. I have to start in the Transvaal and advance to the Transvaal Provincial Council £30,000 in order to provide employment for 500 men on road-work, and that did not absorb them. In addition, in my own department I am spending £33,000 to provide employment for another 300 men. I am negotiating now to build a road from Muizenberg to the Strand, which is all Government land, and that will cost the department £15,000.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What do you pay them?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>They are on piece-work, earning about 8s. a day. The minimum is 6s. and the average is about 7s. a day. Take the Groot Schuur site; one of the best jobs ever done by civilized labour. Two hundred men were employed upon that job, 100 white and 100 coloured, and the average earnings of the white was 10s. 6d. per day, while that of the coloured was 8s. 6d. per day. Then take the rural side. I have a return here showing what has been done in this connection, and anyone who says we are not doing anything to meet the unemployment position has only to read this document. We have something like 3,000 men who would not otherwise be employed now working in all parts of the country through subsidies or under the auspices of the Labour Department. Some 20 or 30 jobs have been put in hand this year already, in order to find employment for these men. I say that a good deal of the prosperity which we now have can be traced to the fact that we have such a large number of these people employed, as a result of which the spending power of the community is greater now than ever before. As a matter of fact, the increase in wages paid amounts to no less than 3&#x00BD; millions sterling. Compared with the position in our manufacturing industries at the time when we came into power, wages are 3&#x00BD; million pounds per year more. Again referring to the rural side, we have training farms and extension schemes on which we have 1,000 families which are being helped. After the training farm comes the extension scheme. I asked the Department of Finance to appoint a commission to go into the economic side of the administration of our scheme. This was done, and I have here the commission&#x2019;s report. Not satisfied with that, I asked the Agriculture Department to go into the working of our extension scheme. I have its report before me, written by one of the chief officials, who says that the scheme was absolutely successful. Let me quote his own words. He said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">It is the most successful land development scheme in a country which is noted for its unsuccessful land development.</block>

<p><span class="col_197-198" refersTo="page_0135"/>Hon. members who state that we are not doing anything to put them back on the land are simply stating what is not true. No Government has ever done more in this direction than we have.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>What are the costs?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>You can get those in the report. I would like to say, however, that in regard to the training farms, we are getting a revenue of from £25,000 to £30,000.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>Why don&#x2019;t you extend the farm labourers&#x2019; schools?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I am trying to do so all the time. I would like to have one in the Cape. Of course, if hon. members on the opposite side of the House persist in introducing a party spirit into the matter, you will spoil the whole scheme. The leader of the Opposition, in the course of his remarks, stated that the Government came in on the turn of the tide, that it got nothing but large surpluses, and that everything went along all right. Let me read what the president of the Chamber of Industries said in a speech which he made to the Association of chambers of commerce of South Africa in 1928. [Quotation read.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>And you take the credit for all this!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>Yes. Just listen to what he had to say further. [Quotation read.] That is the hon. member for Three Rivers (Mr. Gibaud). The country has not gone ahead through good luck, but through good management. We have had a period of peace in industry, progress, and unprecedented prosperity.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander) has been the recognized champion of the public services in this House, and it is difficult to understand the remarks he made in the course of his speech yesterday. I think, however, that the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs has a better appreciation of the position in the public service than the hon. member, and two or three weeks ago at a meeting of the Labour party at Bloemfontein, the Minister stated that there was grave discontent in the public service. The hon. member for Hanover Street said there was no promise on the part of the Government with regard to the 10 per cent, cut, and the local allowances, and that there was more prospect of restoration from the Pact Government than from the South African party. When the hon. member brought forward a motion for the restoration of the scales, he dealt with the reasons why this 10 per cent, was deducted from the official salaries. He said it was deducted in a time of depression, and then he went on to say&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In this time of abounding surpluses it is quite time to restore the salaries.</block>

<p>In the course of the same speech he said that the request of the public service to be given back their 10 per cent, was a perfectly legitimate one.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I have still the same views.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member said there was no promise made.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>You read Hansard, and you will see what I said.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>I am quoting from your speech in Hansard. You said that the public servants were given every reason to believe, having regard to the speeches made all over the country, that one of the first things the Pact would do would be to restore the salaries. You said that in a former speech, not the speech of last night. The Labour conference that year adopted a motion urging the restoration of the fifth report scales. Members of the Labour party cannot ignore their promises in regard to the pre-war salaries and allowances. That is what the hon. member said, and I think that is sufficient. I do not think it is a change of outlook at all, but I think it is a change of seat. He has his eye on the Gardens now instead of on Woodstock. The hon. member took a great interest in the public service, and I remember the time when he attended conferences and spoke in favour of resolutions adopted at them. At a conference in Pretoria last May a resolution was passed recognizing the widespread discontent in the service due to the Government&#x2019;s failure to restore the 10 per cent, cut in salaries, and the differentiation in the local allowances. There was also another resolution at this conference in Pretoria, deploring the failure of the Government in this respect, and in view of these resolutions, it is quite evident that public servants were buoyed up with the promise that the scales would be restored. There was a further resolution passed in which the public servants of South Africa, sitting in annual conference, recorded their strongest protest against the practice of filling the higher appointments by importations from outside. I understand that something like 180 of these appointments were made from outside the service. I am sure that those resolutions state the views of the public service. I am in daily contact with these men, and I know what their feelings are. They are opposed to the disastrous policy of the spoils to the victors., or jobs for pals.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>Forget it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to forget it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister of Agriculture says that he prefers a Nationalist every time to a member of any other party, and his department is concrete evidence of what happens. The Minister of the Interior stated in the House that, all things being equal, he was prepared to give a job to a Nationalist. The <span class="col_199-200" refersTo="page_0136"/>Minister of the Interior, with his well-known sympathies, a judge of when things are equal, it is not difficult to determine how the decision will go. The Minister of the Interior was a member of the select committee which considered the duties of the Public Service Commission, and the select committee was very anxious that the commission should be free from political influence and independant of the Government of the day. Notwithstanding that, one of the first acts he performed on assuming office was to dismiss the Public Service Commission. I asked him the reason and he replied because the commission would not carry out the policy of the Government.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR</person>:</from>

<p>They did not want to carry out the Act of Union.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>There are very few plums in the public service, and when men have been in the service for years and when they are near the top of the tree, it is not very pleasant for them to find that the highest appointments are given to the political pals of the Government. When the post of Secretary for the Interior became vacant, the appointment was given to a man from outside the service (the Provincial Administration), although the assistant secretary had been acting as secretary to the department for years whilst his chief was overseas. Then, when Col. Truter retired, no suitable man was found in his department, a man from outside the service was appointed Commissioner of Police. Again, when Mr. Warington Smyth retired from the position of Secretary for Mines, his successor was appointed from outside the service.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I can give you a reply to that, and more than you bargain for. When you speak in the House, talk about what you understand.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>What experience had Dr. Pirow of the administration and the working of the mines department? He was appointed simply because he was a political friend of the Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>That is an absolute distortion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>A man with an English name is generally superseded. One disquieting phrase concerning many of the appointments from within the service is the almost established practice&#x2014;whenever a vacancy occurs in a high position&#x2014;to appoint anyone rather than the next in rank of seniority, especially if he has the misfortune to be an English-speaking civil servant.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>That is an absolute distortion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>It is not, it is an absolute fact. How often has the excuse of abolition of office and reorganization been used to get rid of a man. The Government retired a man, an inspector in the public service, on a pension of £640 a year, although he was 10 years under pensionable age, and appointed four others with Dutch names. What is the name of that man retrenched?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#marwick">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MARWICK</person>:</from>

<p>Col. Clayton.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>A year ago, the Minister of the Interior promised to extend the functions of the Public Service Advisory Council. It was hoped that the council would be able to assist the Public Service Commission in regard to salaries and appointments, but out of the 34 recommendations the council made, only ten, and those of a very minor character, were accepted by the commission. The Advisory Council is so dissatisfied and disappointed with the result of its work that it will probably be dropped. I would like to say a few words to the Minister of Railways. He had the experience of his predecessor in office to guide him, and he also served for years on the Select Committee on Railways, where the many problems with which he has been confronted were continually under discussion, but he has failed to take advantage of the experience he gained there. To-day the traffic to the interior has been entirely revolutionized, but, instead of altering his tactics to meet the changed conditions, the Minister carries on in the same old way. He has forgotten clause 127 of the South Africa Act.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Our old friend again.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>The three men he has appointed as members of the Railway Board are estimable gentlemen, but what about their business experience? This section was specially included in the Act as a safeguard for the Minister, has been deliberately set aside for political reasons. There is an entire change in the traffic conditions of the railways. Instead of getting the keenest business men and railway experts he could find, the Minister filled these offices with political appointments, and these men are simply the instruments of the Minister in carrying out his policy. If the Minister had been strong enough to say to the Government: &#x201C;This thing has got to stop; I am going to run the railways as a business concern,&#x201D; possibly the railways would not be in their present parlous condition. In the early days it may have been quite good policy for the Railway Department to shoulder many of the burdens which should have been borne by the Central Government, but in spite of the falling revenue and changed conditions, the Minister has continued his policy with the result that £2,000,000 worth of services are still being rendered by the railways for the Central Government which the Minister should insist upon their paying. The users of the railways in the North are paying for all this expenditure. According to the Auditor-General&#x2019;s report the rates to-day are in some cases 125 per cent, over the pre-war rates, an average of approximately 40 per cent.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Have wages not increased?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>You should have taken this into account and insisted that the services <span class="col_201-202" refersTo="page_0137"/>rendered to the central Government by the railways should be paid for. Take the payment of interest on capital, the failure to earn interest on the branch lines, the contributions to the Renewals Fund and the cost of uneconomic white labour. Then there is the annual payment of half a million pounds from the capital from which the railways are constructed. When the Minister was in opposition he opposed this policy. There has been a loss on the grain elevators this year of £41,000, a total of £208,000. This does not include the special trucks made and then used uneconomically on other services. Then there is the loss on the Durban graving dock of £232,000. This does not even pay working expenses, let alone interest. Take the loss on the Sea Point line, about £38,000. That has to be made up out of extra fares and rates that up-country people have to pay. Then take the question of drought relief. This is really a national matter, but the Minister of Railways, in reply to the hon. member for Hospital (Mr. Papenfus), said he thought it good policy to assist the farmers. Why should he go out of his way to assist the general public at the expense of up-country people only, who have to pay for this in increased fares and rates. The general manager in 1927 reported he had transported 1¼ million animals, using 18,064 trucks at a total direct and indirect loss of £150,000 for removal of stock. This is clearly a matter which the central Government should pay. Take the Renewals Fund. We have contributed since Union about 14&#x00BD;, million pounds to the Renewals Fund. This fund was built up for the purpose of replacing wasted assets. Of this £14,000,000 less than £2,000,000 has been withdrawn for assets which have actually disappeared. It follows that the railways have built up a fund of 12&#x00BD; million pounds too much. It is good policy to build up a Renewals Fund, but there is no necessity to take out of revenue a million pounds a year for this purpose, a much lesser sum should suffice for this fund. In regard to the cost of raising loans the balance in favour of the railways to-day is £480,000. Why does not the Minister take up these matters with the Minister of Finance? Something-like £1,000,000 was taken out of the Renewals Fund for new electric engines, which should have been purchased out of capital. The Minister has never been able to defend that. Then there is the question of civilized labour. Every time a question is asked from this side about; the civilized labour policy, the cry goes up that we are against the employment of white labour. We are not but we say you are using this labour in the wrong direction. The Minister entices the men from the land&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>That is not so. They are engaged by the Labour Department after the fullest investigation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>But is it not better to employ these men in their natural surroundings? These men can never rise to more than 7s., 8s. or 9s. a day. We have this anomaly. The Minister of Agriculture at a farmers&#x2019; conference in Pretoria chastised the farmers for their low production and efficiency. The Minister of Lands spends huge sums on land settlement, and here we have the Minister of Railways enticing these men from the land out of their natural environment. Then take free passes. Why should the Railway Department pay for members&#x2019; passes and those of provincial councillors? When the Prince of Wales came it cost something like £31,000, which the railways paid. This visit was an invitation from the central Government, so why should they not put up the money? Then there is this other matter of the branch lines; if the Minister had put a strong Railway Board there they would at least have gone carefully into the actual cost of construction and the probable revenue before recommending any lines. We all realize that we must have branch lines to open up the country, but they are not for the benefit of the railways only, but for that of the whole country, and if there is a loss the whole country should pay. In 1926, the date of the latest statistics, out of seventy branch lines, ten showed a net profit, thirty-two paid working expenses, and twenty-eight did not cover working expenses; the total loss for the year was £572,000, which did not include the indirect loss of rolling stock which could have been used on traffic that did pay. There is an obligation on the Railway Board to go carefully into proposed lines and to see that the revenue was likely to be sufficient to cover at least working expenses. There is a branch line of thirty-four miles from Ladismith to Calitzdorp which was recommended by the Railway Board for construction and the report gave the estimated revenue for the first year as £16,633; there were no round figures about it. There was to be an estimated profit of £279&#x2014;no round figure of £280. It looked as if there was very careful and accurate estimating, but after three years of working it was found that the revenue was £4,339, or only about a quarter of the estimated revenue, and the loss was £8,809. On the Matatuba line the estimated cost was £419,760 and the actual cost £631,358, an excess of £211,598. How can this House come to a definite conclusion as to the payability of any line when you have such estimates? These are clearly cases where Section 130 should have been put into operation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Do you believe Mr. Orr to be a business man, Mr. Rissik and Sir Andries Stockenstrom?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>They had nothing to do with the Matatuba railway.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>The present board are not responsible for any programme.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>My point is that if they were a board of directors they would have seen that we got value for our money; if they were in my employ, men who made such an estimates, would make no other. The Minister of Railways and Harbours set aside the board, which was one of his first acts, and authorized the railway to Klaver. He then got the hoard to confirm his action.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from><span class="col_203-204" refersTo="page_0138"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>That is not so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>I sat on the Select Committee on Railways and Harbours and know the history of this thing. The board said they were faced with an accomplished fact and confirmed the action of the Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I hope all lines give us such good results.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>I am not saying that; but the Minister can do away with the Railway Board altogether, if that is the argument. With regard to the establishment of industries in the interior, just outside of Pretoria we have one of the finest quarries in the country for the production of black granite. Would the House believe that it is cheaper for that company to rail one ton of rough granite to Cape Town, ship it to Scotland, get it polished there and reship to Cape Town, than to rail the polished granite from Pretoria to Cape Town. This is not assisting the establishment of industries in the interior. With regard to citrus growers in the Transvaal, a 40-ton truck of citrus was hauled from Nelspruit to Cape Town, 1,196 miles, with a paying load of only 15 tons for £13 10s. if for export, and £37 10s. for local consumption, whilst the cost of railage of 40 tons of the products of a factory producing lemon and orange squash from the same place was £260, whilst the same goods were carried from Durban to Cape Town, 1,250 miles, or 54 miles further, for one-third of the amount. It is clear from this that the Minister is not carrying out his clause in the Act to regulate the rates for the establishment of industries in the interior.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>I have listened so far with attention to the debate, and must state that as long as I have been in the House I have never heard such a flood of trivialities as the Opposition has taken the opportunity of this debate to deliver. Not one of the arguments which have so far been put forward has benefitted the motion. As we, therefore, on this side of the House, and the people outside, come to the conclusion that the Opposition have failed miserably as opposition, and now, at the end of the Government&#x2019;s term of office, have to come forward with a motion of no-confidence to make the people believe that they have done something in Parliament, then it is quite justified. I shall repeat a few points which have also been repeated in the countryside by the Opposition, and of which we are very tired. The first is that hon. members on the other side maintain that this side committed a great sin by not terminating the Pact on the evening of the 17th June, 1924. I shall say to the hon. members&#x2014;and I hope they will not forget it again &#x2014;that the Pact ended on that day at 8 o&#x2019;clock.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>And began again the following morning.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>The ending of the Pact did not prevent the two parties the following day, or eight days later, from meeting together again, and deciding to work together. The decision taken by the leaders of both parties was duly confirmed by the congresses concerned. Why is the Opposition so concerned about this thing? The Nationalist party was content with the Pact Government, and the congress of the Labour party also gave its consent to it. I see that the hon. member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts) is again going round the country saying that we have fulfilled none of the promises made at the last election. I have here the programme. Three years ago, when the accusation was made, I also produced it here. I read it out article by article, and the hon. member for Stellenbosch (Mr. J. P. Louw), who, if I am not mistaken, also spoke like that, has never again mentioned it. In this motion of no-confidence, however, the argument must again be used that the Government has not fulfilled its promises. I am not surprised that the people outside have left the once great South African party. This will continue still more in the future till nothing remains of the party. We, as the Nationalist party, come before the people with concrete facts.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>Oh, indeed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Duncan) climbed onto a buck waggon in Marico, and put a great big hat on his head to look like a backveld Boer, but the people only laughed at him. The people in Marico do not let themselves be misled by such things. For the instruction of the hon. members on the other side, I should like briefly to go through the promises again here. I have read them over carefully, and see that all, except one, which is still only partly unfulfilled, that is the Indian question, have been fufilled. I see that hon. members of the Opposition go round the country and make, grave accusations in connection with the affair. The hon. member for Standerton is one of them, and, if I remember rightly, he is one of the members who, when the Indian question was before this House, agreed to it, and welcomed it, and congratulated this side that such an agreement had been reached. The people outside cannot understand what the conditions are. They ask me how it is that the leader of the Opposition is not in favour of it, while I tell them that the Opposition voted for it. I wish that members on the other side would get up, and here in the House state clearly what they also state outside, where the newspapers have not such a wide circulation as in the big towns. I cannot understand how the Opposition, which has so much on its conscience, dares propose a motion of on-confidence in this House. I applaud the motion. The people have the opportunity of seeing whether, if the leader of the Opposition and his supporters were put on the scales, they would carry weight, and I do not doubt that this House, just as the public did four years ago, will give the result: &#x201C;Weighed in the balance and found wanting.&#x201D; We are glad also because we get the opportunity, not only of proclaiming the good deeds of the present Government here, but also of summing up the misdeeds of the former Government. The hon. member for Standerton, six months ago, honoured my <span class="col_205-206" refersTo="page_0139"/>district of Marico with a visit, and at a meeting spoke the first truth in his whole round of visits.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>*An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>In his whole life.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>I will just keep to his journey. He said that he has been in public life for 30 years, and has never yet seen the country so flourishing as during the last four years. The meeting rejoiced over this, but then he continued with a &#x201C;but.&#x201D; He said: &#x201C;If we now had only had the opportunity of governing the country, then &#x2026;&#x201D; Unfortunately, the hon. member is not in his place, but some of his former Ministers were there, and I would ask them whether more or less rain has fallen under the present Government than fell under the last one.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>*An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Less.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>I should like them to ask them whether under the last Government there was more drought than under this one. Almost everyone here will say that there has been more drought now. Did it hail more during the South African party Government? I think the House will answer: &#x201C;No.&#x201D; As for myself, I must acknowledge that I have had much more hail during the last two years than in the five years under the previous Government, but I must, nevertheless, say that, during the two years I did better than in the five years with less drought and less hail. It is no use saying that this Government is just lucky. It is no use saying that the country has suddenly changed. No, there has been a change in policy, a change in the psychology of the South African people. The people here and also abroad have acquired confidence in the country which they did not have before 1924. The confidence has arisen because of the capable policy of the Government, and the prosperity of the country in consequence thereof. Why did not the previous Government have the confidence? Because they opposed everything that was for the benefit of South Africa, to favour foreign interests. The interests of the empire were put before the interests of South Africa. Not even the interests of the empire in general, but just of the islands 6,000 miles from here. To-day they do not very greatly watch imperial interests, but just on those of England. They never speak of the other dominions. When they are considering treaties they think of England alone. We look at the empire as a whole. Why did things go so badly during the last years of the South African party Government? I only want to mention a few small points, but they are far-reaching. In the first place, there is the financial policy. We and the people have not forgotten that under the previous Government the inflation by paper money was permitted. Thereafter the Government suddenly came and said that there should now be deflation. The bank had to collect all the paper money that was issued and the bills, and when the time came for settlement thousands of farmers right up to the Limpopo went insolvent. When that happened they and the whole country suffered. The people have not forgotten it, and when they have to vote again they will vote the same as in 1924.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>What did the Government have to do with that?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>The Government permitted the inflation, and then forced through the Act of 1923 which I have here. The people have also not forgotten that in 1921 an embargo was placed on the export of mealies from the country. The price of mealies was 28s. to 30s. a bag, but when we could get it, it was said that we could not export, and the price fell to 8s. and 10s. a bag. When all was bought up by the buyers the Government, at my instance, finally removed the embargo. Can members of the old South Africau party Government propose a motion of no-confidence? This Government sees that our mealies are exported every year by November, and, therefore, the market price remains steady. The public have not forgotten this either. They drank the bitter cup when the embargo was put on them, and this generation, in any case, will pass before Nationalists who voted for us in 1924 will again vote South African party. The hon. member for Standerton mentioned, and I think it is the only argument he used to justify his motion of no-confidence, that the Labour party were divided, the basis of the Pact had dropped away, and that if we wanted to go on with it, it was immoral. I am surprised that the hon. member has taken that bold line, because if there is anything immoral in the policy, then he is the greatest sinner in that respect. I shall mention a few facts to prove it. I have a book here written by Sir Lionel Phillips, giving his reminiscences of the period after the second war of independence. In it he says on pages 196 and 197&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">When I again settled in the Transvaal in 1906 the condition of political affairs was deplorable. Gen. Botha was in the saddle as Prime Minister.</block>

<block name="quote">I got into touch with Gen. Botha and Gen. Smuts and gradually established friendly&#x2014;even intimate relations with them.</block>

<block name="quote">The Prime Minister and Gen. Smuts stayed occasionally at my house, and we arranged a few social gatherings there in the town to bring them into personal touch with well-known people of our side. I never left our party or pretended to do so to my new boer friends, and gradually almost insensibly the tension became slackened &#x2026; I made it my mission in those days to keep abreast of proposals, and often by explanation prior to publication, was able to point out defects and ulterior consequences in their proposed legislation&#x2026;.</block>

<p>Hon. members opposite laugh, but they were members of &#x201C;our side&#x201D; that helped Sir Lionel Phillips to act as Prime Minister of the Transvaal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Have not you a Schlesinger?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>Thereafter the writer proceeds&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote"><span class="col_207-208" refersTo="page_0140"/>The result was, after agreement had been reached, that the proposals were either not brought forward or were modified.</block>

<p>Who then was ruling. It is immorality in politics if you allow an Opposition to play the master, and say what legislation shall be introduced. We are told every day from the benches opposite, and on platforms outside that the South African party have swallowed up the Unionists. The latter have given up all their principles and adopted those of the South African party. The hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Duncan) will, however, not admit that, because he is too honest to do so. He will do what Sir Abe Bailey did five years ago, and say that it is a lie that the old Unionists have discarded their principles. He will say that they are still maintaining their principles. He will do so because he is too high-principled to run away merely for a seat in Parliament. We can, therefore, proceed from the standpoint that the Unionists have actually swallowed and digested the South African party. At the last congress of the Unionist party in Bloemfontein Sir Percy Fitzpatrick said that his party&#x2019;s principles would not cease to exist, but that they would persist into distant generations. They j also prevail to-day, but from the leader of the Opposition to the most humble member, the old Unionist language is used, and the old Unionist ideals are honoured. I, therefore, say that there is no longer actually a South African party, but only one in name.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>What do you say about a; republic?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>Here are my party principles, and if the hon. member can find the word &#x201C;republic&#x201D; in them, I will give him £1,000 each time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>What about your speeches?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>I was born a republican, and I am sympathetic towards a republic, but I have learned to be content when I see that my country is in prosperous condition. Whether, however, it is in the interests of South Africa or not, hon. members opposite want to make empire interests prevail. We, however, say: &#x201C;Charity begins at home&#x201D;, and therefore we honour the slogan: &#x201C;South Africa first&#x201D;, I want to mention another thing to prove the immorality of the South African party. Six months&#x2019; ago the hon. member for Standerton opened the congress of the B.E.S.L. at Pretoria. He there said that he was one of the founders of the body, and that he wanted to warn them that there was moderate influence which they wanted to undermine and that they should therefore have a care. Did the hon. member possibly mean the Sons of South Africa? Is he a member of that body? No. He is a member of everything foreign. I do not blame him for being a member of the B.E.S.L., because we do not want his influence in the Sons of South Africa.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Is the Prime Minister a member of the Sons of South Africa? •</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, he is a founder.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Is the Minister of Defence a member?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>I do not blame a man for being a member of the B.E.S.L., but because the leader of the Opposition has such great influence in it I can understand why that body took such an active part when the flag question was on in the House. He co-operated with that body in fighting the Sons of South Africa, and that the Minister of Defence has never yet done. The hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige) mentioned a point in his speech on which I feel very strongly, and that is the co-operation between us who feel and think alike. I know he did not mean it seriously, but the public outside might think that he actually meant it, and therefore I want to mention a few things. On Tuesday a motion of no-confidence was tabled, and if he feels with South Africa, then he should not have supported that motion with such poor arguments.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>*An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>He is a Unionist.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>Oh, is that the reason? Then he is the girl who first rode on the tiger and was later swallowed up. Recently there was a movement for an orientation of parties, and after the statement of the intention of the movement in Johannesburg by the leader of the Nationalist party in the Transvaal, the leader of the Opposition Said at Wellington that he could not think of cooperation because he could not desert his Unionist friends for the sake of co-operation with his fellow countrymen who thought alike with him. Is the hon. member for Caledon honest, then, in speaking about co-operation, while following a man who wants none of it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Are you prepared to desert the Labour members?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>The Labour members are just as much citizens of the country as he is, and much better.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>So are the Unionists.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>The Unionists are citizens of the country, and that is all. Their ideals are broad. Then I also want to tell the hon. member that we have not swallowed up each other, but that the two parties met properly and decided what they were going to do. The people of the country are satisfied that the work of the last four and a half years has been well done. Now I want to put a few questions to the Opposition. Do we agree about the native question when they stand for equality and we do not? Do we agree when imperial and South African interests are in question? I have never once seen that we think alike on these matters. Do we agree about industries, and our workers? No. That side of the House is for the lowest cost of production; this side is against that and stands <span class="col_209-210" refersTo="page_0141"/>for a reasonable production cost so that the national wealth can be distributed among the people, in order that the power to purchase can be regained, and whether the farmer, the secondary producer and the trader can flourish. It is because that side do not support this few overseas industries can exist.&#x201D; I think it principle that we cannot co-operate with them. Do we agree about protection? We introduced it so that more industries could arise, and not only that more work could be given to workers, but also better markets could be created for the producers. The Opposition think differently because they are free traders. Their view is: &#x201C;Let what will happen to the country, and let the industries disappear as long as a was very daring of the Opposition to introduce this motion in view of what the Government has done during the past four and a half years. Let us go back to 1924. Before the election the country was in such a deplorable state that the hon. member for Standerton himself had to run away from his own position. He then abandoned statesmanship and suddenly became a prophet. His first prophecy to the people was that if the Nationalists came into power money would go out of the country. Just the opposite happened. The fact that the Pact Government assumed office caused money to flow into the country. Business went ahead, and everyone could make money. His second prophecy was that the Pact Government would only last for three months. The people had only given him a little leave of absence, and then he would come back, take over the reins and govern the country again. The period soon became six months, but it passed, and here the Government still are to-day. If we are to judge by what we see outside then the South African party will still remain in opposition for a very long time. The people can consider the few facts I have mentioned, and I think they will come to the same conclusion as the House, namely, that the motion of no-confidence is merely an attempt to show that the Opposition have, anyhow, done something, as an Opposition, during the life of the present Parliament. It is their last convulsion, and as the hon. member for Hoopstad (Mr. Conroy) said the other day, there are many of them to whom we can bid adieu. Here I want to end, and to express the hope that the hon. member for Standerton, in view of the debate, will withdraw his motion so that we can get on with our work.</p>

</speech>

<p>On the motion of Mr. Blackwell, debate adjourned; to be resumed on 4th February.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1929-02-01T17:48:00">5.48 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

