---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol13 - FRIDAY 16 AUGUST 1929'
layout: debate
year: 1929
month: AUGUST
month_slug: Aug
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 16th AUGUST, 1929.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1929-08-16T11:06:00">11.6 a.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<p>I. Withdrawn.</p>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Accident at Klaarwater.</heading>

<question by="#acutt" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. ACUTT (for Maj. Richards)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether the report of the enquiry held in connection with the accident at Klaarwater, Natal, has been received by the Government, and, if so, when it will be available for public information?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#acutt">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>Yes, and copies thereof are available for perusal in my department in the Palace of Justice, Pretoria, and in the magistrate&#x2019;s office, Durban.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Cottages At Wellington.</heading>

<question by="#waterson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. WATERSON (for Mr. Lawrence)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it has been reported to the Administration that for the last five years the foundations of several houses intended to be built for railway servants at Wellington are lying in a derelict condition; if so,</li>

<li>(2) why has not the Government pursued the work and built these cottages for the accommodation of the railway staff at Wellington;</li>

<li>(3) at how many other places throughout the Union are similar foundations lying in a similar neglected condition;</li>

<li>(4) what is the estimated amount of money lost on these abandoned foundations; and</li>

<li>(5) whether the Administration is prepared to complete these houses and thus assist in removing the shortage which exists at all railway centres for housing accommodation for the departmental servants?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#waterson">

<from><span class="col_957-958" refersTo="page_0506"/>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) In 1920 the construction of several new houses was embarked upon, but, owing to financial stringency in 1921, the programme of work was curtailed.</li>

<li>(3) Four.</li>

<li>(4) &#x00A3;1,153.</li>

<li>(5) No. Not until more urgent demands are met.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Czechoslovak Republic.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_external_affairs">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN (for Mr. Coulter)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of External Affairs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether notice was given on behalf of the Union of South Africa that it desired, that the stipulations of the treaty of commerce between Great Britain and the Czechoslovak Republic, dated the 14th July, 1923, should apply to the Union; if so, when; and</li>

<li>(2) whether notice terminating the said treaty, as between South Africa and the said republic, has been given; if so, when?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_external_affairs" to="#nathan">

<from>*The MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS:</from>

<p>I can only say that the question appeared on the Votes for the first time this morning, and I do not suppose that the hon. member will expect me to give him an immediate reply. I am quite willing to reply, but certainly not this morning.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_external_affairs">

<from>*Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>To-morrow morning?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_external_affairs" to="#nathan">

<from>*The MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS:</from>

<p>The question is too childish.</p>

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oral_question">

<heading>ORAL QUESTION.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Dissolution of the Senate.</heading>

<question by="#duncan" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Mr. DUNCAN:</from>

<p>Is the Prime Minister now in a position to give us an indication of the date of the senatorial election?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#duncan">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>As soon as the House is adjourned the proclamation will be issued dissolving the Senate. I have come to the conclusion that the best date for the election will be the 6th September.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Train Sanitation.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS replied to Question VI, by Mr. W. F. de Wet, standing over from 13th August.</p>

<question by="#de_wet" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it was reported to the Administration that on the 3rd August passengers travelling between Queenstown and Cape Town were put to serious inconvenience owing to the sanitary arrangements and water supply in coach No. 606 having failed to function, and to the staff having neglected to prepare breakfast at Stormberg Junction to meet passengers&#x2019; requirements on arrival of the train at that station; and</li>

<li>(2) what steps he is prepared to take to prevent a recurrence of a state of affairs of this nature on both the Eastern and Mid land systems?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#de_wet">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<p>A mechanical defect in the water supply which the train staff was unable to rectify, occurred about 6.0 a.m. and was remedied on arrival at Rosmead, where the train is due at 11.50 a.m. I am assured that breakfast was in readiness on arrival at Stormberg, where the train remained 51 minutes. No complaints were made to the catering department.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Diamonds: Alexander Bay.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE replied to Question XII, by Mr. Humphreys, standing over from 13th August,</p>

<question by="#humphreys" to="#minister_of_justice">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) What percentage of the seven million pounds sterling worth of alluvial diamonds found at Alexander Bay has been sold or otherwise placed upon the market;</li>

<li>(2) over what period does the Government propose to dispose of these diamonds in order to maintain the prices;</li>

<li>(3) whether there has been any depreciation of the market prices ruling for alluvial diamonds since these finds at Alexander Bay;</li>

<li>(4) what is the percentage depreciation, if any, of the price of alluvial diamonds;</li>

<li>(5) whether this depreciation is due to the disposition of these abnormal finds at Alexander Bay;</li>

<li>(6) whether the Minister will give an assurance that he will hold such stones as may be found there so as not unduly to depreciate the price ruling on the alluvial diamond fields;</li>

<li>(7) whether any arrangement has been entered into with the diamond producers whereby the supply is restricted with a view to maintaining the prices in order that the alluvial digger on the river diggings will get a fair price for his stones; and, if so,</li>

<li>(8) whether the Minister will make a statement disclosing the terms of such agreement?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#humphreys">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Approximately 50 per cent. up to the end of July, 1929.</li>

<li>(2) I am unable to state any period.</li>

<li>(3) No. Diamonds of quality when offered for sale always maintain their price; market fluctuation especially at this time of the year is on the down grade (and not due to any discovery <span class="col_959-960" refersTo="page_0507"/>at Alexander Bay); good stones have more than maintained their price.</li>

<li>(4) This all depends on the quality offered.</li>

<li>(5) No.</li>

<li>(6) In the past the Government has taken every precaution to maintain the stability of the alluvial diamond market and it will continue to do so.</li>

<li>(7) No.</li>

<li>(8) In view of the answer to (7) this question falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railways_and_harbours_appropriation_(1929-1930)_bill">

<heading>RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS APPROPRIATION (1929-&#x2019;30) BILL.</heading>

<p>First Order read: Second reading, Railways and Harbours Appropriation (1929-&#x2019;30) Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>During the course of the debate yesterday I asked the Minister a question with regard to carbonic acid gas. I understand he said he would consider the matter during the recess. At the same time reference was made to the Minister of Finance, and he asked if I could suggest how customs duties could be placed on the importation of articles without increasing the cost of living. I would like to ask the Minister of Railways if he knows of a single instance where a tax has been placed on the importation of any article without increasing the cost of living.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bowen">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">BOWEN</person>:</from>

<p>This question of motor competition on the part of the Railway Department is seriously affecting motor services here in Cape Town. There is one service which has been built up at considerable cost, contributes a considerable amount of revenue to the state, and has a considerable passenger service which is in no way competing with the Minister&#x2019;s Railway Department. In fact, they had included motor tours to Knysna, and they withdrew them the moment the Minister opened up his Knysna line. When the Minister put on his motor service to the docks this particular service, which was serving a valuable need in Cape Town, was withdrawn in deference to the railway competition. I would like to ask the Minister whether that docks motor service is returning a profit to the Administration, or whether it is being run at a loss. There is very grave concern on the part of this particular enterprise at the possibility of the Minister coming here during the Cape season, and as it were, skimming the milk of the tourist traffic, as it is alleged has been done in Durban. I want to ask whether he proposes entering into competition with private enterprise in regard to these tourist motor services, which have been running in the Peninsula. I refer to the tours to Sir Lowry Pass, Cape Point and various other services which are run throughout the year. Private enterprise has, of course, no chance of competing with the department in view of the fact that the Government pays no customs duty, returns no revenue, and pays no licence fees, and I understand the pay given by the Railway Department to their motor-bus drivers is not that which is ordered by the wage determination award which was made applicable to these private motor drivers. I would like to know whether the Minister and his department propose to extend this tourist traffic here during the season in open competition with the motor-bus services, which are in no way competing with the department. If the Minister does propose to extend the sphere of his operations, is he going to make the service one which is merely going to serve the public during the season, and leave the public in the off-season without any service at all? Motor Charabancs. Limited, are returning a fair measure of revenue to the state, and serving the public&#x2019;s need at a very fair price. The average charge is l&#x00BD;d. per mile, and, as run by the Government, the price has not been in any way comparable with the service provided by private enterprise.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry I have to trouble the Minister on a matter of detail when we are now busy discussing the principles, but I could not raise the point earlier. It is a matter of very great importance&#x2014;the position of the station yard at Caledon. For a considerable number of years there has been an agitation to have a subway or a bridge as an approach to the station. Several fatal accidents have occurred there. The department has insisted on a contribution from the divisional council and the municipality on the &#x00A3; for &#x00A3; principle, but it appears almost impossible to get these public bodies to agree on this contribution. Both have to bear great financial burdens. This road is virtually the main road between Caledon and Bredasdorp, and the Railway Department came along and put the station in such a position that it is necessary to have this crossing. Notwithstanding the danger that exists there, and has existed there for a long time, the department is continuing to lay more rails; I am not certain, but I think there must be a dozen. Business is increasing at a very great rate, and the result is the danger has been very much accentuated. Sometimes trucks stand in such a position that if you, cross one set you are up against another. Very sad accidents, as the Minister knows, have taken place there. He also knows the position of Elgin station, where the people are very badly housed. I am very pleased he has extended the shed accommodation for the fruit farmers. A commission, appointed by the Minister, at the request of the farmers, about three years ago, made a thorough inspection, and were impressed with the unsatisfactory state of the buildings for housing purposes, the stationmaster and other officers of the department being very badly housed. That station returns a very high revenue to the department. The Minister gave the impression that he would consider the position and make provision on the estimates for an improvement at Elgin, but, although I have carefully scanned the estimates, I find ho provision <span class="col_961-962" refersTo="page_0508"/>made for this. I am certain the Minister will, in the near future, give this matter his attention, and will give some relief.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>*Mr. J. J. M. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to draw the Minister&#x2019;s attention to a matter in connection with the increase which he has given to railway labourers. If they were two years in the service they were to get 6d. more, and, after a further, year, an additional 6d. Now it seems to be that there is considerable misunderstanding, and the people think that they will only get the 6d. more after four years, and I should like the Minister to say what the position is. Another matter is the transhipping of coal at Laingsburg. Provision was formerly made to tranship coal arriving by train at Laingsburg, but the people have now been removed, and the coal is now taken to Touws River, transhipped there, and brought back by train. It seems to me that this causes unnecessary expense, as the train takes the coal there and brings it back. I shall be glad if the Minister will see that coal is once more transhipped at Laingsburg. Moreover, it would assist the people in that dry area a bit if they could earn something in this way.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#buirski">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">BUIRSKI</person>:</from>

<p>We have had a considerable agitation recently with regard to slum property, agitation which is quite necessary, and I would like to ask the Minister to take into consideration the advisability of getting rid of certain houses on the approach to Woodstock station, belonging to the Railway Department. These are let at a very small rental. Generally the approach is in such a wretched condition that it would be in the interests of this very densely populated place if those houses were demolished. I would like to draw attention to another matter, and that is, with the construction of the Woltemade line, very great inconvenience is caused to the public in regard to the approaches to Woodstock beach. I hope the Minister will take into account the advisability of having more subways under that line. We should take more interest in those people, who are mostly of the poorer citizens, and desire to have easy access to the beach.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>I also want to make a few remarks in connection with the circular which the hon. member for Ladismith (Mr. J. J. M. van Zyl has referred to. This circular is quite plain, and it says that those who have served for two years will receive 6d. extra per day, and those with three years&#x2019; service another 6d. Unfortunately, this circular has not been carried out. I can assure the Minister that there are people with more than three years&#x2019; service who have not received the extra pay. This I do not myself understand, and I shall, therefore, be glad if the Minister will give us some information about it, and if he will enquire into the matter. Then it is also a fact that labourers who formerly got an extra 3d. a day have not now received the increase of 6d. I hope the Minister will also look into this and see that all the labourers are treated according to the circular issued.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry to see that the Minister has not made any provision for the development of the Salt River&#x2014;Cape Flats line. I have spoken of this before, and I think the Minister is really in favour of it. It is all the more important because of the housing question. If the Minister makes this land accessible, it means that more land will be available for a cheaper class of dwelling. Therefore, access to the Cape Flats is important. It will also make that line earn more money. Quite a lot of passenger traffic could be secured if the train service were good. I would also like the Minister to consider whether he could grant lower second and third class fares for areas close to big towns. If we could have cheap fares for such areas, it would make a great difference to the possibility of the poorer classes living on cheap land outside the cities, instead of on dear land in the centre of those cities. This would also assist in the solution of the housing question by making the provision of cheaper houses possible, and assisting people to whom every penny is of importance in their monthly budget to get outside the slum areas. With regard to the development of this line, I hope the Administration will not wait until private enterprise takes up the matter of transport. Private enterprise is competing severely with the railway at present in the form of motor traffic, and the Administration should not wait until the competition comes along and then squeal because they do not get the traffic.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Don&#x2019;t you notice that private enterprise is squealing this morning?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I am talking about the squealing of the Railway Administration. For six or seven, years the railways have had a monopoly of the traffic to Pinelands. Years ago they could have competed successfully with any bus traffic, but, naturally, it, is a temptation to a private individual when he finds the railways are not sufficiently enterprising to serve the public adequately, to come in and give the public the service they require. I ask the Minister to consider the development of this line.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>*The <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. members for Ladismith (Mr. J. J. M. van Zyl) and Fordsburg (Mr. Pretorius) spoke about the paying of white labourers. There is apparently some misunderstanding, and the position is that the labourers only get a rise of 6d. a day after two years&#x2019; service, and that after they have drawn 5s. 6d. for a year, they get a further increase of 6d.. so, that at the beginning Of the fourth year of service they get 6s. The hon. member for Fordsburg says that in some cases they do not get the increases. If he will let me know of such cases they will be investigated. Then the hon. member for Ladismith spoke about the transhipment of coal at Touws River, and pleaded that it should be done at Laingsburg. The matter was investigated on previous representations of the hon. members, but the officials, after careful enquiry, came to the conclusion <span class="col_963-964" refersTo="page_0509"/>that it was in the best interests of the railways to have the transhipment done at Touws River. Laingsburg has advantages in some respects, hut the advantages of Touws River, which have existed for years, are greater. I want to add that when the maize traffic is extraordinarily great, coal is, in fact, temporarily transhipped at Laingsburg.</p>

<p>&#x2020; The hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford) raises the question of Salt River and Pinelands. We have already acquired the land, and it is now simply a question of whether we can justify the expenditure of a fairly large amount of money. While I agree with him with regard to the desirability of the line. I am not in agreement with him that we would be justified in embarking on further, capital expenditure on that particular line. I do not want to enter into discussion with regard to road competition with the railways, the question of private enterprise raised by the hon. member, and the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Bowen). It would be premature for me to do that. Hon. members are inclined to think that all this motor competition is due to inefficiency of the state railways. Let me disabuse the minds of. hon. members. We have not suffered from motor competition to anything like the extent of the British railways. Through the efficiency of our service in South Africa we have been able to withstand motor competition, probably because we are further away from Europe, but we have certainly stood it far better than railways have stood it in Belgium, Germany, France, America and Great Britain, where private companies are competing with railways. I think we should leave the matter of motor competition to the commission until they have reported to the House and to the country, and, next year, I hope We shall be able to introduce a measure dealing with the whole question, when the matter can be debated. When the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Bowen) spoke, we had the matter of private enterprise brought up, so that the boot is not always on one leg. With regard to second and third class railway fares, I quite agree with the hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford) that, if we could get the working classes to live outside the city, it would be better. The introduction of workmen&#x2019;s tickets has helped things considerably, and we shall do all we can to get people to live, out of these congested areas. With reference to the remarks of the hon. member for Woodstock (Mr. Buirski) on private houses at Woodstock station, I shall consult the officers of my department on this matter. The hon. member has also asked for move subways to be made to enable the inhabitants of Woodstock to approach the beach. The whole matter of these subways formed the subject of long [negotiations with the City Council, and, after these long negotiations, we have come to an agreement which will mean a large increase in the sum I am asking Parliament for. I am afraid we shall not be able to do anything more at present. The hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige) spoke of the station yard. I cannot go further than I went yesterday when I said that public local bodies must be prepared to share in the cost of these facilities, and if the good people of Caledon will provide the necessary money on a fifty-fifty basis, I am prepared to consider the matter. With regard to the housing position at Elgin, it is realized that it is not satisfactory, but the needs of Elgin will not be overlooked when the money is available. Another hon. member said that when you raise the customs duties the cost of living must go up, but I do not agree with him. Take, for example, the case of boots and shoes. The duty has been increased from 27 per cent. to 30 per cent., and the price of hoots and shoes has not gone up. What is the reason? Because, as a result of this protection policy, you have many boot factories in the country, and they are competing amongst themselves. This also refers to many other articles. I now move the second reading of the Bill.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a second time; House to go into committee now.</p>

<p>House In Committee:</p>

<p>Clauses, schedule and title put and agreed to.</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Bill reported without amendment and read a third time.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#pensions_(supplementary)_bill">

<heading>PENSIONS (SUPPLEMENTARY) BILL.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS (for the Minister of Finance)</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">For leave to introduce a Bill to provide for certain pensions, grants and gratuities and other pensionable benefits.</block>

<p>This Bill merely validates the resolutions we arrived at on the report of the Select Committee on Pensions, Grants and Gratuities.</p>

<p>Mr. M. L. MALAN seconded.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="#hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill he now read a second time.</block>

<p>Mr. M. L. MALAN seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a second time; House to go into committee now.</p>

<p>House In Committee:</p>

<p>Clauses, schedule and title put and agreed to.</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Bill reported without amendment and read a third time.</p>

<p>Business suspended at 11.53 a.m. and resumed at 4.9 p.m.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<p><i><span class="col_965-966" refersTo="page_0510"/>Afternoon Sitting.</i></p>

<debateSection name="#the_flags">

<heading>THE FLAGS.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER read the following letter from Vice-Admiral R. M. Burmester, Commander-in-Chief, Africa Station&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Office of the Commander-in-Chief, Africa Station, Simonstown, C.P. 15th August, 1929. The Speaker of the House of Assembly.</block>

<block name="quote">Mr. Speaker,&#x2014;I understand that last session resolved that the national flag that was hoisted at the ceremony of the unfurling of the flags of the Union in Cape Town and which has been presented by &#x201C;Ons Eie Vlag Komitee,&#x201D; be preserved in the Houses of Parliament.</block>

<block name="quote">When I learned this I was reminded that the actual Union Jack that was hoisted at the same ceremony, having been lent by H.M. Navy, had been specially set apart by order of the then commander-in-chief.</block>

<block name="quote">It may be that Parliament will desire that this Union Jack should be preserved, alongside the national flag, and if this be so, it will give the commander-in-chief very great pleasure to present it.</block>

<block name="quote">R. M. Burmester, Vice Admiral, Commander-in-Chief.</block>

<block name="quote">A similar letter has been addressed to the President of the Senate.</block>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="#hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the thanks of this House be conveyed to the commander-in-chief for his offer to present to Parliament the Union Jack used at the Houses of Parliament on the occasion of the ceremony of the unfurling of the flags of the Union. This House, however, regrets that the imminent termination of the session and the consequent impracticability of conferring with the hon. the Senate upon the matter precludes it from giving consideration to the offer at the present time.</block>

<p>The reason of this motion is plain. The committees of the two Houses would have to meet in connection with this matter, but that is not possible at this stage. They will meet next session and discuss it, and I do not doubt but that the offer will be accepted.</p>

<p>Mr. M. L. MALAN seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to point out that if the answer is simply in the terms the Prime Minister has stated, the object he has evidently in view may be defeated, because as the answer reads now it seems an apparent rejection of the offer, whereas I understand the intention of the Prime Minister is that the matter should he pursued next session. I think words to that effect should be added; that the subject cannot be pursued now as we are at the end of a session, but we hope to do so afterwards. The answer might be misconstrued as it stands now and might be taken to imply a refusal of the offer.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="#hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I will add at the end&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">&#x2026; but hopes that such consideration will be given to it at the next ensuing session.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="#hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, just some words should be added to indicate that the matter will be submitted to both Houses of Parliament next session.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On the motion that the House do now adjourn,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="#hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the necessary proclamation proroguing Parliament will appear on Monday.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1929-08-16T16:30:00">4.30 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_dropped">

<heading>BUSINESS DROPPED.</heading>

<p>At the prorogation of Parliament on 16th August, 1929, the following matters had not been disposed of, and consequently dropped&#x2014;</p>

<p>Orders or the Day:</p>

<block name="quote">Second reading, Iron and Steel Industry Encouragement Act, 1922, Amendment Bill&#x2014;(Minister of Mines and Industries).</block>

<block name="quote">Second reading, Fuel Research Institute and Coal Bill&#x2014;(Minister of Mines and Industries).</block>

<block name="quote">Second reading, Natives (Urban Areas) Act, 1923, Amendment Bill&#x2014;(Minister of Native Affairs).</block>

<p>Question To Minister:</p>

<p>IV. Mr. Coulter (col. 957).&#x2014;External Affairs.</p>

<p><span class="col_967-968" refersTo="page_0511"/>Friend, A.&#x2014;Dundee.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, C. H.&#x2014;Prieska.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.&#x2014;Johannesburg (North).</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.&#x2014;Griqualand.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W., C.B.E.&#x2014;Pretoria (East).</p>

<p>Grobler, Hon. P. G. W.&#x2014;Rustenburg.</p>

<p>Hattingh, Rev. B. R.&#x2014;Krugersdorp <i>(Deputy-Speaker and Chairman of Committees).</i> Havenga, Hon. N. C.&#x2014;Fauresmith.</p>

<p>Haywood, J. J.&#x2014;Bloemfontein (South).</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.&#x2014;Worcester.</p>

<p>Henderson, R. H., C.M.G.&#x2014;Hospital.</p>

<p>Hertzog, Gen. the Hon. J. B. M.&#x2014;Smithfield-Rouxville.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.&#x2014;Middelburg.</p>

<p>Hockly, R. A.&#x2014;Fort Beaufort.</p>

<p>Humphreys, W. B.&#x2014;Beaconsfield.</p>

<p>Jansen, Hon. E. G.&#x2014;Vryheid.</p>

<p>Kayser, C. F.&#x2014;Port Elizabeth (North).</p>

<p>Kemp, Gen. the Hon. J. C. G.&#x2014;Wotmaransstad.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.&#x2014;Troyeville.</p>

<p>Kotz&#x00E9;, Sir R. N., Kt.&#x2014;Springs.</p>

<p>Krige, Hon. C. J.&#x2014;Caledon.</p>

<p>Lamprecht, Dr. H. A.&#x2014;Colesberg.</p>

<p>Lawrence, H. G.&#x2014;Salt River.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.&#x2014;Oudtshoorn.</p>

<p>MacCallum, A. J.&#x2014;Cape Town (Castle).</p>

<p>Macintosh, Sir W., Kt.&#x2014;Port Elizabeth (South).</p>

<p>Madeley, W. B.&#x2014;Benoni.</p>

<p>Malan, Hon. C. W.&#x2014;Humansdorp.</p>

<p>Malan, Dr. the Hon. D. F.&#x2014;Calvinia.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.&#x2014;Heilbron.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.&#x2014;Illovo.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.&#x2014;Boksburg.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.&#x2014;Christiana.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.&#x2014;Vredefort.</p>

<p>Nathan, E., K.C.&#x2014;Von Brandis.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.&#x2014;Wakkerstroom.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. Tom.&#x2014;Pietersburg.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, Rev. S. W.&#x2014;Potgietersrust.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.&#x2014;Newcastle.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.&#x2014;Zululand.</p>

<p>Nicoll, V. L.&#x2014;Durban (Point).</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J., O.B.E.&#x2014;Pietermaritzburg (District).</p>

<p>Oost, H.&#x2014;Pretoria (District).</p>

<p>Oppenheimer, Sir E., Kt.&#x2014;Kimberley.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.&#x2014;Tembuland.</p>

<p>Pienaar, B. J.&#x2014;Gezina.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.&#x2014;Marico.</p>

<p>Pocock, P. V.&#x2014;Pretoria (Central).</p>

<p>Potgieter, Dr. C. S. H.&#x2014;North East Rand.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.&#x2014;Fordsburg.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.&#x2014;Bechuanaland.</p>

<p>Reitz, Col. the Hon. D.&#x2014;Barberton.</p>

<p>Reitz, Dr. H.&#x2014;Brits.</p>

<p>Richards, Maj. G. R.&#x2014;Durban (Greyville).</p>

<p>Roberts, Maj. F. J.&#x2014;Vrededorp.</p>

<p>Robertson, G. T.&#x2014;Witbank.</p>

<p>Robinson, C. P.&#x2014;Durban (Stamford Hill).</p>

<p>Rockey, W., O.B.E.&#x2014;Parktown.</p>

<p>Rood, Maj. K.&#x2014;Vereeniging.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.&#x2014;Carolina.</p>

<p>Roos, Hon. T. J. de V., K.C.&#x2014;Bethal.</p>

<p>Roper, E. R., D.S.O., M.C.&#x2014;Wynberg.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.&#x2014;Ceres.</p>

<p>Sampson, Hon. H. W., O.B.E.&#x2014;Jeppes.</p>

<p>Sauer, P. O.&#x2014;Victoria West.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.&#x2014;Aliwal.</p>

<p>Shaw, F.&#x2014;Bloemfontein (North).</p>

<p>Smuts, Gen. the Rt. Hon. J. C., P.C., C.H., K.C., D.T.D.&#x2014;Standerton.</p>

<p>Stallard, Col. C. F., K.C., D.S.O.&#x2014;Roodepoort.</p>

<p>Stals, Dr. A. J.&#x2014;Hopetown.</p>

<p>Steenkamp, Dr. W. P.&#x2014;Namaqualand.</p>

<p>Steyn, G. P.&#x2014;Willowmore.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.&#x2014;Albert.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H., O.B.E.&#x2014;Albany.</p>

<p>Strydom, J. G.&#x2014;Waterberg.</p>

<p>Sturrock, F. C.&#x2014;Turfiontein.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.&#x2014;Newlands.</p>

<p>Swanepoel, A. J.&#x2014;Lichtenburg.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.&#x2014;Ladybrand.</p>

<p>Terreblanehe, Lt.-Col. P. J.&#x2014;Kroonstad.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, Dr. H. D.&#x2014;Wonderboom.</p>

<p>Van Coller, C. M.&#x2014;Cathcart.</p>

<p>Van der Byl, Maj. P. V. G., M.C.&#x2014;Bredasdorp.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, Dr. N. J.&#x2014;Winburg.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, R. A. T.&#x2014;Bethlehem.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.&#x2014;Brakpan.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.&#x2014;Boshof.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, Maj. G. B.&#x2014;Sea Point.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.&#x2014;Ladismith.</p>

<p>Vermooten, O. S.&#x2014;Wodehouse<i> (Deputy-Chairman of Committees).</i></p>

<p>Verster, J. D. H., D.T.D., M.C.&#x2014;Zwartruggens.</p>

<p>Visser, W. J. M.&#x2014;Senekal.</p>

<p>Vorster, W. H.&#x2014;Zoutpansberg.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.&#x2014;Somerset.</p>

<p>Wares. Col. A. P. J.&#x2014;Port Elizabeth (Central).</p>

<p>Waterson, S. F.&#x2014;South Peninsula.</p>

<p>Wentzel, L. M.&#x2014;Delarey.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.&#x2014;Frankfort.</p>

<p>Williamson, J.&#x2014;Durban (Berea).</p>

<p>Wolfaard, G. van Zyl.&#x2014;Swellendam.</p>

<p>[Vacancy: Edenburg.]</p>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

</debateBody>

</debate>

</akomaNtoso>
