---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol12 - FRIDAY 15 MARCH 1929'
layout: debate
year: 1929
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 15th MARCH, 1929.</heading>

<narrative>

Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1929-03-15T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

<debateSection name="#s_c_on_irrigation_and_water_supply_matters">

<heading>S.C. ON IRRIGATION AND WATER SUPPLY MATTERS.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, as chairman, brought up the first report of the Select Committee on Irrigation and Water Supply Matters, as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Your committee, having considered the reports of the Irrigation Commission dealing with the Bon Accord Irrigation scheme and with the Ritchie irrigation scheme, begs to recommend as follows:</block>

<p>On the Bon Accord irrigation scheme&#x2014;&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) That the district be divided into two wards, namely:

<ol><li>(a) the upper, comprising all land on the left bank irrigated from the canal above the sloot at 5.8 miles from the reservoir and all land on the right bank:</li>

<li>(b) the lower, comprising the remainder of the irrigable land.</li></ol></li>

<li>(2) That the lower ward be rated with the full rate payable on the land therein in respect of its share of the loan.</li>

<li>(3) That the upper ward be rated at one pound (£1) per morgen per annum.</li>

<li>(4) That the rates mentioned in Nos. 2 and 3. being in respect of interest and redemption on the Government loan, be payable as from 1 July, 1929, for a period of 40 years.</li>

<li>(5) That the portion of the debt which under these conditions cannot be redeemed, be written off.</li>

<li>(6) That every opportunity be given to the lower owners to withdraw from the scheme.</li>

<li>(7) That with each curtailment of the scheme owing to the withdrawal of areas from the lower ward a pro rata share of the debt be written off, provided that the total amount written off shall not exceed £120,000 even though the rate of £1 per morgen on ground in the upper ward has to be increased in order to meet yearly redemption payments.</li>

<li>(8) That the write-off be subject to the condition that in the event of any portion of the water being eventually sold by the parties interested for any purpose other than the purpose for which the works were constructed, the amount thereby realized shall be payable to the state as a set-off against the amount which shall have been written-off.</li>

<li>(9) That the rates for maintenance purposes be uniform throughout the whole district.</li></ol>

<p>On the Ritchie Irrigation Scheme&#x2014;</p>

<ol><li>(1) That the whole of the amount owing by the board in respect of the loan, capital and interest be written off.</li>

<li>(2) That the write-off be subject to the condition that in the event of the property purchased by the board for the amount of £1,900 being sold or disposed of by the board the amount thereby realized shall be payable to the state as a set-off against the amount which shall have been written-off.</li></ol>

<p>Report to be considered on 19th March.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#s_c_on_irrigation_(irrigation_loans_adjustments_bill)">

<heading>S.C. ON IRRIGATION (IRRIGATION LOANS ADJUSTMENTS BILL).</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, as chairman, brought up the second report of the Select Committee on Irrigation and Water Supply Matters, reporting the Irrigation Loans Adjustments Bill, with amendments.</p>

<p>House to go into Committee on the Bill on 19th March.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#s_c_on_native_affairs_(natives_(urban_areas)_act_1923,_amendment_bill)">

<heading>S.C. ON NATIVE AFFAIRS (NATIVES (URBAN AREAS) ACT. 1923, AMENDMENT BILL).</heading>

<p>Mr. VAN NIEKERK, as chairman, brought up the second report of the select Committee on Native Affairs on the subject of the Natives (Urban Areas) Act, 1923. Amendment Bill, reporting an amended Bill.</p>

<p>Report and evidence to be printed.</p>

<p>First reading of Natives (Urban Areas) Act, 1923. Amendment Bill discharged and Bill withdrawn.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#natives_(urban_areas)_act,_1923,_amendment_bill">

<heading>NATIVES (URBAN AREAS) ACT, 1923, AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>The Natives (Urban Areas) Act, 1923, Amendment Bill was read a first time; second reading on 18th March.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Native Settlement Farms.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Native Affairs whether, with regard to the expenditure of the sum of £25,914 for farms for native settlement during the year ending 31st March, 1928, he will give (a) the names of the farms purchased and the districts where situated, (b) the sizes of the farms respectively, (c) the purchase price of each of the said farms, and (d) the names of the sellers in each instance?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_native_affairs" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS:</from>

<p>The information required is furnished in the following schedule: &#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Item</p></td>

<td><p>Name of Farm.</p></td>

<td><p>Extent in morgen.</p></td>

<td><p>District.</p></td>

<td><p>Purchase price.</p></td>

<td><p>Seller.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p>Koppies</p></td>

<td><p>408</p></td>

<td><p>Glen Grey</p></td>

<td><p>£3,522</p></td>

<td><p>E. L. Saayman.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>2</p></td>

<td><p>Lumko</p></td>

<td><p>889</p></td>

<td><p>Glen Grey</p></td>

<td><p>£2,319</p></td>

<td><p>W. T. Muir and L. G. Muir.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>3</p></td>

<td><p>Middlekraal</p></td>

<td><p>3,000</p></td>

<td><p>Glen Grey</p></td>

<td><p>£3,100</p></td>

<td><p>P. Opperman.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>4</p></td>

<td><p>Mimosa Park</p></td>

<td><p>411</p></td>

<td><p>Glen Grey</p></td>

<td><p>£4,105</p></td>

<td><p>J. P. Landman.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>5</p></td>

<td><p>Pond Valley and Oak Grove</p></td>

<td><p>553</p></td>

<td><p>Glen Grey</p></td>

<td><p>£7,000</p></td>

<td><p>J. C. Landman.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>6</p></td>

<td><p>Ardath</p></td>

<td><p>5,170</p></td>

<td><p>Kuruman</p></td>

<td><p>£1,270</p></td>

<td><p>Standard Bank.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>7</p></td>

<td><p>Glenferness</p></td>

<td><p>4,040</p></td>

<td><p>Pietersburg</p></td>

<td><p>£5,728</p></td>

<td><p>Mrs. W. H. Langerman.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>8</p></td>

<td><p>Portion of Malokong No. 861</p></td>

<td><p>1,000</p></td>

<td><p>Potgietersrust</p></td>

<td><p>£1,514</p></td>

<td><p>Berlin Mission Society.</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>It should be mentioned in regard to items 5, 6 and 7 above that payment of only £6,000, £25 and £5,328 respectively was actually effected during the financial year 1927 &#x2019;28.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Agricultural Students&#x2019; Scholarships.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol><li>(1) What are the names of the three students referred to at page 238 of the Auditor-General&#x2019;s report for 1927-&#x2019;28 (paragraph 10), who have been awarded each £250 per annum and other benefits, and by whose authority were these awards made;</li>

<li>(2) how was the selection of these students arrived at;</li>

<li>(3) whether these scholarships were open to competition by other students in the Union; and</li>

<li>(4) upon what terms as to repayment and otherwise were these awards made?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</from>

<p>replied&#x2014;</p>

<ol><li>(1) Scholarships of £240 per annum plus travelling expenses were awarded to D. Gutsche, D. Retief and W. Thompson, all graduates in agriculture of the Transvaal University College, with the approval of the Treasury and the Public Service Commission.</li>

<li>(2) and (3) Owing to the impossibility of securing suitable trained men in the Union and in view of the increased tobacco production, the three candidates mentioned were specially selected for further study. The scholarships were not advertised.</li>

<li>(4) The candidates selected are not required to refund any money so long as contracts are fulfilled, but entered into an agreement, with the necessary sureties, to return to the Union and to be prepared to serve the Government for at least three years on the same terms as are applicable to other Government students. This has been done and the students are now employed in the department.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Groot Constantia Cafe.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_public_works">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Works:</p>

<ol><li>(1) What is the name of the person to whom the right was given to sell tea and light refreshments at Groot Constantia, without calling for tenders;</li>

<li>(2) why were tenders not called for;</li>

<li>(3) what are the terms of the right so given; and</li>

<li>(4) by whose authority and under what authority was this right given?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_works" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS:</from>

<ol><li>(1) No right has been given out to sell tea and light refreshments at Groot Constantia;</li>

<li>(2), (3) and (4) Fall away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_1323-1324" refersTo="page_0699"/>Railways: Truck Types.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether he will inform the House of the several types of trucks in use on the railway system at the present time; and</li>

<li>(2) what is the estimated daily earning capacity of each type of truck?</li>

</ol></question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol><li>(1) The information will be found on pages 136 and 137 of the general manager&#x2019;s report for the year ended 31st March, 1928.</li>

<li>(2) The information is not available.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Hospitals, Cancer and Radium.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether he has been approached by the Johannesburg Hospital for a grant towards the cancer radium fund now being raised by that hospital, and, if so, with what result; and, if not,</li>

<li>(2) whether, in view of the fact that money is badly and urgently required for the purpose of cancer research and the alleviation and eradication of the disease, which is a national matter, the Government is prepared to and will make a grant for the said fund, and, if so, of how much?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) No.</li>

<li>(2) The hon. member&#x2019;s attention is invited to the reply to question No. XXXVII of the 1st February last.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Divorce, Collusion in.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Acting Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether, in view of the many recent utterances from the bench by judges of the Supreme Court that there were strong grounds for suspicion leading to the inference that collusion was present in certain actions for divorce, he will consult the judges as to the necessity for introducing legislation for the appointment of a King&#x2019;s proctor; and</li>

<li>(2) whether, if there is a consensus of opinion, he will introduce the necessary legislation?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#nathan">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>The answer is in the negative.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Posts: Farm Telephones.</heading>

<question by="#vosloo" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Mr. VOSLOO</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol><li>(1) How many applications for farm telephones have been received by the department which have not yet been dealt with;</li>

<li>(2) what is the date of the earliest applications;</li>

<li>(3) whether they are dealt with strictly in order of date of receipt; and</li>

<li>(4) whether, in view of the value which the telephone now has for the farmer, who is far away from the railway and has a postal service of only once or twice per week, the Minister will take steps to meet the need for telephones?</li>

</ol>

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Posts: Rosendal Telephonist.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. SWART</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether his department is aware that the postmaster at Rosendal, Orange Free State, also has to do the work of telephonist and that his work as postmaster is made very difficult thereby and that it also causes the public unnecessary inconvenience; and</li>

<li>(2) whether his department is prepared to appoint a separate telephonist for the work; and, if not, why not?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#swart">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>(1) and (2) I am pleased to be able to inform the hon. member that the question of providing the postmaster of Rosendal with the necessary assistance is in hand.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Rosendal: Special J.P. at.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. SWART</from>

<p>asked the Acting Minister of Justice whether the department is prepared to appoint a special justice of the peace in the village of Rosendal, Orange Free State, in view of the fact that such an appointment is urgently required by the public in that vicinity, and that in many other Free State villages which are of the same importance as Rosendal there are already special justices of the peace; and, if not, why not?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#swart">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>This question was carefully considered quite recently and it was impossible to avoid the conclusion that the appointment of a special justice of the peace at Rosendal would not be justified. It is considered that the judicial requirements there are, for the present at all events, adequately met by the periodical court, which sits there once a month.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Electricity Supply Commission.</heading>

<question by="#drummond_chaplin" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Sir DRUMMOND CHAPLIN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether the Electricity Supply Commission is responsible for a system of distributing electricity in the Cape rural area outside the Cape Peninsula; if so,</li>

<li>(2) on what terms is the electricity distributed; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the commission proposes to establish and operate a distribution system <span class="col_1325-1326" refersTo="page_0700"/>for the benefit of farmers in parts of the Cape Peninsula, such as Constantia, which are not included in any municipality, and, if so, on what terms?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#drummond_chaplin">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) It is impossible to give a definite answer to this question as the tariffs vary according to the conditions in each case, including the points of supply and the quantity of electricity consumed. If the hon. member will call at the office of the commission in Cape Town, any information he may require will be gladly furnished.</li>

<li>(3) No, because the whole of the Cape Peninsula, including Constantia, is within the area of supply of the Cape Town Corporation under authority granted by the Electricity Control Board under section 39 of the Electricity Act, 1922 (Act No. 42 of 1922).</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_1327-1328" refersTo="page_0701"/>Wage Determinations.</heading>

<question by="#coulter" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Mr. COULTER:</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether the subsisting determinations in the Wage Act of 1925 are specified on page 100 of the &#x201C;Social and Industrial Review&#x201D; of January, 1929; if not, what are the additional wage determinations now in existence;</li>

<li>(2) whether publication of each of these determinations was made in a special issue of the &#x201C;Social and Industrial Review&#x201D; in addition to the &#x201C;Government Gazette&#x201D;;</li>

<li>(3) whether each of them was published in any newspaper other than the two publications just mentioned; and</li>

<li>(4) whether, in view of the judgment of the Cape of Good Hope Provincial Division of the Supreme Court of South Africa in the matter of Rex vs. Portuese, it is the intention of the Government to continue to enforce any wage determinations aforesaid that may be rendered invalid by such judgment?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#coulter">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Two wage determinations additional to those enumerated on page 100 of the January issue of the &#x201C;Social and Industrial Review&#x201D; have been made. They are (a) No. 25 relating to unskilled employment in certain trades and occupations in Bloemfontein.; and (b) No. 26 relating to shop assistants in certain urban areas.</li>

<li>(2) Yes.</li>

<li>(3) No, but in each case where a recommendation by the Wage Board was published in the &#x201C;Gazette&#x201D; and &#x201C;Social and Industrial Review&#x201D; an advertisement drawing attention to such publication was inserted in the daily press.</li>

<li>(4) Only two determinations are affected and invalidated by this judgment which resulted from the omission of a specific date on the publication in which the notice under section 7 (2) of the Wage Act was issued. Steps have been taken to rectify the matter by the issue of a fresh reference in one case and similar steps are being taken in the second case.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Posts: Broadcasting and Crystal Sets.</heading>

<question by="#giovanetti" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Mr. GIOVANETTI</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether he is aware that since the closing down of the wireless broadcasting relay station at Pretoria, reception on crystal sets has been impossible in some cases and unsatisfactory in others;</li>

<li>(2) what remedy these licence-holders have who purchased crystal sets from the African Broadcasting Company on the guarantee that those sets were adequate; and</li>

<li>(3) what steps he proposes to take to protect the interests of the users of small sets who have paid licence fees in these circumstances?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#giovanetti">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>(1), (2) and (3) I am aware that certain users of crystal receiving sets in Pretoria are dissatisfied with the reception of the broadcasting which they at present get, but I must point out that the broadcasting service is conducted by a commercial company and the Government cannot accept responsibility for it. At the same time I will have the matter investigated to ascertain whether the position is really so bad as it has been represented to be.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Dock Police.</heading>

<question by="#stuttaford" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>Mr. STUTTAFORD</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol><li>(1) How many police of all ranks were detailed for the Table Bay dock area on the 1st April, 1928, and how many are so detailed at the present time;</li>

<li>(2) how many railway police he proposes to employ in the same area from the 1st April, 1929; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the railway police have the full powers and functions within the dock area as formerly exercised by the Union police, including control of traffic?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#stuttaford">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol><li>(1) At both dates, twelve railway uniformed constables supervised by three sergeants who also control men at Cape Town station and goods depot and at Salt River Works.</li>

<li>(2) Eighteen uniformed constables, under the supervision of three sergeants as at present.</li>

<li>(3) No. Railway police at the docks are appointed under section 57 of Act No. 22 of 1916. Under this section they are responsible for maintaining order in the harbour area, for the regulation of traffic and for purely railway work, such as the prevention of pilferage and damage to, or theft of, consignments in the custody of the Administration. They will not <span class="col_1329-1330" refersTo="page_0702"/>undertake other duties previously performed by the S.A. police which are outside their functions as railway police. It is understood certain water police will be maintained, also three men in the charge office under the control of the S.A. police.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#stuttaford" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. STUTTAFORD:</from>

<p>What steps is the Minister going to take to protect the public against the committing of unlawful offences, such as burglary on ships?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>That is a question which the hon. member must address to my colleague, the Minister of Justice.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Police: Det.-Sot. Atkinson.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Acting Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether Detective-sergeant Atkinson appealed to the Minister of Justice on the 12th July, 1928, against his being discharged from the police force without his having been notified of any charge made against him; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) what was the nature of the Minister&#x2019;s reply to such appeal?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: German Engines.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether, in view of the fact that the undermentioned types of German engines were out of service for the combined aggregate number of days shown hereunder, from their coming into use until the 31st December, 1928, viz.&#x2014;</p>

<ol><li>(a) ten Maffei articulated &#x201C;U&#x201D; type, 1,838 days;</li>

<li>(b) two 3-cylinder (Class 18) type, 162 days;</li>

<li>(c) two G.H. (Maffei) type, 405 days;</li>

<li>(d) ten H.F. (Henschel) type, 1,337 days; he will state what is the estimated consequential damage suffered by the Administration, based upon the number of days each engine was out of service at the earning power per day?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(a), (b) and (d). There are no consequential damages involved.</li>

<li>(c) In this case, the matter is under negotiation with the suppliers.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>What amount of consequential damage has been suffered&#x2014;not merely involved&#x2014;by the railways? I have put that question three times, and the Minister has not answered it. May I ask the Minister whether this same question was not put on the Order Paper by me on the opening day of the session?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I have already replied to the question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister whether the information was not supplied to him by the general manager before 1st February this year in time for the reply to my question?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I ask the hon. member to put that on the paper.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Did I not ask this question on March 11th, 1929?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I have no further information to give the hon. member.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Whether this is not the third time of asking?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Potchefstroom Labourert As Politician.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture whether he will lay upon the Table the records of the enquiry held by the magistrate, Potchefstroom, in regard to the charges brought against a European labourer at the Potchefstroom School of Agriculture of taking an active part in politics?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I do not consider it necessary to lay these papers on the Table. This will be clear to the hon. member from my reply to Question No. XIII put by the hon. member for Newcastle.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister let us have access to these papers in his office?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>Yes, if after the question has been answered the hon. member still wishes to see the papers.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Auditor-General&#x2019;s Retirement.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether Mr. J. de Villiers Roos, the Controller and Auditor-General, was invited to consider the question of extending his service after reaching sixty years of age; and</li>

<li>(2) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table all correspondence exchanged with Mr. J. de Villiers Roos on the subject of his coming retirement?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) I discussed the matter with Mr. Roos more than twelve months ago with the result indicated in my reply to Question No. XV of 8th instant.</li>

<li>(2) There was no correspondence.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister whether an expression of the Government&#x2019;s appreciation of the magnificent services rendered by Mr. Roos has been made?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>That is rather a premature question.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Potchefstroom Hospital Attendant as Politician.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior whether he will lay upon the <span class="col_1331-1332" refersTo="page_0703"/>Table the records of the enquiry held by the magistrate, Potchefstroom, into the charges brought against an attendant at the mental hospital, Potchefstroom, of taking a prominent part in politics?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>No, but the hon. member can peruse the papers in connection with the case at my office as soon as they are received from Pretoria.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Engines and Spark Arrestors.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XIX.</num>

<from>Mr. SWART</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether all engines operating on (a) main lines and (b) branch lines in the Orange Free State are fitted with spark arrestors; and, if not all, to what extent?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#swart">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Posts: Verneuk Pan.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>XX.</num>

<from>Mr. SWART</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether the name &#x201C;Verneuk Pan&#x201D; is one which is officially recognised by his department; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he will prevent the alteration of this old picturesque African name into &#x201C;Blue-Bird Pan&#x201D; as proposed; and, if so, what steps he is going to take to retain the name &#x201C;Verneuk Pan&#x201D;?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#swart">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2.) There is a post office agency known as &#x201C;Verneuk Pan&#x201D; some miles from the place where the racing track is being prepared. No proposal has been received to alter the name of this office. At the racing track itself there is a purely temporary field post office, and it is not at all clear that a permanent office will be established there. The pan itself is private property and the department cannot very well exercise any control over a name by which a local owner calls his farm.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Flags.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_public_works">

<num>XXI.</num>

<from>Mr. SWART</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Works:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether it is a fact that the Union national flags ordered by the Government in 1927-&#x2019;28 were of inferior quality as far as the dyes are concerned;</li>

<li>(2) where were the flags ordered and manufactured; and</li>

<li>(3) whether further orders of such flags have been placed with the same firm?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_works" to="#swart">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I am not prepared to say that an inferior article was delivered in fulfilling the initial order placed by the Government for national flags. The initial supply was certainly disappointing as regards the colours, which lacked depth and vividness, but being an entirely new flag, the manufacturers had no standard to go by and the price charged was a very low one&#x2014;equal to 14s. for a flag 9 feet by 6 feet with much detail in it.</li>

<li>(2) Through the High Commissioner in London&#x2014;of English manufacture.</li>

<li>(3) No. Sample flags are being obtained from various sources in order to fix the standard for future ordering.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: German Rails, Tenders for.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether any purchases of rails and fishplates were made in 1927 through the High Commissioner&#x2019;s Office, London, from a firm in Germany, without tenders having been invited or formal contracts executed; if so,</li>

<li>(2) what Supplies of rails and fish-plates were so purchased, from what firm, and at what cost;</li>

<li>(3) for how many track miles of rails did the firm in question quote in response to a public invitation for tenders;</li>

<li>(4) why were the additional supplies ordered from this firm without public tender;</li>

<li>(5) why were formal contracts not signed in accordance with the recommendation of the Fourth Report of the Select Committee on Railways and Harbours, 1928; and</li>

<li>(6) upon whose recommendation in London did the Minister agree to allow the purchase of the rails and fish-plates by private negotiation rather than by public tender?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) (a) 115 track miles 85-lb. section rails; 362 track miles 80-lb. section rails; 380 track miles 60-llb. section rails; 231/110 pairs of fish-plates, (b) Stahlwerke Verband, Dusseldorf, Germany, (c) £602,763.</li>

<li>(3) and (4) I would refer the hon. member to the reply given on the 1st March to the hon. member for Pietermaritzburg (North). The rail market is controlled by a railmakers&#x2019; association, and no purpose would, therefore, be served by inviting public tenders.</li>

<li>(5) The Administration has accepted the principle of entering into formal contracts as far as practicable. To do so in every instance would, however, involve additional expense without any corresponding advantage. In this case, the usual practice was followed by the High Comissioner&#x2019;s Office, a formal order, containing all the essential conditions, being placed with the firm and accepted by them, thereby, in effect, constituting a contract.</li>

<li>(6) The purchases were made on the recommendation of the High Commissioner. I may add that the market position is closely watched in South Africa and London and, as suitable opportunity occurs, the High Commissioner is asked to obtain quotations for the Administration&#x2019;s requirements. Experience over a number of years has shown that, in the <span class="col_1333-1334" refersTo="page_0704"/>peculiar circumstances surrounding the rail market, the procedure followed by the Administration is calculated to give the most satisfactory results.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister lay upon the Table the recommendation of the High Commissioner to which he has referred?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>No, I am not prepared to do that, but the hon. member may see it at the office of the general manager.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Engines, Maffei Type of.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXIII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Upon what date were the two Maffei G.H. type engines, referred to in the recent report by the departmental committee appointed to determine responsibility for the ordering of such engines, taken out of service for over-weight; and</li>

<li>(2) whether there were any other defects in the engines that militated against their being used?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) July, 1928.</li>

<li>(2) No other defects had developed up to the time the engines were withdrawn from service.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Why did the Minister in reply to a question put by the hon. member for Illovo (Mr. Marwick) on the 210th March last year, deny that these engines were overweight?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The hon. member had better give notice of that.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>In view of the report of the recent departmental committee, why did the Minister tell me on&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>That does not arise out of the question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>It is in direct reference to this very question.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member can refer to it in the course of debate.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Did the chief civil engineer of the railways state at any time that these engines were not overweight?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I have already replied.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Did the Minister admit in 1928 that these engines had any other defect besides overweight that would interfere with their being used?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Potchefstroom Labourer As Politician.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE replied to Question XIII by Mr. Nel, standing over from 12th March.</p>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol><li>(1) Whether a European labourer employed at the Potchefstroom School of Agriculture during the general provincial election in the Transvaal in 1927 was charged with having taken an active part in politics on behalf of the South African party; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether his conduct was enquired into by the magistrate of Potchefstroom;</li>

<li>(3) what disciplinary offence was he charged with; and</li>

<li>(4) what was the magistrate&#x2019;s finding?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#nel">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol><li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) Yes.</li>

<li>(3) Taking an active part in political matters.</li>

<li>(4) That he did not take a very active part in the election. I did not consider that the action taken constituted an offence and consequently no further steps were taken. The labourer is still in the service of the school.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister give us the names of the witnesses who appeared against him?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>May we have access to the records?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>As soon as I get the documents the hon. member can see them.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Attorney-General and J. J. Scholtz.</heading>

<p>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE replied to Question XXXIV by Mr. Marwick, standing over from 12th March.</p>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol><li>(1) Whether in the case Rex vs. J. J. Scholtz, the offence with which he was charged was alleged to have taken place in the Boshof district; if so,</li>

<li>(2) why was the preparatory examination transferred to Bloemfontein;</li>

<li>(3) what were the charges brought against him;</li>

<li>(4) whether such charges were framed by the law adviser who reported on the case or by the Attorney-General of the Orange Free State;</li>

<li>(5) whether the Attorney-General of the Orange Free State met the accused on his arrival at Bloemfontein and accompanied him to his hotel; and</li>

<li>(6) whether the same Mr. J. J. Scholtz has been appointed as deputy sheriff of Mossel Bay?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol><li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) The preparatory examination was held in Bloemfontein because it was more convenient for both the Crown and the accused to take the case there.</li>

<li><span class="col_1335-1336" refersTo="page_0705"/>(3) The accused was charged on three counts of fraud and one of theft. The details of the charges can be seen by the hon. member in my office.</li>

<li>(4) The charges were framed by the law adviser, Mr. Hoal, on the lines which had been suggested by Mr. Nightingale.</li>

<li>(5) No.</li>

<li>(6) Yes. The hon. member is perhaps not aware that such appointments are not made by the Minister. The high sheriff informs me that he appointed Mr. J. J. Scholtz as deputy sheriff of Mossel Bay on the 1st of June last year and that he did so on the recommendation of the magistrate.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware that Mr. Scholtz was also appointed as the Administrator&#x2019;s representative on the Mossel Bay Valuation Court?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member must give notice of that.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is the Minister prepared to consider the re-opening of this trial on further information which can be given?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>The reply is in a most emphatic negative. We have gone out of our way, and we had a trial by the magistrate of Bloemfontein, one of the most experienced of magistrates, and I am not prepared to take it any further.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Was it a preparatory examination or a trial?</p>

</question>

<question by="#anderson" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Will the Minister request the magistrate to furnish his reasons for recommending Mr. Scholtz for this position?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#anderson">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#barlow" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. BARLOW:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware that the hon. member for Illovo (Mr. Marwick) has obtained his information from a man who has been prosecuted as a thief?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#barlow">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The Minister cannot possibly know that.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#barlow" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. BARLOW:</from>

<p>I want the country to know.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#fuel_research_institute_and_coal_bill">

<heading>FUEL RESEARCH INSTITUTE AND COAL BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Mines and Industries to introduce the Fuel Research Institute and Coal Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 18th March.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railways_and_harbours_appropriation_(part)_bill">

<heading>RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS APPROPRIATION (PART) BILL.</heading>

<p>First Order read: Second reading, Railways and Harbours Appropriation (Part) Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<ol><li>1. Before I deal with the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the ensuing financial year (1929-&#x2019;30), it will assist hon. members to a full appreciation thereof, if I, first of all, comment briefly on the results of working the railways, harbours and steamships, during the current financial year, which will terminate at the end of this month.</li>

<li>2. It will be remembered that the estimates submitted to Parliament last session, provided for a gross expenditure during the year of £29,414,222.</li></ol>

<debateSection name="#additional_expenditure">

<heading>Additional Expenditure.</heading>

<ol><li>3. Estimates of Additional Expenditure were recently approved by this House which indicated that the net increased expenditure anticipated was £770,237 and when added to the original estimate make the total revised estimate of expenditure for the year 1928-&#x2019;29 £30,184,459.</li>

<li>4. The final accounts for the current year will, of course, not be available for some time, but, provided the present satisfactory returns of revenue are maintained, and there is every reason to believe that they will be&#x2014;then it is possible to forecast with some degree of accuracy the approximate net result that is likely to be realized.</li>

<li>5. In the Green Book, which will be distributed this afternoon, hon. members will find the latest revised Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure to the 31st March, 1929. These estimates are based on the actual results to 31st January, 1929, added to the estimated results for months of February and March.</li>

<li>6. Briefly, the total revenue is estimated to be £30,514,766, and the total expenditure £30,184,459, thus indicating a surplus from the year&#x2019;s working of £330,307.</li>

<li>7. To this requires to be added the surplus of last year which amounted to £47,217. and so the accumulated surplus at the 31st March, 1929, will be approximately £377,524.</li>

<li>8. There are certain interesting features which arise out of a consideration of the working during the current year to which I wish to refer briefly.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#engine_mileage">

<heading>Engine Mileage.</heading>

<ol><li>9. First of all then the increase in tonnage of traffic has called for additional labour, principally at the ports, and has involved additional engine mileage&#x2014;which it is estimated will, at the 31st March&#x2014;amount to 4,152,149 miles, equal to an increase of 7 per cent.</li>

<li>10. For the first nine months of the year, this increase in traffic amounted to nearly 800,000 tons over the corresponding period of the previous year, and of course has its reflection in the increase in revenue.</li>

<li>11. Compared with the corresponding period of the previous year, railway earnings for the nine months ended 31st December, 1928, increased <span class="col_1337-1338" refersTo="page_0706"/>to the extent of £679,374, while the expenditure incurred on the main services of transportation and mechanical departments in earning that additional revenue involved an increase by the comparatively small amount of £42,612.</li>

<li>12. This satisfactory feature was made possible only by the most intensive attention to detail and the exercise of economy by all grades of servants.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#revenue_£1&#x2014;expended_13s_l1d">

<heading>Revenue £1&#x2014;Expended 13s. l1d.</heading>

<ol><li>13. Comparing the gross revenue and gross expenditure for the ten months ended January, 1929, with the figures for the corresponding period of the previous year, it is found that the increase in expenditure is equal to the low figure of 70 per cent, of the increase in revenue.</li>

<li>14. In other words each additional pound of revenue has been obtained by an expenditure of 13s. l1d.&#x2014;a most gratifying feature of the year so far.</li></ol>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>A very welcome change.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, and credit is due in the first place, to the general manager, his officers and all grades of the staff, for their excellent work.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railway_revenue&#x2014;1928-&#x2019;29">

<heading>Railway Revenue&#x2014;1928-&#x2019;29.</heading>

<ol><li>15. Over 82 million passengers were conveyed during 1928&#x2014;an increase of one million over the previous year&#x2014;and it is anticipated that under this head the increased revenue in 1928-&#x2019;29 will be £25,000 over the actual revenue earned in 1927-&#x2019;28.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#goods_and_minerals">

<heading>Goods and Minerals.</heading>

<ol><li>16. All the principal classes of goods and mineral traffic showed a satisfactory increase as compared with the corresponding period of 1927, the principal increases being:</li></ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Tons.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>General merchandise</p></td>

<td><p>212,214</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Export maize</p></td>

<td><p>554,331</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Other grain and produce</p></td>

<td><p>30,954</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Minerals and low grade traffic</p></td>

<td><p>374,150</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<ol><li>17. Although a large portion of this traffic is low rated, it is particularly gratifying to note that the increased revenue anticipated over the original estimate is no less than £1,375,060.</li>

<li>18. It will be of interest to hon. members to know also that during the last year we conveyed 914,136 tons of export maize as compared with 359.805 tons in the previous year.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#coal">

<heading>Coal.</heading>

<ol><li>19. The tonnage of coal conveyed for local consumption showed an increase of 316,313 tons in 1928 compared with the preceding year, but shipment coal decreased to the exent of 351,344 tons.</li>

<li>20. Whilst, with the healthy expansion of our manufacturing industries, an increase in local consumption of coal can be anticipated, no material improvement can be looked for at present in the case of bunker coal due in part to the increasing number of motor ships in South African waters using oil as fuel.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#livestock">

<heading>Livestock.</heading>

<ol><li>21. There was a considerable reduction in the number of livestock conveyed during the twelve months ended 31st December, 1928, amounting to over half a million as compared with the previous twelve months. This is reflected in the reduced receipts under this head.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#catering">

<heading>Catering.</heading>

<ol><li>22. Catering revenue has not come up to expectations and it is anticipated a loss will be incurred on the year&#x2019;s working to the extent of approximately £6,000. That loss is largely attributable to running dining cars on branch lines, where there is not sufficient demand for the service to make it profitable. This matter is being carefully enquired into by the general manager.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#grain_elevators">

<heading>Grain Elevators.</heading>

<ol><li>23. A loss of £15,604 was incurred in working the grain elevators during the nine months ended 31st December, 1928.</li>

<li>24. The total quantity of maize and kaffir corn received into the elevator system for the current season, commencing June, 1928, up to the end of January, 1929, amounted to over 421,000 tons (4,210,000 bags) as compared with 263,900 tons (2,639,000 bags) for the same period of the previous year, an increase of 157,100 tons (1,571,1100 bags).</li>

<li>25. Of the total tonnage deposited in the grain elevators, for the period stated, nearly 300,000 tons have been exported, and over 31,000 tons delivered for local consumption and milling-in-transit, as compared with 137,300 tons and 16,290 tons, respectively, last year.</li>

<li>26. After allowing for the revenue still to be derived from the delivery of 75,000 tons of grain, it is estimated that the loss in working the elevators during the current financial year will amount to £17,759.</li>

<li>27. The experience gained thus far has justified the cautious policy pursued by the Administration in the matter of elevator extension proposals, and the more valuable experience still to be gained in the process of thoroughly testing the capacity of the existing system should enable us to profit therefrom, not only in regard to the location of country elevators, but also in the matter of less costly design. There is no doubt that our elevators are too costly.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#road_motor_services">

<heading>Road Motor Services.</heading>

<ol><li>28. During 1928 the road motor services continued to expand. Vehicles of increased carrying capacity were introduced enabling the services to deal with heavier traffic than has hitherto been the case.</li>

<li>29. Cream traffic on the road motor services has developed to an extraordinary degree and <span class="col_1339-1340" refersTo="page_0707"/>special type vehicles fitted with removable double decks have been provided in districts where cream traffic predominates.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#trailers">

<heading>Trailers.</heading>

<ol><li>30. Experiments are now being conducted with suitable trailers and it is hoped that these units will greatly increase the capacity of the services in areas suitable for trailer working.</li>

<li>31. During the past year the road motor services have been increased from 157 to 197 services, in addition to which extensions were made to 15 services already in operation.</li>

<li>32. The route mileage now in operation is 9,148, while services sanctioned and awaiting inauguration total a further 1,660 miles.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#total_traffic">

<heading>Total Traffic.</heading>

<ol><li>33. The traffic dealt with during 1928 totalled 1,204,353 passengers, 99,436 tons of goods traffic and 502,870 gallons of cream, reflecting an increase of 326,921 passengers, 47,367 tons of goods and&#x2014;what is more remarkable&#x2014;209,681 gallons of cream over the previous year. A large proportion of this traffic is brought to the railway for conveyance by rail, so that the services are directly helping to increase rail traffic.</li>

<li>34. Development of the outlying agricultural areas served by the road motors is proceeding rapidly, and farmers are now able to dispose of market produce speedily and regularly. The traffic dealt with is largely agricultural, and in certain areas the progress of the farmers, due to the establishment of reliable transport facilities, has been most marked.</li>

<li>35. Changes in rates over the services have been made with the object of encouraging agricultural development, and, it is hoped, will be productive of good results.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#goods_tariffs">

<heading>Goods Tariffs.</heading>

<p>The tariff in respect of:</p>

<block name="quote">South African jams, jellies, honey and canned or bottled fruit (including tomatoes), golden syrup and moskonfyt, now carried at rate No. 5, will be reduced to rate No. 6.</block>

<block name="quote">Unworked iron and steel, now carried at rate No. 3, will be reduced to rate No. 4.</block>

<block name="quote">Grease wool and mohair, in bales, pressed to the satisfaction of the Administration, now carried at rate No. 4, will be reduced to rate No. 4 less 10 per cent.</block>

<block name="quote">Power paraffin, now carried at rate No. 4, will be reduced to rate No. 6.</block>

<block name="quote">Motor spirit, including South African alcohol motor spirit, conveyed from Union port towns, will be modified over distances up to 155 miles.</block>

<block name="quote">South African alcohol motor spirit will be reduced from rate No. 3 to rate No. 4.</block>

<block name="quote">Motor vehicles, now carried at rate No. 1, vide page 137 of the official tariff book, will be reduced from rate No. 1 to rate No. 2. The tariff for such vehicles will be simplified generally.</block>

<block name="quote">Contractors&#x2019; plant, including water boring plant, will be reduced to the level of the rate applicable to agricultural implements, vide Clause 259 of the official tariff book.</block>

<block name="quote">Pick, hammer and shovel handles manufactured from South African timber will be subjected to certain maximum rates.</block>

<block name="quote">The storage of goods (warehouse charges) at Johannesburg (Kazerne), Germiston and Pretoria, will be reduced to Id. per 100 lbs. per day (minimum charge, 6d. per day).</block>

<block name="quote">Anthracite coal, coke and coal generally, in small quantities, bagged, will be reduced from rate No. 5 to rate No. 7. That is done to help the small irrigation farmers who have to use power pumps. The reduction is confined to coal in bags.</block>

<block name="quote">Piping used in connection with windmills erected on stock farms will be reduced to the same level as piping for irrigation purposes, vide Clause 258 of the official tariff book.</block>

<ol><li>36. During the year 342 miles of services were withdrawn, in some cases due to completed branch lines having taken their place, and in others to the lack of support on the part of the communities served.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#competition">

<heading>Competition.</heading>

<ol><li>37. In a number of instances, private competitive services make their appearance after the Administration&#x2019;s service has been in operation, and the traffic considerably developed as a result of the departmental service provided. The private owner thus enters an area where the traffic has been proved to exist in sufficient quantity to justify a service, and he usually fixes his tariffs slightly below those of the Administration.</li>

<li>38. Many of the competitors may be termed &#x201C;fair weather&#x201D; competitors in that during good weather they select the best of the traffic at a reduced rate, and leave the Administration&#x2019;s vehicles to cope with the traffic during wet weather, and over bad roads, which all tends to increase maintenance costs.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_railway_construction">

<heading>New Railway Construction.</heading>

<ol><li>39. During the financial year ending 31st March, 1929, 194 miles of new branch lines will have been completed and opened for public traffic, and 407 miles will be under construction, leaving 90 miles of authorized lines still to be commenced. It is anticipated that during the financial year 1929-&#x2019;30 a further 344 miles of new lines will be completed.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#knysna_line">

<heading>Knysna Line.</heading>

<ol><li>40. The last of the 1922 programme lines, authorized under the previous Government, viz., from George to Knysna, was opened for public traffic on 1st May last.</li>

<li>41. Since the present Government assumed office in 1924, new lines totalling 1,067 miles have been authorized by Parliament.</li>

<li>42. Of this mileage, 570 miles will have been completed and opened for traffic by 31st March, 1929, and 914 miles will have been completed by 31st March, 1930.</li>

<li><span class="col_1341-1342" refersTo="page_0708"/>43. In addition, in August, 1925, the Administration acquired the 205 miles of railway between Worcester and Fore Bay Junction, formerly owned by the New Cape Central Railway Company, giving the districts served the benefit of lower tariffs, and a considerable sum is Being spent upon the improvement of the line.</li>

<li>44. Altogether, therefore, the Government has authorized since it assumed office, the construction or acquisition of 1,272 miles of railway, involving an expenditure of nearly £7,000,000.</li>

<li>45. It may be of interest to mention that the Union of South Africa (as at 31st March, 1929) has 11,586 miles of Government and privately-owned railways, which is equal to 2.45 miles of line per 100 square miles of territory, compared with 1.00 miles for Canada and Australia and 3.07 for New Zealand.</li>

<li>46. The comparison of the different provinces of the Union is also interesting; in the Cape there is a European population of 133 per mile of railway. In the Transvaal it is 192; in the Orange Free State 131, and in Natal 102.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#rates_and_fares">

<heading>Rates and Fares.</heading>

<ol><li>47. While no general tariff reductions have been effected during the past financial year, many minor amendments designed to promote the development of trade and industry have been authorized.</li>

<li>48. We are now able, however, to contemplate rate reduction on a somewhat larger scale, and in framing the programme of reductions we propose to introduce, the desirability of making substantial cuts in the rates affected, in preference to slight reductions covering a much wider range, has been kept in view.</li>

<li>49. Passenger fare amendments in the suburban area where traffic is most dense, and competition most acute, are also contemplated, that is to say, in the Cape suburban area.</li>

<li>50. The passenger traffic involves a heavy loss in working in the Cape suburban area, and no wholesale reduction of fares is possible, but we propose to remodel the fares list in a downward direction with a view to meeting competition where it is most acute, and at the same time place the fares on a more uniform basis than they are at the present time.</li>

<li>51. The reductions in goods rates I have referred to will be introduced with effect on and from 1st April, 1929.</li>

<li>52. Details of these will be embodied in a statement that I propose to lay on the Table at an early date but at this stage it may be of interest to hon. members to know that these rate reductions together with the reductions to be made in the passenger fares on the Cape suburban line will involve a surrender of revenue of at least £218,000 per annum.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#competition">

<heading>The New Organization.</heading>

<ol><li>53. Hon. members will recollect that last year I outlined certain changes in the organization of the railways and harbours which it was proposed to introduce.</li>

<li>54. These changes were in the main brought into operation as from 1st April, 1928.</li>

<li>55. The object of the changes was to enable a more effective control to be exercised from the head-quarters of the Administration, and at the same time, by a judicious extension of existing powers and authorities to local heads of departments, to ensure greater flexibility and efficiency in detail, and a removal of that fruitful cause of irritation to the public&#x2014;the restricted powers of the local officer.</li>

<li>56. I am pleased to say the new organization is proving a success. Here and there small adjustments have been necessary both in personnel and methods, but on the whole, the Administration has every reason to be pleased with the result.</li>

<li>57. There is tangible evidence of a greater degree of efficiency now, than before the change, a considerable amount of circumlocution is avoided under the new organization, and the increased powers of local heads is a source of convenience to the public.</li>

<li>58. In the engineering department the appointment of inspecting engineers has enabled the chief civil engineer to organize a more satisfactory inspection of permanent way and works on open lines.</li>

<li>59. Similarly in the mechanical department, the appointment of an assistant chief mechanical engineer is leading to greater efficiency in the organization of our workshops and the speeding up of the output.</li>

<li>60. The transfer of the control of the offices accounting to expenditure on transportation to the chief accountant has been of great assistance in enabling a closer grip to be maintained on expenditure.</li>

<li>61. The various departmental accounts are now examined by the general manager and chief accountant in greater detail than was possible before; attention is promptly drawn to expenditure which appears excessive, and every channel of possible economy is carefully pursued.</li>

<li>62. With the co-operation of the senior officers of the departments incurring the expenditure, the policy of constructive criticism which has been introduced has had, and will have, beneficial and far-reaching results in keeping down operating costs.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#competition">

<heading>Commercial Agents.</heading>

<ol><li>63. Towards the end of 1927 a commercial agent was appointed on trial to each system. The results having proved satisfactory suitable experienced officers were permanently appointed as commercial agents as from the 1st December, 1928.</li>

<li>64. Their duty is to keep in touch with agricultural, commercial, industrial and other interests and to function as transportation salesmen. As such, they are endeavouring to obtain and secure to the railways and harbours, traffic which might be carried by other transportation agencies, and in addition they are increasing traffic by suggestion, advice, and information to the farming and commercial communities.</li>

<li>65. Some very useful reports have been submitted, and the results of the year&#x2019;s trial showed that the experiment had proved a success. <span class="col_1343-1344" refersTo="page_0709"/>Here I may add that it has also been tried and proved a success on the New Zealand railways.</li>

</ol>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>How long have they been going on?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>From the end of 1927, and I propose to make the appointments permanent. I think it has been a tremendous success getting these transportation salesmen to attend meetings of chambers of commerce, farmers&#x2019; associations and so on. It has had the effect of bringing users of the railways and the railway administration much closer together, and that is all to the good.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railways_and_harbours_gratuity_act">

<heading>Railways and Harbours Gratuity Act.</heading>

<ol><li>66. This Act became operative with effect as from the 14th April, 1928, and provides statutory authority for the payment of a gratuity to any servant with fifteen years&#x2019; service or more who is retired on the grounds of age, ill-health or physical disability, or severe bodily injury sustained whilst on duty, and who has never been eligible for membership of, or was refused admission to, any pension or super-annuation fund or scheme.</li>

<li>67. Contributions are not payable by the servant concerned.</li>

<li>68. The provisions of the Act benefit mostly coloured, native and Indian servants, other than those intermittently employed, and includes boatmen casually employed but guaranteed employment by the Administration for a minimum number of days in any specified period.</li>

<li>69. The gratuity is at the rate of ten days&#x2019; emoluments for each year&#x2019;s service.</li>

<li>70. The Act provides for much-needed relief for men with long service retired without opportunity of acquiring pension privileges.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#competition">

<heading>Increase of European Labour.</heading>

<ol>

<li>71. The Administration has steadily pursued its policy of extending the employment of civilized labourers wherever possible. I am sure the hon. member for Cape Town (Harbour) (Maj. G. B. van Zyl) will be pleased to hear this.</li>

<li>72. At the end of December, 1928, the total European staff employed was 57,809 and it may be of interest to give the relative figures for the preceding five years, namely:</li></ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>December, 1923</p></td>

<td><p>38,285</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>December, 1924</p></td>

<td><p>44.243</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>December, 1925</p></td>

<td><p>50,776</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>December, 1926</p></td>

<td><p>53,720</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>December, 1927</p></td>

<td><p>56,519</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>December, 1928</p></td>

<td><p>57,809</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<ol><li>73. For the period mentioned, therefore, the Administration has found employment for 19,524 additional Europeans. This result is very satisfactory, especially when it is borne in mind that in carrying out its policy, the Administration has not taken any action to terminate the services of natives, whose replacement has been effected only as they voluntarily leave the service or are provided for in some other branch of work.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#coloured_labour">

<heading>Coloured Labour.</heading>

<ol><li>74. In regard to coloured labourers, the numbers employed at the close of each of the last six years have been:</li></ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>As at 31st December.</p></td>

<td><p>No.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1923</p></td>

<td><p>5,603</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1924</p></td>

<td><p>4,571</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1925</p></td>

<td><p>6,772</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1926</p></td>

<td><p>7,299</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1927</p></td>

<td><p>7,089</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1928</p></td>

<td><p>7,344</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>These also show a satisfactory advance from year to year.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#welfare_officers">

<heading>Welfare Officers.</heading>

<ol><li>75. As I intimated last session, the appointment of welfare officers was decided upon in connection with the introduction of the probationer scheme.</li>

<li>76. From the date of the inception of the scheme up to the end of 1928, no less than 966 probationers had been employed from outside the service (140 clerical and 826 employee probationers), while at 31st December, 1928, the total number of probationers was 1,573 (185 clerical, 1,270 employees and 118 catering helpers). We are gradually training our South African youths to take up catering work. Our officers are finding that they are not taking very kindly to it. It is not very pleasant work, of course, but it all shows that our South African youths are now prepared to do the lower classes of work in order later on to make progress in the service and that is all to the good.</li>

<li>77. It is the duty of the welfare officers to keep in constant touch with theses youths, advising them in regard to their training and seeing that they are developing on the right lines. The selection of these youths for advancement depends upon the report of the welfare officers who, by their close contact with the individuals, are in a position to advise in regard to their suitability for vacancies in graded posts as they arise.</li>

<li>78. Not only is the welfare officer&#x2019;s attention devoted to probationers but he is responsible also for looking after the welfare of the adult European labourer and similarly of keeping in close personal contact with men in this grade whose education and training form part of his activities.</li>

<li>79. One result of the appointment of welfare officers and their activities in developing the probationer scheme is that the results anticipated at the time of the inception of the scheme are being realized. Our youths are being trained on correct and well-defined lines and it is confidently anticipated that the efficiency of the service will greatly benefit from the change.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#meetings_with_staff">

<heading>Meetings with Staff.</heading>

<ol><li>80. Apart from the Conciliation Board, which has continued to do good work, the Administration and the department have held several meetings with staff unions, and representatives of sections of the staff, to discuss various representations regarding working conditions.</li>

<li><span class="col_1345-1346" refersTo="page_0710"/>81. Meetings have been held with representatives of the salaried staff, running staff and artisans, at which matters in connection with improvements in staff conditions generally have been freely discussed. It has been found that many matters of local interest only are brought up for discussion at such meetings. These could be more readily discussed with the local departmental heads. Arrangements have, therefore, been made for meetings to be held periodically between local representatives of (a) running staff, (b) artisans in running sheds, (c) artisans in workshops, and the local departmental heads to discuss matters of local interest including improvements in methods of working, measures of economy, etc. I may say that it is working very well. We are getting the cooperation of the men through these sectional conferences held by the responsible officer with the men under his control. He gets the opportunity of not only putting forward his particular point of view, but also of hearing what the men have to say with regard to improvements in the work.</li>

<li>82. Good results accrue from these meetings and it is often practicable to remedy defects or improve working arrangements as a result of personal discussion with the staff concerned.</li>

<li>83. In this connection I should like to pay a tribute to the moderate tone adopted by the staff representatives at these discussions. Their attitude has greatly facilitated discussions and enabled both sides to appreciate each other&#x2019;s difficulties.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#staff_committee">

<heading>Staff Committee.</heading>

<ol><li>84. As the result of persistent pressure from sections of the staff for improvements in their grading and to assist the management in carrying out the re-organization of the service, it was found necessary some time ago to resuscitate the departmental staff committee.</li>

<li>85. In connection with the re-organization of the service effected from 1st April. 1928, the committee has been largely occupied in examining the grading of the clerical staff in the various departments and branches of the service. As a result many changes have been recommended both in the direction of the curtailment of the establishments, where the reorganized working has made this practicable, and of revising the value of appointments requiring alteration. Many of these have been re-graded to a higher grade.</li>

<li>86. The committee has now made an investigation in most of the offices concerned, but there are still one or two departments which remain to be examined.</li>

<li>87. Valuable work has been accomplished.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#parys-vredefort_railway_route_adjustment_bill">

<heading>Transportation Pupils.</heading>

<ol><li>88. The Administration has, for some time past, realized the need for affording special training for a limited number of well-educated young men&#x2014;men with degrees&#x2014;with a view to fitting them for some of the higher posts in the transportation department. After mature consideration a scheme was introduced whereby university graduates under certain defined conditions may enter the railway service as transportation pupils.</li>

<li>89. At the commencement of 1929, eight university graduates were selected, and one appointment made to the system offices at Cape Town, Kimberley, Port Elizabeth, East London, Bloemfontein, Durban, Johannesburg and Pretoria, respectively.</li>

<li>90. These transportation pupils will serve a period of three years&#x2019; training. During this time they will be given opportunity of gaining experience in all branches of transportation work by actual service in shunting yards, invoice offices, signal cabins, stations, etc., and will also spend certain periods in the system offices.</li>

<li>91. On the expiration of three years&#x2019; satisfactory service, the intention is to appoint these transportation pupils to a position equivalent to that of a first grade clerk and their future progress in the service will depend upon their own zeal and capacity. They will not go through all the other grades.</li>

<li>92. In order, however, not to close the door to matriculated youths already in the service, the Administration has decided to hold a competitive examination in September next, which will be open to matriculated youths who are not less than 21 years or more than 25 years of age as at 31st August, 1929, who have had at least three years&#x2019; service with the Administration immediately prior to the latter date, whose applications to sit for the examination have been approved personally by the head of the department and who are considered by the head of their department as suitable officers to appoint as transportation pupils.</li>

<li>93. With the introduction of the scheme there has been a manifestation of healthy rivalry amongst the better educated youths in the service, and it is felt that once the innovation has been given a reasonable trial, the Administration will have cause to congratulate itself on the step it has taken in this direction. May I say that one other result will be that in the near future South Africa will have as leaders in railway management, her own sons.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#estimates,_1929&#x2019;30">

<heading>Estimates, 1929&#x2019;30.</heading>

<ol><li>94. I will now deal with the prospects for the year 1929-&#x2019;30.</li>

<li>95. Expenditure for the year is estimated to be £31,181,118, made up of:</li></ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>£29,595,436</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>1,445,221</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Steamships</p></td>

<td><p>140,461</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<ol><li>96. Comparing these estimates with the original estimates for the year 1928-&#x2019;29, there is an increase of £1,766,896, made up of:</li></ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Main services</p></td>

<td><p>£1,226,590</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Subsidiary services</p></td>

<td><p>71,579</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Net revenue account</p></td>

<td><p>353,784</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Special appropriation</p></td>

<td><p>100,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£1,751,953</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p><span class="col_1347-1348" refersTo="page_0711"/>Harbours&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Main services</p></td>

<td><p>£34,527</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Subsidiary services (decrease)</p></td>

<td><p>433</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Net revenue account</p></td>

<td><p>13,063</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£47,157</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Steamships&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(Decrease)</p></td>

<td><p>£32,214</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total Increase&#x2014;Railways, Harbours and Steamships Expenditure&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>£1,766,896</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<ol><li>97. The increase of £1,226,590 on main services, railways, is distributed over all heads of working expenditure, but principally over the heads: general charges, maintenance of rolling stock, running expenses, traffic expenses, and depreciation.</li>

<li>98. The increase under general charges is mainly due to re-organization, as a result of which certain expenditure previously provided for under other votes is now charged to this head, corresponding savings being effected under other heads.</li>

<li>99. Expenditure under the three heads maintenance of rolling stock, running expenses, and traffic expenses, is largely governed by the quantity of traffic dealt with, and the engine and train mileage which is required to move that traffic.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#heavier_engines">

<heading>Heavier Engines.</heading>

<ol><li>100. The increased size and weight of modern engines and rolling stock necessitates an increase in cost of repair work, while the engine and train mileage for next year, estimated to exceed that of last year by over 2,000,000 miles, or 3&#x00BD; per cent., is mainly responsible for the increase in running expenses and traffic expenses. I hope the House will appreciate that we are bound to expand our services as the requirements of the country demand.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#depreciation_of_stock">

<heading>Depreciation of Stock.</heading>

<ol><li>101. It has been found necessary to materially increase the provision for the depreciation of permanent way and rolling stock (a matter to which I will refer again later) and this additional provision accounts for £390,233. During the last two years we have been contributing £1,500,000 towards our renewals fund. As a result of the report of the departmental committee which went into this whole question it was found that in order to safeguard the whole position we must contribute a far larger amount from revenue to the renewals fund, which means a greater burden on the users of the railway; but hon. members who have read the report will agree with me that it is far better to err, if we do err, on the side of safety than not to make adequate provision.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#subsidiary_services">

<heading>Subsidiary Services.</heading>

<ol><li>102. Dealing now with the increase of £71,579 under the head of railways&#x2014;subsidiary services, we have increases under the heads of:</li></ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Road motor services</p></td>

<td><p>£107,386</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Tourist traffic</p></td>

<td><p>11,050</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£118,436</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>&#x2014;and I may say I think the House has come to the conclusion that in many cases the pressure for the construction of branch lines might very well be left over, so long as road motor services are adequate, and decreases under the heads of:</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Catering</p></td>

<td><p>£2,231</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bookstalls and advertising</p></td>

<td><p>6,185</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bedding equipment of trains</p></td>

<td><p>7,185</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Grain elevators</p></td>

<td><p>31,256</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>46,857</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Net increase</p></td>

<td><p>£71,579</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<ol><li>103. The Administration&#x2019;s system of road motor services is rapidly extending, and provision is made for extension of existing services and inauguration of further services.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#tourists">

<heading>Tourists.</heading>

<ol><li>104. The general development of the tourist branch&#x2019;s activities in the direction of catering for travellers and special tours has expanded considerably, and provision is made for additional expenditure in anticipation of further increases under this head. The House will have seen that our administration is very well served by our publicity agent in London, and the appointment which was made has been thoroughly justified. Mr. Chittenden is a young South African who went to London without much experience of this class of work and has done excellent work. The number of tourists this season almost reached the 10,000 mark.</li>

<li>105. The small decrease under the head of catering is mainly due to the amount provided for in the estimates for 1928-&#x2019;29 being in excess of requirements, while the decrease in the case of bookstalls and advertising is due to reduced provision for purchases of books and periodicals in anticipation of a small reduction in sales at bookstalls.</li>

<li>106. The reduction in the case of grain elevators is mainly due to the decision not to make provision for contributions to the renewals fund on grain elevator buildings.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#net_revenue">

<heading>Net Revenue.</heading>

<ol><li>107. Under the head of railways&#x2014;net revenue account, provision is made for increased expenditure to the extent of £353,784. Of this increase, interest charges on additional expenditure to be met out of loan funds, amount to £276,984, while the steady increase in the balances of the superannuation and other funds entails an increase in the provision for interest on these funds to the extent of £67,410.</li>

<li>108. This, of course, is compensated for by the increase of interest from investment of these fund balances.</li>

<li>109. In dealing with our capital expenditure I would impress hon. members not to ask for platforms, stations, subways, and increased expenditure in the manner they are doing. I <span class="col_1349-1350" refersTo="page_0712"/>hope I will have the support of the House in checking capital expenditure. We cannot justify the continuance of this policy.</li></ol>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>Why electrify the Cape line?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>That was the policy of my hon. friend opposite.</p>

<p>Mr. JAGGER made a remark [inaudible].</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Let my hon. friend refresh his memory and refer to the Act of 1922. I would like to state here that the capital account of the Administration amounts in round figures to £150,000,000 and the charges for interest on this sum for 1929-&#x2019;30 will amount to:</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Railways</p></td>

<td><p>£5,399,946</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Harbours</p></td>

<td><p>560,656</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total&#x2014;interest charges</p></td>

<td><p>£5,960,602</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>or in round figures no less than £16,000 per diem.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person>:</from>

<p>You are increasing your business.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I agree, but I say we cannot continue at the same rate of expenditure.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#allen">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALLEN</person>:</from>

<p>How much of that money is paid in Africa?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>About one-third of our loans have been placed in South Africa and two-thirds outside.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#betterment">

<heading>Betterment.</heading>

<ol><li>110. The increase of £100,000 under the head of &#x201C;Railways Special Appropriation&#x201D; is accounted for by the decision to increase the contribution next year to the betterment fund from £250,000 to £350,000 to meet additional expenditure under this head due to the general expansion of the railways.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#harbours&#x2014;main_services">

<heading>Harbours&#x2014;Main Services.</heading>

<ol><li>111. Of the increase in harbour main services amounting to £34,527 an increase in the provision for depreciation on harbour assets accounts for £11,354, while the balance is accounted for under the ordinary working heads.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#net_revenue">

<heading>Net Revenue.</heading>

<ol><li>112. The increase under the head of harbours net revenue account is entirely due to the additional interest which will be payable on expenditure from loan funds.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#steamships">

<heading>Steamships.</heading>

<ol><li>113. The reduction of £32,214 under the head of steamships is due to the fact that provision was made in last year&#x2019;s estimates for working four vessels whereas only three vessels will be employed in the coming year.</li></ol>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>Why don&#x2019;t you increase your ships instead of selling them?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>It was necessary for us to sell, because that ship had reached the stage when it was economical to do so.</p>

</speech>

<ol><li>114. On outward voyages the vessels are to be used, as in past years, to assist in the maintenance and development of the South African coal export trade. Employment will continue to be on a charter basis for the conveyance of full cargoes of coal to eastern and other markets.</li>

<li>115. On return voyages, the tonnage available will be employed principally in the transportation of the Administration&#x2019;s timber purchases from Eastern and Western Australia, from Burmah and from the Netherlands Indies.</li></ol>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>Are the ships paying?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

<ol><li>116. All units are to be manned by crews serving under purely South African agreements. Within practicable limits, all bunker fuel, provisions and stores will be obtained in South Africa. Similarly, all possible drydocking, surveying and repairing will be effected at Union ports, and generally, all means will be employed, consistent with efficiency, to encourage the disbursement of expenditure in the Union.</li></ol>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#interest-bearing_capital_reduced">

<heading>Interest-bearing Capital Reduced.</heading>

<ol><li>117. In accordance with the policy announced three years ago, provision was made for a further sum of £250,000 towards the reduction of interest-bearing capital. This will be the fifth of such contributions, and at the end of 1929-&#x2019;30 capital indebtedness will have been relieved to the extent of £1,250,000 and in consequence the Administration will have been relieved of interest to the extent of £62,500 annually.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#revenue">

<heading>Revenue.</heading>

<ol><li>118. I will now briefly review the all important question of the estimated revenue for the coming year, and after that the estimated final results for the year.</li>

<li>119. If hon. members will refer to the green book they will see that we anticipate from all sources a total revenue of £31,075,947, made up of: Railways, £29,163,622; harbours, £1,761,800; steamships, £150,525.</li>

<li>120. Railways revenue&#x2014;main services&#x2014;has been estimated on the basis of an average weekly revenue of £510,000, which is an increase of £5,345 over the actual average weekly earnings from 1st April, 1928, to 16th February, 1929, and an increase of £25,000 per week over the estimated weekly earnings for the current financial year.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#future_revenue">

<heading>Future Revenue.</heading>

<ol><li>121. In taking this optimistic view in regard to revenue for the ensuing year, consideration has been given to the fact that the general <span class="col_1351-1352" refersTo="page_0713"/>economic activities of South Africa are greater to-day than in any previous period of our history, not only as a whole, but in nearly every one of the several branches of our productive life.</li>

<li>122. Though the country suffered from lack of rain during the latter part of 1928, rains have been fairly general during the last two months, and at the moment there are indications of a successful maize crop.</li>

<li>123. A certain amount of additional revenue will be earned from new lines to be opened during the course of the year. These features taken altogether indicate a justification for assuming an average revenue of £510,000 per week.</li></ol>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>You take a more optimistic view than your colleague.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<ol><li>124. Harbour earnings are being well maintained and it is considered there is every justification for estimating the earnings for the year ending 31st March, 1930, at £1,761,800 based on an average of £32,500 per week.</li></ol>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#steamships">

<heading>Steamships.</heading>

<ol><li>125. The steamship earnings are based on the anticipated receipts from the three vessels now remaining with the Administration.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#final_results&#x2014;1929-&#x2019;30">

<heading>Final Results&#x2014;1929-&#x2019;30.</heading>

<ol><li>126. Briefly, then, it is anticipated that the position at 31st March, 1930, will be that with an estimated expenditure on all services, amounting to £31,181,118 and an estimated revenue of £31,075,947, we are budgetting for a deficit on the year&#x2019;s working of £105,171.</li>

<li>127. If this is realized, the loss will be met from the accumulated surplus at 31st March, 1929, which, as already stated, is estimated to be £377,524. We will have in hand an accumulated surplus of £377,000, so that if this deficit were to eventuate, there will be this sum available, together with a sum of £313,033 from the Rates Equalization Fund, so that we have close upon £700,000 in hand to meet any future deficit.</li>

<li>128. Having outlined the financial results likely to accrue during the coming year (1929-&#x2019;30) it may not be out of place if I briefly review at this stage what has been accomplished in working the railways and harbours during the last five years.</li>

<li>129. Starting with an accumulated deficit at 31st March, 1924, of £770,244. the greater portion of which was discharged in the following year, the actual results of each year have been as follows:</li></ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Surplus.</p></td>

<td><p>Deficit.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1924-&#x2019;25</p></td>

<td><p>765,059</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1925-&#x2019;26</p></td>

<td><p>769,691</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1926-&#x2019;27</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>158,811</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1927-&#x2019;28</p></td>

<td><p>47,217</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1928-&#x2019;29 (estimated)</p></td>

<td><p>330,307</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>Thus giving a net surplus on the five years&#x2019; working of no less than £1,753,463.</p>

<ol><li>130. In this connection hon. members must remember that these are the results after providing for the full amount of interest due to the Treasury on the capital of 150 millions borrowed by the Administration and in addition after providing for the following:</li></ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Contribution to reduce deficiency in pension and superannuation funds</p></td>

<td><p>£1,231,700</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Reduction in value of stores stock</p></td>

<td><p>100,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Contribution to betterment fund</p></td>

<td><p>1,350,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Contribution towards reduction of interest-bearing capital</p></td>

<td><p>1,000,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>£3,681,700</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<ol><li>131. The net surplus indicated on the 5 years&#x2019; working has been disposed of as follows:</li></ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Liquidation of the deficit at 31st March, 1924</p></td>

<td><p>£770,244</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Net contribution to the rates equalization fund</p></td>

<td><p>313,033</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Writing out the loss on the Durban elevator foundations</p></td>

<td><p>250,000</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Writing out capital unrepresented by any tangible asset on the Sea Point line</p></td>

<td><p>42,662</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Surplus estimated to be on hand at 31st March, 1929</p></td>

<td><p>377,524</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>£1,753,463</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#renewals_fund">

<heading>Renewals Fund.</heading>

<ol><li>132. During the course of the year consideration was given to the report of the departmental committee appointed to investigate the adequacy or otherwise of the contribution of £1,500,000 annually to the renewals fund in respect of the permanent way and rolling stock assets of the railways.</li>

<li>133. The report of the committee is being printed and copies will be issued to hon. members as early as possible.</li>

<li>134. The committee reported that the contribution of £1,500,000 per annum as at 31st March, 1925, was approximately sufficient for the requirements of that time.</li>

<li>135. Since then, however, a considerable quantity of new rolling stock has been brought into service, amounting to approximately £8,500,000, and, in addition, 1,458 miles of new lines have been opened with their consequential addition to the value of the wasting assets of the Administration, for all of which provision for renewal has now to be made.</li>

<li>136. The committee dealt with the whole subject most exhaustively, and clearly demonstrated that while in recent years £1.500,000 had been a sufficiently large contribution to the renewals fund for depreciation of permanent way and rolling stock, it would be necessary from now onwards to increase that contribution and provision has been made accordingly in the estimates for the ensuing year.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#past_appropriation">

<heading>Past Appropriation.</heading>

<ol><li>137. Because of the unusual circumstances of this session I do not propose to burden hon. members <span class="col_1353-1354" refersTo="page_0714"/>with further particulars of the financial position of our railways and harbours.</li>

<li>138. Hon. members will have observed that I have not dealt in detail with the various subsidiary services, nor with the various departments of the railways.</li>

<li>139. I have felt that the need for such was doubtful, bearing in mind particularly that I do not propose to ask the House to vote the estimated expenditure for the ensuing financial year, but merely to vote a lump sum to enable us to carry on until Parliament meets again.</li>

<li>140. The lump sum to which I refer will be £12,000,000, and will cover four months&#x2019; supply in respect of both revenue and loan accounts, and will take the form of the usual Part Appropriation Bill.</li>

<li>141. I have not dealt with such matters as the position of the various funds, although I can assure hon. members in a few words that these at the present time give no cause for anxiety.</li>

<li>142. If, however, there are further points upon which I have not touched and in regard to which information is desired I shall be happy to supply such in the course of our discussion.</li>

<li>143. There now remains only one matter with which I desire to deal.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#lower_ranks&#x2019;_wages">

<heading>Lower Ranks&#x2019; Wages.</heading>

<ol><li>144. Hon. members will remember that on a previous occasion I intimated that consideration was being given to the rates of wages of the lower grades of staff.</li></ol>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Election increases.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What about the rates?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I understood hon. members were very pleased with the reduction in rates. Surely they do not begrudge consideration being given to the railway servants in the lower grades?</p>

</speech>

<ol><li>145. At any rate, we are prepared to face our responsibility also in this regard. The decision come to is to improve rates of pay under the following four divisions: (a) Improved rates of pay to European labourers, (b) Relief scale to grade 3 clerks and telegraphists, (c) Improvement in pay conditions of coloured labourers in receipt of standard rates of pay. (d) Extension of application of recommendations of &#x201C;Hours of Duty&#x201D; committee, as affecting running staff.</li>

<li>146. These improvements in pay will involve an increase in expenditure of approximately £162,000 per annum, but I will lay a statement of the details on the Table so that hon. members may more fully see the nature of the improvements.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#increases_in_salaries_and_wages">

<heading>Increases in Salaries and Wages.</heading>

<p>Hon. members will recollect that when the additional estimates for the present financial year were under discussion I promised a statement as to the intentions of the Government with regard to the pay of labourers, clerical staff and the running staff.</p>

<p>It will be appreciated that representations have been made from time to time on behalf of many grades and sections of the staff and it has been a matter of some difficulty to select those cases which are deserving of immediate relief.</p>

<p>The most insistent of the representations made have been on behalf of the European and coloured labourers and the lower paid clerical grades. Frequent appeals have also been made in regard to the full application of the report of the Hours of Duty Committee which investigated the hours of the staff in 1925.</p>

<p>It will be recollected that when the Hours of Duty Committee&#x2019;s report was dealt with in 1926 the House was informed that it was felt the recommendations then adopted, which it was estimated would cost a quarter of a million, was as far as the Administration could then go and that whether it would be possible in the future to go further along the same road would depend upon the financial position and the extent to which the changes decided upon were successful.</p>

<p>Whilst the financial position was in an unsatisfactory state the Administration felt itself unable to incur further substantial additional liability in meeting the representations made both in regard to improvements in pay conditions and the adoption of further instalments of the Hours of Duty Committee&#x2019;s report. There has, fortunately, been considerable improvements in the outlook during the financial year just drawing to a close and there is every prospect that the improvements will be maintained.</p>

<p>The Administration has, therefore, felt itself justified in reviewing the representations made from time to time with a view to affording a measure of relief.</p>

<p>After careful consideration the conclusion has been arrived at that the cases deserving of immediate attention are: (a) European labourers; (b) members of the clerical staff and telegraphists at the grade III barrier; (c) coloured labourers.</p>

<p>It has also been considered that the opportunity should be taken of applying a further instalment of the Hours of Duty Committee&#x2019;s recommendations in so far as the running staff is concerned.</p>

<p>Certain concessions have, therefore, been decided upon. These concessions may not go quite as far as the staff desire but in committing the Government to additional annual expenditure of this nature a policy of caution is necessary. It is hoped that the sections of the staff who will benefit will appreciate the measures of relief now to be afforded and will regard them as a genuine desire on the part of the Administration to improve the outlook in the case of men in the lower paid grades, to assist the clerical staff at the grade III barrier and to grant a further instalment of the Hours of Duty Committee&#x2019;s report. Particulars of the concessions which have been decided upon are as follows:</p>

<p><span class="col_1355-1356" refersTo="page_0715"/>1.&#x2014;European Labourers.</p>

<p>Probably no single section of railway and harbour servants is more deserving of consideration than the European labourers, whose rates of pay have formed the subject of repeated representations and who have great difficulty in maintaining a civilized standard of living. A measure of relief was afforded a year ago but this did not go as far as the Administration would have liked.</p>

<p>A large proportion of these men are married with families and experience difficulty in maintaining themselves on the existing rates.</p>

<p>The increase now decided upon will apply principally to men who have gained experience of the work and who have proved their usefulness to the department.</p>

<p>The present rate of pay for adult European labourers is 5s. per diem, with an increase to 5s. 3d. after three years&#x2019; service, with a further increase to 5s. 6d. after a further twelve months&#x2019; service, plus free quarters or an allowance in lieu thereof.</p>

<p>It has now been decided that the rates should be improved so as to provide for a wage of 5s. 6d. per diem for adult labourers after two years&#x2019; service at 5s. and a further increase to 6s. per diem after twelve months&#x2019; service at 5s. 6d. per diem. The privilege of free quarters, or an allowance in lieu thereof, will be retained.</p>

<p>The allowances in lieu of free quarters are as follows:</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>District</p></td>

<td><p>Allowance for single labourers.</p></td>

<td><p>Allowance for married labourers.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>s. d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p>6d.</p></td>

<td><p>1 0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>2</p></td>

<td><p>6d.</p></td>

<td><p>1 1</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>3</p></td>

<td><p>8d.</p></td>

<td><p>1 3</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>4</p></td>

<td><p>9d.</p></td>

<td><p>1 6</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>5</p></td>

<td><p>l0d.</p></td>

<td><p>1 9</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>In addition European labourers obtain sick fund benefits for themselves, their wives and families, certain leave privileges, travelling concessions and superannuation fund membership, the value of which is equal to approximately another 1s. 4d. per day.</p>

<p>2. &#x2014;Relief to Clerical Staff.</p>

<p>Repeated attention has been drawn to the large number of members of the clerical staff, including telegraphists, who have been waiting at the maximum of the third grade for an opportunity of securing promotion.</p>

<p>Many of these men are married with family responsibilities and they have found it increasingly difficult to exist on their present salaries and without immediate hope of advancement. Promotion has been slow and there has been a tendency for such officers to become discouraged.</p>

<p>The case of these men has been carefully examined and the conclusion has been arrived at that a measure of relief is due.</p>

<p>There are over 2,300 clerks and telegraphists in grade III, of whom no less than 1,500 are at the barrier.</p>

<p>It has been decided to establish an intermediate grade between grade III and grade II. This grade will carry a maximum salary of £360 per annum.</p>

<p>An establishment of approximately 1,200 positions in this intermediate grade will be provided for, which will be built up by selecting the more important positions at present filled by grade III officers. The posts will be filled in the ordinary way by nomination and selection in accordance with existing instructions.</p>

<p>Officers who are at the old maximum of £340 and who can be certified as performing their work efficiently and are qualified to do the work of an intermediate grade III position will be first considered; then the selection for any remaining posts will be made from amongst grade III clerks or telegraphists who have served not less than two years at the existing maximum of £310 per annum.</p>

<p>This scheme will afford relief to approximately 1,200 clerical officers, including telegraphists, who are at present debarred from further progress owing to the absence of suitable vacancies in grade II.</p>

<p>3. &#x2014;Coloured Labourers.</p>

<p>It has been decided that coloured labourers in receipt of the standard rates of pay for this class of labourer (excluding those who are in receipt of special rates of pay in excess of the maximum standard rates in operation in the various districts) will receive an increase of 3d. per diem after three years at the existing maximum, followed by a further increase of 3d. per diem after a further twelve months&#x2019; service. This special increase will take the place, in the case of those affected, of the long service increment at present available of 3d. per diem after five years at the maximum with another 3d. per diem after a further five years&#x2019; service.</p>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What is this going to cost?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member need not be afraid. The finances of the railway are absolutely safe in the hands of the Government.</p>

</speech>

<p>4. &#x2014;Running Staff.</p>

<p>The Hours of Duty Committee&#x2019;s report contemplated the inclusion of booking on and off time allowances in arriving at the aggregate of weekday time worked in any fortnightly period for the purpose of computing any weekday overtime payable.</p>

<p>In adopting the report, however, it was decided for financial reasons that booking on and off time allowances should be excluded in the fortnightly aggregate and that they should be paid for at straight rates.</p>

<p>It has now been decided to include booking on and off time allowances in the fortnightly aggregate. This will result in considerable benefit to the running staff in computing time to be paid for at overtime rates.</p>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Could you not have done it two years ago?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from><span class="col_1357-1358" refersTo="page_0716"/>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Surely the hon. member must recollect that two years ago I stated that the time had not come to grant a further concession, but in view of the excellent position in which our railway finances are, and the very hearty co-operation we have had from all grades of the staff, we feel that the time has now come to give this further consideration to the staff.</p>

</speech>

<p>5.&#x2014;Catering Travelling Staff.</p>

<p>The Hours of Duty Committee recommended that the travelling catering staff be allowed time off at their home station varying according to the length of the trip as follows: A trip covering a period of between (a) 72 to 96 hours a clear break, excluding Sundays, of 24 hours; (b) over 96 to 144 hours, 36 hours; (c) over 144 hours, 48 hours&#x2014;without reduction of their monthly pay&#x2014;and that when these breaks could not be granted half pay in lieu of any portion of the period falling short of the full break recommended should be paid, calculated on tenths for each day. i.e., on 260ths for a month (10 hours multiplied by 26).</p>

<p>The committee&#x2019;s recommendation was not accepted in its entirety but it was decided to allow to travelling catering staff time off at their home station for periods aggregating eight days per month without loss of pay, and that time short of eight days should be accumulative.</p>

<p>It has now been decided to adopt the committee&#x2019;s recommendation and to allow half pay in lieu of any portion of the accepted break which, owing to the exigencies of the service, cannot be granted.</p>

<p>6. &#x2014;Hours of Duty Committee&#x2019;s Report, 1925.</p>

<p>The following is a brief synopsis of the principal concessions which the Administration granted to the staff in 1926, arising out of the Hours of Duty Committee&#x2019;s recommendations.</p>

<block name="quote">Running Staff.&#x2014;The introduction of an eight-hour day as a basis of pay for drivers and firemen in place of a nine-hour day, and a nine-hour day as a basis of pay for guards and ticket examiners in place of a ten-hour day. The adoption of a fortnightly guarantee of 96 hours for drivers and firemen and 108 hours for guards and ticket examiners in place of the existing monthly, weekly and daily guarantees.</block>

<block name="quote">Sunday time to stand alone.</block>

<block name="quote">All time (other than time specifically paid for at straight rates) in excess of 96 or 108 hours per fortnight, as the case may be, to be paid for at overtime rates.</block>

<block name="quote">The scheme put forward by the Hours of Duty Committee involved the modification of certain conditions which had been in operation up to that point, e.g., each day to stand by itself for overtime purposes, revision of daily minimum time payments, reduction in booking off time allowance for guards and ticket examiners.</block>

<block name="quote">These modifications were accepted in the nature of a compromise as part of the new scheme</block>

<block name="quote">Permanent Way Staff.&#x2014;Hours reduced from 53&#x00BD; to 51 in the summer and from 49&#x00BD; to 48 per week in winter. (Hours of Duty Committee recommended 49¼ all the year round.)</block>

<block name="quote">Station Foremen.&#x2014;Various reductions in hours into groups 48 and 54 and where practicable 56. Leave compensation in respect of missed meals three days or two days per annum according to circumstances. System of diagram working introduced wherever practicable.</block>

<block name="quote">Floating Staff.&#x2014;Various reductions in hours as recommended by Hours of Duty Committee.</block>

<block name="quote">Catering Staff.&#x2014;Time off at home station for a period aggregating eight days per month without loss of pay, time short of eight days to be accumulative.</block>

<block name="quote">General railway grades and labourers.&#x2014;Reduction in accordance with the Hours of Duty Committee&#x2019;s proposals which aimed at reductions to 48 per week wherever these hours could be justified.</block>

<block name="quote">In the case of the signalmen generally these employees were placed on an eight-hour day and in other grades substantially reduced hours were authorized, in many cases to eight per day, in others to 54 or 56 per week, the previous hours worked in many instances being 60.</block>

<p>These concessions involved additional expenditure amounting to approximately £250,000 per annum.</p>

<block name="quote">Recommendations not accepted.&#x2014;Certain concessions recommended by the Hours of Duty Committee were for financial reasons withheld and these in the main are the following:</block>

<block name="quote">Running Staff.&#x2014;Eight-hour day as a basis of pay not accepted for guards and ticket examiners, but nine-hour day on fortnightly basis granted.</block>

<block name="quote">Booking on and off times paid for at straight rates only, and not included in fortnightly aggregate.</block>

<block name="quote">Station Foremen.&#x2014;Fifty-six-hour group not accepted in its entirety, but diagram system applied wherever practicable.</block>

<block name="quote">Leave compensation for missed meals at rate of nine days per annum reduced to three days or two days according to circumstances.</block>

<block name="quote">Catering Staff.&#x2014;Clear breaks for definite trips or alternatively half pay in lieu of periods falling short of those breaks, not accepted.</block>

<p>The decisions outlined above will be brought into operation with effect from 1st April, 1929, and the concessions to the staff concerned will involve an estimated additional expenditure of approximately £162,000 per annum.</p>

<p>I feel convinced the staff will appreciate what has been done to improve their conditions and that they will, by their loyalty, demonstrate to the Administration their earnest desire to still further improve the efficiency of the service and to maintain the more encouraging financial results which have accrued during the present <span class="col_1359-1360" refersTo="page_0717"/>financial year and that they will also by their actions continue to merit the goodwill and appreciation of all sections of the community.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#conclusion">

<heading>Conclusion.</heading>

<ol><li>147. In conclusion I desire to say a few words of well-deserved praise to the officers and men of all grades in the railway and harbour service.</li>

<li>148. I cannot speak too highly of the support that has been given to me and the Railway Board by the general manager and his senior officers particularly, and of the general efficiency manifested by all sections of the personnel during the past year.</li>

<li>149. I am sure this House, and the public generally, fully appreciate the loyalty, zeal and efficiency of the staff of the railways and harbours service, and just what such loyal service means to the welfare of South Africa.</li></ol>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot allow this occasion to pass without congratulating the Minister on what he has now done. We know that this is the last session before the election, which accounts for quite a lot. Hon. members opposite should remember, when they are so very hilarious about results, that in the past the Minister practically on no occasion has been correct in his forecasts. I hope he is correct on this occasion, but it must be remembered while he has not the pleasure of dealing with diamonds, he has not been able to transfer certain sums from the betterment fund. The Minister has placed before the House a vast mass of figures and it will be difficult for us to consider them fully without a little time for consideration. I hope he will allow me to move the adjournment.</p>

</speech>

<p>On the motion of Maj. G. B. van Zyl the debate was adjourned; to be resumed on 18th March.</p>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railways_construction_bill">

<heading>RAILWAYS CONSTRUCTION BILL.</heading>

<p>Second Order Read: Second reading, Railways Construction Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>Hon. members will see that four proposals are submitted to the House in this Bill, three of which refer to railway construction, and hon. members will also see that in all three cases the construction is covered by guarantees of the public concerned, or the company asking for the construction. There is therefore no question of construction without guarantees. Hon. members will also have obtained full details in connection with these proposals from the report of the railway board laid on the Table, and I therefore do not intend to cover again all the ground in connection with the proposals. I think, however, it is necessary to say a few words in connection with particular proposals, especially that of the Koopmansfontein-Postmasburg line. Hon. members know that in 1925 Dr. Hall, one of the Mines Department officials, investigated the large deposits of manganese in Postmasburg and its surroundings, and after the enquiry he issued a report, after which great interest was taken in connection with the development of our deposit of manganese, but schemes have hitherto always failed owing to the absence of a railway line. The persons and companies concerned all said that there were very good manganese deposits, and that we ought to build a line, after which they would see that the manganese was mined. The attitude of the railway administration has always been that we admitted that large quantities of manganese were used in the world, but that we knew that there were supplies of it in other places which were closer to the great centres of consumption than we were, and we always said that if manganese companies had first of all to prove that they were in earnest in connection with the matter by providing the necessary capital for the construction of the railway. We did not see our way to building the line at State expense, and negotiations were carried on for years, but unfortunately we could not arrive at any agreement until eventually the British-Swiss International Corporation approached us with such proposals, that, after lengthy negotiations and consideration of various points, an agreement was concluded on the basis now before the House. I can give the heads of the agreement in a few words. The company agrees to place a guarantee for the capital for the construction of the railway line in full at the disposal of the Railway Administration, an amount of £302,000 plus a maximum of 10 per cent. Including interests on the capital of £302,000, the cost of construction is estimated at £310,000. The company undertakes to pay this to the Railway Administration pari passu with the construction, and the Railway Administration on the other hand undertakes to repay it to the company after 10 years. In the meantime interest on the capital required for the construction is reckoned at 4&#x00BD; per cent., and the 4&#x00BD; per cent, will form a debit on the actual cost of running the railway. In that way they guarantee us against any loss, and as a guarantee they must lodge security with the Government up to a sum of £100,000. This safeguards the Railway Administration against any possible loss, and it is a responsibility on the company to make good any loss to the State. In addition guarantee is given that after the first year at least 350.000 tons per year will be transported, and if that quantity is not maintained, 2s. per ton compensation will be paid for every ton short.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>2s.?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, 2s., and that in turn goes to the credit of the running costs. Then hon. members will see that the company has further undertaken to enter into an agreement with the Electricity Commission&#x2014;and the agreement will be possible&#x2014;that they will within 5 years erect certain reduction works along the Natal main line. Hon. members will appreciate why <span class="col_1361-1362" refersTo="page_0718"/>we do this. Hon. members of the select committee in any case are aware of it. The troubles in connection with the Colenso power station have always hitherto been that a larger number of power consumers were necessary to create a sound position for the Railway Administration with regard to the use of electrical power. The capital costs of Colenso are very high, and until such time as we have a large number of consumers of power it will not be a financial success to the Railway Administration. We have practically to continue to pay full interest on the capital. There are indeed a few consumers, but the number is very small in comparison with what the Railway Administration uses. The traffic will, of course, go via Bloemfontein, and we do not define precisely where the reduction works must be put up so long as they are along the main line, and the power is drawn from Colenso. As for the position of other companies not included in the contract, their interests are also protected. In their interest we have included the provision that any company or person having manganese interests can make use of the railway, but they must pay the same proportionate amount of capital cost, and bear the same amount of responsibility, once more in proportion to the British-Swiss Corporation. I think that is very fair. I may say that the quantities of manganese in Postmasburg are practically inexhaustible, and as long as a market abroad can be found for manganese, there can be no question of a reduction of business. The company has not the least doubt that the thing will pay, and that the export, instead of diminishing, will increase. The terminus has been put near the village of Postmasburg to serve the community there, and the ordinary revenue of the railway is estimated at £17,800, and that from manganese at £34,000, while the deficit at the start is reckoned at £16,900. The company, however, guarantees any loss. Apart from the manganese interests there are great possibilities of development in other departments. In the area to be served by the railway we already have 446 miles of road motor services, which carried 6,800 passengers last year, 1,900 tons of goods, and 24,500 gallons of cream, earning £10,790. That is a proof that the area is not so unproductive as some people think. Hon. members will see that the company had to deposit £5,000 at once as a proof of good faith for the execution of the contract, and we shall not commence construction until the company has provided the funds. The second proposal refers to the Witvlei-Gobabis line. In this case the interest on capital is guaranteed by the South-West Administration. We provided in the 1925 railway programme for an expenditure of £348,000 for the line from Oekaremba to Witvlei. The line is practically finished, and we have saved £80,000 in expenditure. On account of the keenness of the South-West Administration for the extension of the line to Gobabis, in view of the settlement and other interests there, the Railway Administration agreed to spend the savings on the extension of the line. The costs of extension are estimated at £96,000, and owing to the saving on the line up to Witvlei the additional capital sum will be negligible&#x2014; and as I have said, the South-West Administration guarantees the interest on the expenditure. Now I come to the third proposal, namely, the deviation at Dordrecht. The line from Sterkstroom to Indwe was built in 1896 by a private company, and hon. members acquainted with the position will agree with me when I say that a great mistake was made at the time of the construction in taking it a distance of three miles off the town of Dordrecht. Since 1903 the public of Dordrecht have been agitating for a deviation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>We are also agitating.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I do not know exactly what deviation the hon. member means, but if they are prepared to accept the conditions which Dordrecht have accepted we shall be prepared to consider their representations. We told the Dordrecht public that they must themselves bear the capital cost if they wanted the deviation, because it would be unfair to ask the State to bear the expense, seeing the railways in any case get the traffic, even if the public have to transport the load 3 miles. At the same time it was felt that it was no more than fair that we should give the Dordrecht public a reasonable time for payment. Let me say that all the classes of the community&#x2014; the Farmers&#x2019; Association, the Chamber of Commerce, the Town Council and the Divisional Council&#x2014;have given their approval in writing to this extra payment which is laid down in the contract. I want to tell the hon. member for Wodehouse (Mr. Vermooten) that he, or any subsequent member for his constituency, must not come to me or any future Minister of Railways, to ask for a reduction. That is a clear understanding with the Dordrecht public.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Such understandings have existed before and yet there have been subsequent representations.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>The former arrangements were on a different basis, by way of subsidy, as in the case of the Strand. In this case it is not a question of collections from the public, but every man who travels or consigns goods must automatically make the extra payment. It will be necessary to pull up the line for a distance of 8¼ miles, and to relay it for a distance of 9¼ miles at a cost of £45,000. There will, however, be repayments on material up to an amount of £5,000, so that the maximum cost is estimated at £40,000, repayable over a period of 34 years. All the other interests north and south of Dordrecht will not be affected by any higher rates. So here there will be no increased tariff on traffic from Maclear, Ugie and Elliott, because the deviation of the line makes it a little longer. Nor must it be thought that the Dordrecht public will get no benefit from the deviation. There is a contract <span class="col_1363-1364" refersTo="page_0719"/>to-day for the carriage from the station to the i town, and in this expense the public will secure a reduction if the station comes nearer to the town. Now I come to the last of the items, namely, the removal of the Sea Point line. The line was constructed by a private company in 1891, and in 1905 it was taken over by the old Cape Parliament with a guarantee for ten years. Since 1915 there has been no guarantee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>That was at the request of the Administration.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Since 1915 there has been a loss of £150,000 on the Sea Point line and in consequence of the electrification the loss has unfortunately become much greater. It is the general view, including that of the hon. member for Cape Town (Harbours) (Maj. G. B. van Zyl) and the Sea Point public that there is no justification for the continuance of the line. I have been accused of being responsible for the electrification and that I should have listened to the recommendation of Dr. van der Byl to pull up the line and build a motor road. I am certain that Dr. van der Byl&#x2019;s scheme would have appeared impracticable because the people in any event now want to be picked up at their doors on the Main Road and along the High Level Road. The public do not want to walk a yard further if means of transport passes their doors. Hon. members living or lodging in Sea Point have doubtless already remarked that the trains are running empty while the public stand in clusters along the road to crowd each other in the buses and trams. If the people do not want the railway&#x2014;although it is fitted out in the most modern way&#x2014;then there is no justification for the State to continue it. I appreciate the assistance I have received from the hon. member for Cape Town (Harbour) and from the town councils and other public bodies of Cape Town, and they have all taken up the attitude that it is no longer possible for the Administration to continue the line. We expect a loss of capital amounting to £56,000. The calculation is a sacrifice of £61,000, but the Administration will get back £4,900 in the breaking up of the line which brings the amount to £56,000. The loss will have to be covered from the available surplus because there can be no question of keeping the amount on the loan account. One of the conditions of the renewal is that the land from Monument Station to Three Anchor Bay&#x2014;which belongs to the Cape Town Municipality&#x2014;will revert to it. The land between Three Anchor Bay and Sea Point reverts to the State, but an agreement has been come to with the Mayor of Cape Town that it will be given to the town council, provided that it is not built on, but that it shall be kept as open space for the benefit of the public. This will help to increase the attractiveness of Sea Point. I think that I have now fully dealt with the proposals in the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>Let me say at once that as far as we are concerned, we do not oppose any movement in the direction of developing the country. I think every hon. member will agree that we should do everything we can to develop the country. I am glad to see that the Minister has accepted the guarantee, and where I must criticize, he must understand that I am not doing so in any spirit of opposition, but to show where matters can be improved. In the matter of the British-Swiss Corporation agreement, it would have been well, I think, had the Minister referred it to the select committee on railways and harbours. We want explanations. In reading the agreement there are some portions which I cannot thoroughly appreciate, and if we could go fully into the clauses in the select committee, we would not only save time, but we could report what our views are. All these privately guaranteed lines have in the past resulted in financial difficulty. In connection with the Utrecht branch line there was an agreement by which the Utrecht collieries should pay 35 per cent, of the revenue, but under the Strange agreement they were credited with far more than could reasonably be expected and the result was that the Railway Administration suffered loss, although it was a guaranteed line.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>That was a result of the nature of the agreement.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>Then we have the Messina line in which the loss on the year&#x2019;s working was £50,000. and the Railway Administration has suffered an aggregate loss of £457,514 as a result of the working of the line. It seems to me that these agreements should be more closely scrutinized and I suggest to the Minister that he should send them to the select committee. As far as I can understand this agreement which has been mentioned, it is a matter of the company merely advancing money to the Government at 4&#x00BD; per cent, for the building of the line, and it seems to me there is very little advantage because the Government could have raised that money and would not have been bound down to these conditions which may detrimentally affect the development of that part of the country. Under section (3) (a) the Government will not be able to charge the company with the interest on the money during construction, yet by 6 (b), when they pay back the amount borrowed to that company afterwards, they have to include the interest during construction.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>It forms a debit against the working of the line from year to year.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>The Government has to pay back the capital.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>The interest is debited against the working year by year.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I may be wrong, but that was how I read it. That is another reason why this should be sent to the select committee. Then why is the Minister charging only 10 per cent, on capital for mechanical <span class="col_1365-1366" refersTo="page_0720"/>appliances. You are charging only 5&#x00BD;per cent, for redemption and working costs, which cannot pay the Administration. From the business point of view, it seems we are merely borrowing from the company, and we are refusing any new companies working unless they pay a share of the expenses. In regard to the Dordrecht line, it seems to me very strange that in one and the same Bill you scrap one line and build another, and both are guaranteed lines, and here again, I think, we might have had further information. If you look at page 17 of the report, it seems to me that the board had serious difficulties. In the first instance they said that the construction was not regarded favourably from the Administration&#x2019;s point of view, because it was not thought that the amount of traffic would justify the deviation. They changed their minds afterwards, and got a guarantee. Is not motor transport competition going seriously to damage the chance of success of this line?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Our own.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I did not know that. That is not explained here. The Minister ought to go fully into the question. No railway line should be built where it is possible to run motor services successfully. In the past, we have found from the board&#x2019;s reports that they have been out of touch with the interests of the country. On the Kalabaskraal-Saldanha line there have been losses for three years running, and the same applies to the Kraaifontein-Klaver line, and many others throughout the country. To-day it may be very much worse, because there is bus competition. I want to emphasize that these reports should go to a select committee and be before us, because we have never had a correct estimate by the Railway Board. If we look at the branch lines we find that in nine instances where the board was required to report on the probable earnings that it was wrong in every instance, and that the shortfalls were large amounts, such as £9,900, £1,600, £1,500. £5,000, £7,100 and £3,500. In other words, whereas the Board recommended that its estimate should be taken, the actual amount produced represented a loss of £52,000 upon an estimate of £131,000. I want the Minister to consider whether, in view of this, he should not exercise very great care and get more up-to-date estimates. Coming to the Sea Point line, I want to thank the Minister for the consideration he has shown in dealing with this matter, and thereby allowing the people chiefly concerned to have some say. The Minister has met us very fairly, and I am going to ask him to go a little further. We have sacrificed a lot at Sea Point in regard to this railway in the past. The tramway company had a stranglehold on the people of Sea Point, who subscribed for the building of the first line and lost every penny. They also for many years guaranteed and paid all the losses. After that, the Administration suggested that the people should pay a round sum, so that there is no blame as far as Sea Point is concerned. The people of Sea Point paid all they were required to pay, and paid it very willingly. I want to ask the Minister whether he will give an assurance that if the tramway company or the bus companies again get a stranglehold, he will give the most careful consideration to the question of starting a railway bus service in that area. If he will do that, I think the people of Sea Point will be very satisfied. They fear another stranglehold, and I think they have every right to have that fear, because they were very badly treated. I know the losses have been great, and the Minister has met the position very fairly, but if he can go to the length I have suggested, he will greatly satisfy the people. In this connection I want to warn the Minister that the suburban line will be in the same position before very long if we continue as at present. I will tell you why. We now have the whole of the electrified railways at the mercy of the Electricity Commission, which is not subject to audit by the Auditor-General, but their own auditors. Our own Auditor-General has nothing to do with them. I find that the reserve fund contribution is 2.9 per cent., and that the Administration holds very strongly that per cent, would be quite sufficient. 2.9 per cent, is a very large sum to pay annually upon three and a half million. Take the Colenso line. It is estimated that the Administration would save £76,000 per annum in capital charges if they had charge of it. On Administration charges we would save £16,000 per annum. Thus if Colenso were handed back to the Administration there would be a saving of between £91,000 and £92,000 per annum. I am told in regard to the charges at Salt River that the position is very much worse. The estimated cost of the power station was £977,000 but the expenditure up to December last was £1,239,000 and up to date is £1,450.000. The Railway Department has to pay every penny of the working expenses. The working costs, which were estimated at £151,000 per annum, have actually been £220,000 per annum. The railways are paying more for light and more for running costs than when the current was obtained from the municipality. Workshops pay £5,000 per annum more. The working expenses to the railways were estimated at £169,000 per annum, but the actual figure is £488,000. The commission&#x2019;s head office charges amount to £24,000 per annum, and for six months the commission charged the Administration £107,500, or at the rate of £215,000 per annum, whereas the actual charge should have been £88,000 even though the basis taken was the serious overcharge for current in comparison to the cost of generating. I mention these facts to show that the actual losses on the Sea Point line were nothing like the losses now set down. I mention these facts further to warn the Minister that if we are going to continue like this, every electrified line will be in danger of having to be scrapped. The overhead charges are enormous, and the Railway Department is bearing the whole burden of them. I think the time has arrived when these matters should be gone into, and a change be made, so that the Auditor-General may have command of these <span class="col_1367-1368" refersTo="page_0721"/>accounts. With great confidence I appeal to the Minister to consider the request of the public meeting held at Sea Point which, to a very large extent, passed a unanimous resolution requesting the Government to protect the public by giving them the assurance that should the tramway company increase the fares unduly, the Railway Administration will arrange for a bus service in competition with the tramways. I know that the Minister&#x2019;s policy is that the railway buses should not run in competition with ordinary bus traffic where possible, but when the Railway Administration is appealed to for the protection of the public in the event of the tramway company unduly raising the fares, then I think the Minister can safely do it, and let the people have a little hope for the future.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I am glad that I can give my almost wholehearted support to the Bill, but I am sorry that I cannot agree with every detail. Railway communication is a long-standing need. It not only supplies a great requirement of agriculture in the neighbourhood, but also the need of exploitation of the mineral treasures of such an area. The result was that a great many more requests for railway communication were made, besides that by the company concerned here, to supply the need for development. The Minister and the House are acquainted with the proposals which I have made here, and deputations have made to the Railway Board. I am grateful that provision has finally been made for the manganese industry at Postmasburg. In consequence of the personal experience I have had I think that I can remove the fear the hon. member for Cape Town (Harbour) (Maj. G. B. van Zyl) that this line will not pay. I remember the report which was made at the time by the official of the Mines Department&#x2014;Dr. Hall&#x2014;in which he concluded that about 100,000,000 tons of manganese ore could be mined in that area. If the present world market justifies it the company will now be able to comply with its maximum obligations, namely, to transport at least 350,000 tons a year. According to that maximum there will thus be enough manganese for at least 300 years to feed that traffic. The fields extend over an area of 10 to 20 miles. We do not wish to take it that the revenue of the line will only come out of manganese traffic. As the Minister has already said there is a considerable amount of agriculture there, and it will probably be very much developed if the railway is built. Therefore I want to thank the Minister in the name of the population of Postmasburg and the neighbourhood. But for us who, during the last few years, have become accustomed to our Government giving special attention to the development of agricultural railways, it is a little disappointing that it is not in the first place an agricultural railway, but an industrial one. Although I heartily welcome the development of the industry I feel that there is a larger area which is not being served, and which is an important agricultural area which is itself possibly more developed than the area which is served by the railway. Of course I do not want to lose sight of the capital and guarantee for the route, but yet I feel that the manganese area could be just as well served by another railway from the other junction, which could contribute much more to the agricultural development of a large area. I assume that the area to be served will greatly develop, and in that connection I want two assurances from the Minister. In the first place under Clause 9 of the agreement the hands of the Administration are left practically free to charge standard rates for all traffic. Now I assume that if there is an alteration for agricultural produce in the general tariff in favour of agriculture it will also apply to that area, and that no higher rates than the ordinary ones can be charged. I should like to have that assurance from the Minister. Another point is in connection with Clause 20 in view of the yearly increasing need of Griqualand West, and especially the southern portion of Griqualand, not only in so far as the development of agriculture is concerned, but also of other minerals which are found there, such as phosphates and asbestos. Now I should like to be assured by the Minister that Clause 20 does not prevent him from subsequently extending and developing the railway in a southerly direction without further capital contribution to this line having to be made by the State. It is possible that within a reasonable time the district may be so developed, and the needs be so great that the line will have to be extended. Will this agreement not hamper us in that? Clause 15 practically creates a monopoly for the British-Swiss Corporation, but if other companies contribute a proportionate amount to the capital expenditure can they also carry manganese ore over the railway? I should like to know whether the stipulation also applies to other minerals.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>No, only for manganese.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>If the Government feels that development in other districts is such that the railway ought to be extended, will the capital cost have to be contributed to?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>Then I am glad and grateful, so that the possibilities for development of Griqualand West will not be hampered. My objections to the agreement which, of course, must be confirmed by an Act, are not great, but yet there are a few points. The first the Minister has agreed to, namely, that the Government will not be bound to make a capital contribution of the railway is extended. Still I feel that a monopoly is practically created as against other companies. And what of the existing companies at Postmasburg? I do not know precisely what the position there is. Are they all included in the agreement of the British-Swiss company?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>A part of them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I can, of course, understand the argument that a company which guarantees <span class="col_1369-1370" refersTo="page_0722"/>the capital can make claim to a certain extent that other companies shall also contribute to the capital if they carry manganese, but this surely somewhat cripples development. With a view to the future development of the area the route is a matter of great importance. I note that the route in accordance with the recommendations of the engineer is via Silver-streams, and that Danielskuil is excluded. I do not know what the possibilities of traffic in the proposed direction are, but a considerable area which is longing for railway communication is being excluded. I want to ask the Minister to review the question of the building of the terminal station. According to the agreement the station must be built on one of two places. One is about five miles, and the other about two-and-a-half miles, from Postmasburg. I understand that the company finding the capital must be served in the first place, but in addition the Minister will feel that the village of Postmasburg will considerably extend, and that it will be a handicap to the whole community if the station is a few miles away from the village. The position is that the Administration cannot depart from the agreement unless it can be altered from an engineering point of view. Now I hope that the Minister will reconsider this side of the matter to assist the village further. The Minister and the hon. member for Cape Town (Harbour) (Maj. G. B. van Zyl) have already pointed out that one of the additional benefits will be the starting of further industries along the Colenso-Durban line. We do not sufficiently value the possibilities which may lead to the using of electrical power, the development of which is a great burden on the Railway Administration to-day. According to the existing agreement the burdens on the Administration are lightened by the electric current which will be bought by private consumers, and the erection of additional smelting works and the use of more current is a strong argument in favour of the contract. I am glad the Government has decided to extend the railway in South-West. I was not able to get all the details but, according to the information I have, I must dissent from what the hon. member for Bloemfontein (North) (Mr. Barlow) recently said about the Angola settlers. With the improvement of marketing facilities for their produce they will have the best opportunity of making a success of their farming. Regarding the Sea Point line there cannot be two views of the matter. The decision to take up the lines is the only possible one. As to the criticism of the hon. member for Cape Town (Harbour) against the existing line I can only say that no suburb could have a better and more convenient railway. I have had the opportunity of living in the suburbs of Europe and have not seen, even in Germany, any better railway service than that on the Sea Point line. The convenience of the railway is not therefore in point, the chief cause of the loss is no doubt the keen competition. Before I leave the subject I want to comment upon the mentality of hon. members who represent towns. It would be amusing if it were not so serious. The townspeople have the greatest conveniences possible, but when conveniences are extended to the countryside they pull wry faces, if they do not weep. The hon. member for Cape Town (Harbour) is worried that the line to Postmasburg will not pay, but glosses over the loss on the Sea Point line and the Cape Town-Wynberg-Simonstown line, and then he wants the Railway Administration to undertake that the Sea Point public will not pay a penny more for their conveyance to and from town. If the Minister goes so far as to give him the assurance, that he will protect the Sea Point public against tariffs, then it will not have my support. I welcome all reasonable measures for developing the countryside, and we who represent it, feel particularly hurt at the attitude which is adopted towards it. Guarantees must be given and statistics supplied to see that not a penny will be lost, and this while the townspeople possess all the conveniences for which, in many cases, they do not pay adequately. In proof of this I can quote that the Sea Point line incurred a loss of £150,000, and the Cape Town-Simonstown line an annual loss of £250,000. Pretoria has a line which does not pay. Johannesburg I will not go into, but that town is now getting a large new railway station. The inhabitants of the big towns use a magnifying glass in the case of facilities for the countryside, but they try to hide the cost of their own. We welcome the proposals as a whole, and I hope that the Minister will take into consideration the one or two points I have submitted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>I propose to deal almost exclusively with the proposed construction of a railway from Koopmansfontein to Postmasburg. I look upon this as one of the most important things that has happened in South Africa for a long time, for I do not think the Minister at all exaggerated when he described the Postmasburg deposits of manganese ore as practically inexhaustible. Evidently other people think so too, because there are indications that several companies propose, if circumstances permit, to exploit these deposits. The importance of this will be realized if we consider that we are definitely in a steel age. Practically the whole operations of the world are becoming mechanized, and for that purpose more and more steel is essential. Steel is not only extensively used now, but will be used even more extensively in the future in bridges, all structural matters, in house building and in production for the various industries which are carried on. Manganese is essential for the production of steel. It so happens it can be used for the production not only of hard steel but also mild steel. It can be also combined with copper to form the basis of manganese bronze and other alloys which are being more and more extensively used for industrial purposes. If the demand for manganese is great now, it is likely to become still greater in the future, and I think it is agreed by the people most interested that probably in the future her base metals will be more important to South Africa than even gold has been in the past. If we cast our minds back to the last thirty or forty years and see the <span class="col_1371-1372" refersTo="page_0723"/>enormous influence that the discovery and production of gold in the Transvaal has had not only on South Africa, but on the business, trade and commerce of the whole world, we may imagine that something perhaps on a greater scale will occur with the development of the use of steel, which can only be developed with the use of manganese. The whole world is looking for suitable metals to carry out the policy of mechanization. The thing we are very interested in now, the speed trials at Verneuk Pan, where a remarkable car is to attempt to lower the world&#x2019;s record, illustrates that this car and the speed possible is the result of discoveries and experiments made in metals from time to time. In fact speed is largely a matter of finding suitable metals to stand the strain. In view, then, of the great expansion of steel production which is within sight in the future it is no wonder that the discovery of these extensive manganese deposits has attracted the attention of several companies. It is interesting to know from sources outside this report that contracts have been already made and prices fixed with overseas users of manganese, and for very large quantities indeed; so if this agreement goes through on satisfactory conditions, we may look forward to a very large export of these manganese ores. This agreement might count for nothing unless very substantial guarantees required by the Government are given, and the Government requires a security of no less than £100,000 to be put up by this company. Furthermore, the agreement provides that at least 200,000 tons must be exported the first year after the railway is opened and thereafter 350,000 tons per annum for ten years. The Minister will not deny that much larger figures are expected in the near future. I do not suppose I would be accused of exaggeration if I suggested that before long an export of a million tons will be in sight of being effected. A million tons is a very large figure, and it is necessary to look ahead to enable it to be handled. The company has undertaken to put up reduction works and the locality of these is fixed by the agreement. It must be somewhere on the Natal main line. Without going into technical details, I understand it is expected that only a proportion of the ore will be reduced for a long time to come. The company do not bind themselves to reduce to concentrates more than a small proportion of the ore they will mine and export. We may assume that for years to come the bulk of the ore exported will be in a raw form. I believe the ore is a 55 per cent, proposition. That is to say, they can extract 55 per cent, of manganese from the raw ore. I understand that this is considerably richer than is usual. The world&#x2019;s annual consumption of manganese ore is at present about 2,500,000 tons. That is likely to be largely increased in the future, but still 2,500,000 tons is a very large figure to contemplate, and to satisfy the world&#x2019;s demand for that amount I have no doubt South Africa will be called upon. I believe some very large manganese fields are to be found in Russia at present, but the conditions for development there, for political and other reasons, are not favourable; so here we have in South Africa a unique opportunity, and it is intended by this agreement to take advantage of it. Assuming that within an appreciably short time a million tons of ore will be mined and exported, it will follow that it will require a hundred ships per annum each of 10,000 tons carrying capacity. It so happens that there are only two possible ports in the Union from which this ore could with advantage be exported, and those are Durban and Buffalo Harbour. The latter is 105 miles nearer to Postmasburg than Durban. So therefore my constituents&#x2014;and I am frankly representing their views, as it is my duty to do&#x2014;claim they are entitled to the reasonable benefits arising from their geographical position with regard to the export of this raw ore. My people are very reasonable. They claim that as they do not object to Natal getting the fullest advantage of her geographical position with regard to her coal fields, etc., so in the matter of distance the people of East London are entitled to have their geographical position and their hinterland taken into consideration. Representatives of the company have visited East London, and my information is that they expressed themselves as very pleased indeed with the suitability of the Buffalo Harbour for their purposes. But since then there has been a little uneasiness with regard to the distribution of the manganese traffic for export purposes, and the uneasiness of my constituents was communicated to me. I was told repeatedly that the railway authorities were practically indifferent as to which port would be selected. They looked upon themselves as transporters&#x2014;common carriers&#x2014;and they were out simply to get business and trade; so long as their trains were filled it did not matter very much to them to which port they were sent. If this were so, I would tell my constituents there is no reason to worry. They want only their fair share which is due to them owing to economic considerations. I looked carefully through this agreement and I found in Clause 16 (a) that the Administration undertakes that the public tariff now in operation would continue in force, which, on the face of it, seems reasonable enough. We think that if the tariff in force at the time the agreement was signed was maintained, there is very little reason to worry, but after my interview with the Minister and the Administration, my attention was directed to summary No. 24 and the alterations to the official railway tariff book No. 14. This summary I found was published on March 8th, or rather more than a fortnight after the agreement was signed. On page 3 I find a very important alteration with regard to the tariff on manganese ore has been made. It says that up to 670 miles it is tariff No. 9, less 10 per cent.; from 671 to 740 miles, 15s. 9d. per ton, and over that tariff No. 9, less 10 per cent. That struck me as very remarkable, and I looked again at the first sentence of this alteration. I found it was to have effect on the 21st February, 1929. The agreement was signed on the 22nd, so I presume legally the new alteration would have the effect of law <span class="col_1373-1374" refersTo="page_0724"/>because it reads &#x201C;The tariff now in operation.&#x201D; I think all that should have been disclosed, and that it should not be due to the industry of private individuals to find out that important fact. This retrospective action calls for some inquiry, and I hope there will be some explanation. I worked out certain distances, and it appears that it is 635¼ miles from the mine to the port of Buffalo harbour, and as it is below 670 miles it will come under tariff No. 9 less 10 per cent. I worked out the distance from Durban Point and it comes to 740 miles. So we have a special tariff which gives Durban Point 15s. 9d. per ton. In my pursuit of knowledge I worked out what these tariffs would amount to, and I found that tariff No. 9 less 10 per cent, for 740 miles is 16s. 4d., that is, the normal rate if this alteration had not been made; so that the Administration arbitrarily have given this company a present of 7d. per ton in percentage. Originally Buffalo harbour had a natural advantage of 1s. per ton. The position now is that there is a difference of 5d. only between the rate from the mine to Durban Point and from the mine to Buffalo harbour, so the railways are generous in carrying ore 105 miles extra for a remuneration of 5d. Taking the one million tons as a reasonable estimate of the export in the near future, one million seven pences mean £29,000, which is a substantial concession enough for any company. It is not for me to say what is the object of the Government. I have heard some talk of the superiority of the Natal grade, 1 in 40 on the eastern system, and 1 in 80 in Natal. No one will raise a voice of protest against £12,000,000 or £13,000,000 having been spent since Union upon improving the lines in Natal, but before this was done it should be remembered that the gradient was 1 in 33, and it then carried double the present traffic on the eastern system. We hear a lot of talk about over-capitalization in connection with the electrification of the Natal line, and the necessity for its carrying a bigger traffic. Let us remember that the Union railways have to be treated as a whole. What does it matter to the Administration if it makes up its compensation for electrification overhead charges on some of the other lines? I hope the matter will be looked into fairly. The people of East London and the Border are just as much entitled to get the advantage of their geographical position as the people of Natal are entitled to enjoy the advantages in regard to their vicinity to the Transvaal and to their coal position. All we ask is that the traffic should be arranged fairly as between the two ports without tariff discrimination. I am informed that such discrimination as this is unprecedented in the railway tariff history of South Africa. If any hon. member can produce a similar instance I shall stand corrected, but I want to be assured that it is on all fours with this position. I think, as a business principle, such a position as this is unthinkable, and I do not think the Minister can claim that he is dealing fairly when he loads the dice against one port in the interests of another. Surely it is to the advantage of the Government that the whole Union should share in any prosperity that might happen. We do not want lop-sided discrimination; we want the whole country to go ahead.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>How are you going to load your ships?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>Shipping people who have visited Buffalo Harbour are most favourably impressed with the sound facilities provided there. This clause 16 provides that the rates cannot be increased for a period of ten years, but there is nothing to prevent the Minister decreasing them, and I hope he will carefully consider making a proportionate decrease in regard to Buffalo Harbour in the same way as he has done in the case of Durban Point. Every day throughout the year I am told an average of 50 or more empty trucks are sent down to East London to carry away the import traffic. Surely it is a business principle that these trucks should be utilised for carrying down profitable traffic such as manganese instead of running empty. I think it is a pity that this matter was not discussed before. If there was no time to embody it in the agreement, I should have preferred that the Minister should have been more open with the House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I gave you the information you asked for at once.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>You did not give the House the information.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>I do think that in a very important matter like this, involving approximately a sum of £29,000 per annum in favour of one port, the Ministers should have considered it of sufficient importance to inform the House when introducing this Bill. I do not think he was quite fair in telling me that the Administration was not particularly interested in the route taken for the raw ore. Furthermore I do not think that it is either reasonable or just to make this discrimination. No doubt there is an explanation of it, but I am a little bit worried about it. If this is, as I am informed, unprecedented, it may become a principle which may be adopted and discrimination against Algoa Bay, Mossel Bay, and even Cape Town may follow. But I hope it is an absolutely exceptional case, and, if so, I feel sure I can confidently appeal to the Minister to take such steps as will remedy the matter. I do not ask that the rates to Durban should be raised, but there is nothing in the agreement to prevent a reduction in the rates to Buffalo harbour. Surely the Minister has no desire to penalize one part of the country in this respect. I should be glad to hear from the Minister that he understands the very natural feeling of those concerned with Buffalo harbour, and I am sure that when he realizes what important interests are involved, and how unjust his proposals are, he will take an early opportunity of rectifying the matter.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#vermooten">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VERMOOTEN</person>:</from>

<p>As regards this Bill I shall confine myself particularly to Clause 2 which concerns the deviation of the railway line <span class="col_1375-1376" refersTo="page_0725"/>Sterkstroom to Maclear at Dordrecht. It is a matter about which the public of Dordrecht have already been agitating for the last 25 years, and I must say I am pleased, and I am grateful to the Minister of Railways and the Railway Board that at last it has now reached the stage that we have a Bill before the House in which this deviation is included. Perhaps it is not generally known that the first part of the line from Sterkstroom to Indwe, 66 miles, was built by a private company with the object of working the coal and other minerals in the district and of laying out a township, which is now called Indwe. For some inexplicable reason the railway at that time was laid three miles away from Dordrecht. I say for an inexplicable reason because the lie and the state of the ground simply naturally suggest the route now proposed. Why it was not adopted at that time we cannot understand. In 1900 by virtue of Act No. 19 the private line was taken over by the Cape Government Railways, and subsequently the line was extended from Indwe to Maclear. Dordrecht is situated in the stretch between Sterkstroom and Indwe, about 42 miles from Sterkstroom, and the inconvenience we suffer in consequence is great. It is an extraordinary cold part, and most of the passenger trains (it is remarkable) arrive and depart at night, whereby the general public, and more particularly the women and children, run great risks to their health. We have striven and agitated and made representations to successive governments to bring the railway to the village, but nothing has ever come of it. All those years representations were made at public meetings and delegates were sent to successive railway Ministers. Since 1896 all the Ministers of Railways have no doubt had deputations from Dordrecht. A person who doubtless served on all the deputations was Mr. Fish, some years ago mayor of Cape Town, and at that time a resident of Dordrecht. He worked hard and enthusiastically for the cause, and we are to a great extent indebted to him for the stage we have reached to-day in having a Bill before the House to authorize the deviation. He also has good reasons to be so enthusiastic about the building of the line. As I have said the trains arrive at night, and a few years ago he had to enter the town by cart on a dark night and was upset and broke his leg. This increased his zeal and he was one of the leaders of the deputations to the Ministers. Promises have been made but something has always happened to prevent their fulfilment until finally, when the Louis Trichardt scheme was authorized to be put before Parliament, the residents of Dordrecht felt that the Railway Department could no longer refuse to grant their deviation as well, and to treat it on the same lines as Louis Trichardt. They made it known that they also accepted the same conditions as Louis Trichardt. We therefore bind ourselves to the stipulations laid down in the report of the Railway Board, in other words it will not cost the country a penny. The capital expenditure will be paid by us by way of an increase in the tariff rates, and therefore I have no hesitation in appealing to hon. members of the House to support us in regard to the deviation. The public bodies of Dordrecht, the divisional council, municipality and farmers association have all undertaken in writing, in so far as they can bind the public, to agree to this and to submit themselves to the increased rate which is mentioned in the report of the Railway Board, I am very pleased, and I think I can speak for my constituents, that the time has finally come for us to expect the long-delayed deviation which will supply a great need and which will mean great facilities to the residents of Dordrecht. It will not cost the State a penny; the residents of Dordrecht are willing to pay the increased rate.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I am prepared to support the construction of a railway from Koopmansfontein to Postmasburg, but I wish to ask the Minister what he means by reducing the rate, which seems to have been done in rather a strange fashion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Why was the rate reduced from 16s. 4d. to 15s. 9d. for distances from 671 to 740 miles?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>The reduction in the railway rate is part of the contract, and it has been publicly announced.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>The reduction was effective from February 21, but the agreement was not signed until February 22. Why is the rate to Buffalo Harbour left at the old figure?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>The company pressed very strongly for the rate to Durban to be the same as the rate to East London. We informed the company that we could not do that, and we do not now penalize East London in any way. We agreed to a reduction in the rate to Durban as part of the agreement. This was disclosed to the public in the ordinary way. All tariff alterations are published every fourteen days. When my hon. friend approached me on the subject Iat once gave him the information asked for. We had no reason whatsoever in keeping the reduction from the public. The rate was 16s. 4d.&#x2014;it is now 15s. 9d. We have a flat rate to the ports for all shipment maize.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Why could you not have made the same reduction to other ports, especially to East London? So far as the company was concerned it would not have made the slightest difference.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Why should we surrender revenue?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Why should you differentiate?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>The company wanted it. The company was satisfied with the rate to East London.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from><span class="col_1377-1378" refersTo="page_0726"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister has no right to differentiate.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>We do that in regard to maize.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>We are talking about ore. The Minister has done wrong in this matter. He has done a grave injustice and he has no right to differentiate as between the two ports.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I have not penalized East London.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>You have penalized East London, because you have not made the same reduction to that port as you have made to Durban. It is not fair, it is not just. We know the fierce competition there is between the various ports. There is only one way to manage things in my opinion, and that is to put them on a footing of absolute equality.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Are you advancing an argument for a flat rate?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I am advancing an argument for equal treatment of all ports in accordance with the reduction you have made to Durban. It is a very strange thing that this was not revealed in the agreement. I looked out for this, because I knew it was coming, but not a word was said. I want to refer to this Gobabis line. I see the Minister is extending the line from Witvlei to Gobabis, and I would like some information. The interest is already guaranteed on the line to Witvlei and then they have also guaranteed the interest on these developments at Walvis Bay harbour. What is the total liability of the South West Africa Administration at the present time? I think the House would like to know. Then I want to make some remarks with reference to the Sea Point line. Of course the loss is serious. I quite admit that, and I think my hon. friend is perfectly justified in the action he has taken. I certainly agreed to the making of this line, but what took place afterwards was this. I had it from Dr. van der Byl himself, that he advised against the electrification of that line. He told me the department had carried out the electrification against his advice. You dropped the electrification of the docks line; why did you not drop the other as well? I can certainly discharge my responsibility seeing you had this direct advice from Dr. van der Byl. In regard to the Electricity Commission, why should the public and the railways pay these enormous costs? Why should you not appoint a strong commission to go into these costs, which are far in excess of what we were told would be the case. It is the duty of the Government not to let things slide but to appoint the strongest commission they can get and ascertain the reasons why the costs of running this show are so very much higher than was expected.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#william_macintosh">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILLIAM MACINTOSH</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for East London (North) (Brig.-Gen. Byron) has spoken as if Buffalo is the only port for Kimberley, but Algoa Bay is 120 miles nearer Kimberley than Durban is, and when the claim is made regarding geographical position it is Algoa Bay which has it. Although there is the handicap of lighters at Algoa Bay, the Minister knows that large shipments come from the Belgian Congo and are shipped at Algoa Bay. Shippers will have to decide from which port the ore is to go, and as the Belgian shippers choose Algoa Bay, the shippers of this manganese ore may also choose the same port. This change in the tariff was deliberately made to make the mileage cover Durban. The Minister can give Durban that rate, but similar proportionate reductions should be given to the other ports. All we ask is that a fair chance should be given, and we call upon the Minister to remove that unfairness.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>In connection with the remarks of the hon. member who has just sat down, I can show that the tariffs in the contract are arranged according to the wishes of the company. This is not the only case where the one harbour is preferred to the other. The railway tariffs in tariff classes I to VI are exactly the same from Germiston to Durban and East London, and that although the respective distances are 470 and 658 miles. In this case East London is preferred to Durban. In connection with the proposed line to the manganese fields I want to draw attention to the fact that during the last two years a great number of companies have been to see the Minister, the Railway Board, and the Government, to ask for the building of a line to the manganese fields. Already at that time it was known that the Postmasburg fields will probably be the biggest in the world, and that the nature of manganese facilitates transport. The Minister is convinced that this line will pay, and that the possibilities of the manganese fields are very great indeed. Thus I consider it a wrong step to insist that the company must provide the money for the building of the line. The Government ought to be ready to build the line so that all the companies can have a chance of working ground, because the present contract might lead to a strong monopoly. The company with whom the contract has been made has an interest in a certain corner of the manganese-bearing ground, and the line will be built to a certain point which will be advantageous to them. Other companies who have ground 20 or 30 miles from the point will, according to the contract, have to take upon themselves half the obligation if they want to transport manganese by the railway. There are to-day several companies who are on the point of working the manganese, but do not want to risk it because then they will be subject to the extremely heavy obligations of the contract. The obligations are explained in Clause 15. [Clause read]. They amount to a capital sum of £310,000, andin addition the possible losses on the line, and this is a heavy burden on the shoulders of the other companies. The Minister knows that other railways can be built which will cost less. One to the middle of the manganese fields, and which <span class="col_1379-1380" refersTo="page_0727"/>will then turn to the right and left, will only cost about £200,000. It is a peculiar method to adopt to put obligations on the companies when the railways are a State monopoly. It is a pity that the contract has not been referred to a select committee to see how far other interests are involved, because it is beyond doubt that the other companies will be hampered by the regulations.</p>

</speech>

<p>On the motion of Mr. van Hees, debate adjourned; to be resumed on 18th March.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1929-03-15T17:55:00">5.55 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

