---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol12 - FRIDAY 25 JANUARY 1929'
layout: debate
year: 1929
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 25th JANUARY, 1929.</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT.</heading>

<p>Pursuant to Proclamation of his Excellency the Officer Administering the Government, dated the 13th November, 1928, summoning Parliament to meet on this day for the dispatch of business, members met in the Assembly Chamber and Mr. Speaker took the Chair at 11.35 a.m.</p>

<p>The CLERK read the Proclamation.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacant_seat">

<heading>VACANT SEAT.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that a vacancy had occurred in the representation in this House of the electoral division of Ficksburg on account of the resignation of Mr. Jan Gerhard Keyter, received by Mr. Speaker to-day.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_member">

<heading>NEW MEMBER.</heading>

<p>The CLERK read a letter from the Secretary to the Prime Minister, dated 17th January, 1929, reporting the election of Mr. William Bawden for the electoral division of Langlaagte in the room of Mr. John Christie, resigned.</p>

<p>Mr. BAWDEN, introduced by Col.-Cdt. Collins and Mr. Rockey, made and subscribed to the oath, and took his seat.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING.</heading>

<p>The CLERK read a letter from the Secretary to the Prime Minister dated 14th December, 1928, stating that his Excellency the Governor-General had signified his intention of opening Parliament at noon to-day with the usual ceremony.</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER and members thereupon proceeded to the Senate House to attend the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and on their return,</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER resumed the Chair at 12.27 p.m.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#roll_of_members">

<heading>ROLL OF MEMBERS.</heading>

<p>The CLERK read the list of members, and those present answered to their names.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#printing_committee">

<heading>PRINTING COMMITTEE.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER appointed the Prime Minister and Gen. Smuts a Committee to assist Mr. Speaker in regard to the printing of the House.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#committee_on_standing_rules_and_orders">

<heading>COMMITTEE ON STANDING RULES AND ORDERS.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER appointed the following members to constitute, with Mr. Speaker, the Committee On Standing Rules and Orders, viz.: The Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Defence, Gen. Smuts, Mr. Krige, Sir Thomas Smartt, Mr. de Waal, Dr. de Jager, Mr. Sampson, Mr. Close and the Rev. Mr. Mullineux.</p>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I see that on the Committee of Standing Rules and Orders there is no representative of the South African Labour party. I trust you will be prepared to supplement the names of the members of the Committee, with a view to rectifying this.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>If the hon. member will see me later in my chambers I will discuss the matter with him.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening_speech">

<heading>OPENING SPEECH.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER reported that the House had this day attended the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and that his Excellency the Governor-General was pleased to deliver an opening speech to both Houses of Parliament, of which, for greater accuracy, he had received a copy, as follows: &#x2014;</p>

<speech by="#president_and_gentlemen_of_the_senate">

<from><span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0038"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">President and Gentlemen of the Senate</person>:</from>

<p></p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker_and_gentlemen_of_the_house_of_assembly">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">Speaker and Gentlemen of the House of Assembly</person>:</from>

<p>The prolonged severe illness of his Majesty the King has been followed with anxiety and sympathy by his subjects in South Africa. It is the earnest prayer of all that it may be the will of God that the recent improvement in his Majesty&#x2019;s health may continue until his recovery is complete.</p>

<p>Our relations with the other dominions and with foreign countries continue to be of the most cordial and friendly nature.</p>

<p>A convention, dealing with the recruiting of native labour from Mozambique for the Transvaal mines, railway matters and commercial intercourse between the Union of South Africa and the Province of Mozambique, has been entered into between the Government of the Union and the Government of Portugal. A Bill to legalise such amendments of the Customs laws of the Union as have been rendered necessary by provisions of the convention will be submitted to you.</p>

<p>As the result of negotiations conducted in the Union between representatives of the Union and of the German Reich, a treaty of commerce and navigation was signed at Pretoria on the 1st September, 1928. This treaty will be submitted to you.</p>

<p>In response to an invitation from the United States of America, my Ministers deemed it in the interest of South Africa and of world peace that the Union should become a signatory to the treaty for the renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy. This treaty was, therefore, signed on behalf of the Union at Paris, on the 27th of August, 1928, and will also be submitted to you.</p>

<p>You will be asked to resume consideration of &#x201C;The Representation of Natives in Parliament Bill&#x201D; of &#x201C;The Coloured Persons&#x2019; Rights Bill&#x201D; and of &#x201C;The Natives&#x2019; Land (Amendment) Bill&#x201D;.</p>

<p>As &#x201C;The Representation of Natives in Parliament Bill&#x201D; and &#x201C;The Coloured Persons&#x2019; Rights Bill&#x201D; will require to be passed by both Houses of Parliament sitting together, my Ministers intend to take the necessary measures for the submission of the said Bills to a combined sitting at the earliest possible moment.</p>

<p>Seeing that this will be the last session of the present Parliament, my Ministers contemplate confining the legislative work of the session, beyond the Bills just mentioned, to such measures only as deal with subjects of a more or less urgent character.</p>

<p>While the country as a whole is experiencing very favourable agricultural advancement, my Ministers deeply regret to state that certain districts continue to be sorely afflicted by drought, thus necessitating special measures for assisting the sufferers.</p>

<p>Mineral production generally shows steady advancement and extension.</p>

<p>Industrial and commercial development continues uninterruptedly. The utilisation of our own raw materials, the influx of capital for industrial establishments and our overseas and African trade, show marked progress.</p>

<p>The question of the conversion of coal into oil is regarded by my Ministers as one of vital importance to the industrial future of the Union. With a view to investigating the possibilities of our coal resources in this connection it is intended to render the necessary funds available for a fuel research institution.</p>

<p>Considerable progress has been attained in the harmonisation of divergent views amongst employers and employees in industry. More complete organisation under the administration of the industrial laws has made possible in an increasing number of industries mutual understandings and agreements for the benefit of all concerned. There has been notable advance in the promotion throughout all industries of a spirit of co-operation which has made possible the preservation of industrial peace on a sound basis.</p>

<p>Progress has also been made in opening up to the youth of the country under wholesome conditions entry into and apprenticeship training in various industries.</p>

<p>The Union was represented at the inter-Empire Conference in London early last year, called together to consider the important subject of the maintenance of adequate communication by both cable and wireless in view of the situation which had arisen due to competition between the two systems.</p>

<p>The conference presented a report recommending a scheme designed to preserve to the peoples of his Majesty&#x2019;s dominions the benefits of inter-communication by both wire and wireless telegraph, and all future developments thereof.</p>

<p>The recommendations have been adopted in principle by his Majesty&#x2019;s Governments in Great Britain and each of the dominions and India.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker_and_gentlemen_of_the_house_of_assembly">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">Speaker and Gentlemen of the House of Assembly</person>:</from>

<p>Additional Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the present financial year and Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the ensuing financial year will be laid before you.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#president_and_gentlemen_of_the_senate">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">President and Gentlemen of the Senate</person>:</from>

<p></p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker_and_gentlemen_of_the_house_of_assembly">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">Speaker and Gentlemen of the House of Assembly</person>:</from>

<p>In commending these matters to your consideration, I pray that the Blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours.</p>

<p>In his Majesty&#x2019;s name I now declare this the sixth session of the fifth Parliament of the Union of South Africa to be duly opened.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#kellogg_peace_treaty">

<heading><span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0039"/>KELLOGG PEACE TREATY.</heading>

<p>On notice of motion by the Prime Minister: That this House, having considered the multilateral treaty for the renunciation of war as an instrument of national policy, signed at Paris on the 27th August, 1928, decides to express its approval thereof,</p>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>As this is a matter of great importance, no doubt members would like to think it over. I hope the Prime Minister will give us a little more time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>It will be laid on the Table first. It is printed. I am going to do my best to give every opportunity of going on with this motion of no-confidence [notice of which had been given] so that members will have every opportunity of going into the matter now mentioned.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#kellogg_peace_treaty">

<heading>GERMAN TREATY.</heading>

<p>On notice of motion by the Minister of Mines and Industries: That this House approves the Treaty of Commerce and Navigation between the Union of South Africa and the German Reich, entered into on the 1st September, 1928, between his Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain, Ireland, and the British Dominions beyond the Seas, Emperor of India, for and on behalf of the Union of South Africa, and the President of the German Reich, a copy whereof was laid upon the Table on the 25th January, 1929.</p>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>I appeal to the Prime Minister not to rush things like this. The subject is of first-class importance, and has stirred a great deal of feeling in the country. The House should have time to consider such a very important matter, and it should not be put down for discussion next Monday, for that is trifling with the House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I should have thought that these gentlemen would have been only too-glad to have the subject discussed at the earliest moment. However, we shall he prepared to be reasonable. I assumed that no delay was necessary, because the treaty is short and its terms well known. This session, too, will perhaps be short, especially in view of the motion of no-confidence by the hon. member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts).</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1929-01-25T12:00:00">12 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

