---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol12 - FRIDAY 1 MARCH 1929'
layout: debate
year: 1929
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 1st MARCH, 1929.</heading>

<narrative>

Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1929-03-01T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Argentine Cattle Farming.</heading>

<question by="#raubenheimer" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Mr. RAUBENHEIMER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether a commission was sent to the Argentine to study cattle-farming and the meat trade; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether the commission has drawn up a report and whether the Minister will lay that report upon the Table?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#raubenheimer">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Mr. R. W. Thornton, director of field and animal husbandry was deputed to investigate cattle-farming and other matters in South America and England. He was accompanied by Commodore Talbot-Ponsonby, who went at his own expense.</li>

<li>(2) A report was handed in by Mr. Thornton which is receiving the consideration of the Government. Portions thereof which are of public interest, have been handed to the press for publication and I lay copy thereof on the Table.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_939-940" refersTo="page_0507"/>Water Bores at Vryburg.</heading>

<question by="#raubenheimer" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. RAUBENHEIMER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many Government water bores are there at present in operation in the divisions of Vryburg and Mafeking (a) on private property and (b) on Crown land; and</li>

<li>(2) how many applications from private landowners for water bores are waiting for disposal and how long will it be before all these applications can be granted?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#raubenheimer">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) (a) Three, (b) Two.</li>

<li>(2) 30. Approximately 10 months.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Voters&#x2019; Roll: L. R. Venter, Canvasser.</heading>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. BLACKWELL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is a fact that Liep. R. Venter, who is employed as a canvasser in the Cape area in connection with the registration of voters now proceeding, is simultaneously employed by the Public Works Department as a carpenter at standard rates of pay;</li>

<li>(2) how many other canvassers in (a) the Cape area and (b) the Witwatersrand area are in full time employment and do their registration work in their spare time;</li>

<li>(3) what is the rate of pay of canvassers; and</li>

<li>(4) why is not the work given to persons out of employment rather than to persons in receipt of steady incomes?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Yes, but I understand he is employed by the Public Works Department as an assistant storeman at a salary of £192 p.a.</li>

<li>(2) (a) 125. (b) 19.</li>

<li>(3) 12s. 6d. per day.</li>

<li>(4) Where possible the work is given to persons out of employment, but the department does not always succeed in obtaining suitable and reliable men from the ranks of the unemployed.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>Arising out of the Minister&#x2019;s answer to (3), that the rate of pay is 12s. 6d. does that mean per full working day, or evenings only?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I could not say at the moment, but I will find but and inform the hon. member.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Water Bore at Mooi River.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture when is the earliest date that the long-promised water-boring plant is due to arrive at Mooi River, where applicants are waiting and are entirely without water for their animals?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>Early in June. The small number of registered applications for drilling in this area makes it difficult to fit in a machine on an economical itinerary.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Doornkop Sugar Estates, Ltd.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol><li>(1) What was the net profit made by the Doornkop Sugar Estates, Ltd., from the first year&#x2019;s milling operations;</li>

<li>(2) on the basis of the first year&#x2019;s, profits, how long is it estimated it will take for the Doornkop Sugar Estates, Ltd., to liquidate all its obligations to the Government under the agreement of the 27th June, 1928;</li>

<li>(3) whether any temporary loans have been raised by the company in terms of Clause 6 of the agreement of the 27th June, 1928; if so, in what amount;</li>

<li>(4) what is the number of (a) Europeans, (b) Indians and (c) natives employed on the Doornkop Sugar Estates, Ltd.;</li>

<li>(5) whether the mortgage bond and the notarial bond provided for in Clause 4 of the agreement of the 27th June, 1928, have been executed and registered in favour of the Government; if so, whether the Minister will place a copy upon the Table of the House;</li>

<li>(6) if the bonds have not been passed and registered, why not;</li>

<li>(7) whether the bonds in question are to rank as first bonds; if not, what preferential claims are there;</li>

<li>(8) whether the £53,000 advanced by Lord Invernairn to the Doornkop Sugar Estates, Ltd., still remains unliquidated; if so, whether Lord Invernairn has any lien on the assets of the Doornkop Sugar Estates in respect of the advance, and, if so, what is the nature of the lien; and</li>

<li>(9) whether this loan is interest-bearing, and, if so, at what rate?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Nil. Towards the end of last year the new mill at Doornkop ran a successful trial test of five weeks. Its first season&#x2019;s milling operations, however, will only start this year.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

<li>(3) No.</li>

<li>(4) The manager has supplied this information but has requested that it be not made public.</li>

<li>(5) and (6) Steps are being taken to this end. Procedure was delayed pending communication with the British Trade Facilities Board in London and the supply by the board of certain necessary documents which have only recently come to hand.</li>

<li>(7) Yes.</li>

<li>(8) The £53,000 provided by Lord Invernairn is in the form of paid up share capital and is not a loan to the company.</li>

<li>(9) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from><span class="col_941-942" refersTo="page_0508"/>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Will the Minister tell us whether he has taken any steps to require the company to create a white settlement at Doornkop in terms of Clause 7 of the agreement</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>That is desired, and it will be done as soon as it is economically possible.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Nothing done so far?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Yes, something has been done. The hon. member will have an opportunity on the Vote of fully discussing this question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Can the Minister tell the House whether the Union Government has guaranteed the repayment of the £70,000 paid to the Doornkop estates through the Trade Facilities Board in Great Britain?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I explained the whole position fully when Parliament was last sitting, and the position as explained then remains the same to-day. The reply to the question is, yes. The hon. member will see it by the agreement which I laid on the Table when Parliament opened.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. NEL:</from>

<p>Is there any security for the £70.000?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#nel">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Yes, the Government considers it has adequate security for the whole amount both for the British Government and the Union Government.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. NEL:</from>

<p>What is the security?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#nel">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>The total assets movable and immovable of the estate.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. NEL:</from>

<p>Under a bond?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#nel">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Yes, under a bond.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>What are the total liabilities of the company to-day?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I will explain all that when we come to the Vote.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#kentridge" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. KENTRIDGE:</from>

<p>In view of the very onerous obligation the Government has undertaken on behalf of the estate, has the Minister no means of securing information for this House as to the number of Europeans employed?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#kentridge">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I have got the information but the managing director said he did not want to make it public, and I am honouring his request.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#kentridge" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. KENTRIDGE:</from>

<p>The point is this. In view of the obligation this country has undertaken, the Minister should surely have some power to give this information.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#kentridge">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I am not prepared at the moment to go against the managing director&#x2019;s wishes.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. STRUBEN:</from>

<p>Can the Minister not give some indication? It is all very well to say the managing director does not wish it published, but we are entitled at least to know why we should not be informed.</p>

</question>

<question by="#madeley" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. MADELEY:</from>

<p>I must ask the Minister this question. Are we to understand that in the Minister&#x2019;s estimation the managing director of this company is more important than this House?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Certainly not, but, as I say, this request came down from the managing director that he did not want the information made public. I am taking the matter up with him, and I am not prepared at this stage to go against his request.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Is the managing director&#x2019;s reason that he did not comply with Clause 7?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>He did not give any reason.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Ladies&#x2019; Privacy.</heading>

<question by="#deane" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Mr. DEANE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether he is aware that considerable annoyance is caused to lady passengers travelling alone through stewards on the train continually opening the doors of their compartments, although they are aware that such passengers are dressing; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he will cause each steward to be conspicuously numbered, so that offenders can be identified and reported?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#deane">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol><li>(1) I am aware there have been complaints of stewards entering compartments without the permission of the occupants.</li>

<li>(2) Stewards are provided with identification badges.</li>

</ol>

<p>As recently as last Wednesday the general manager at a conference of inspecting staff, emphasised the necessity for the staff concerned carrying out the explicit instructions in force that, prior to opening the door of any compartment, they must first knock and await permission to enter.</p>

<p>I may add that supervising officers are required to instruct the staff under their control to be exceedingly careful in this matter, and are authorized to take suitable action where the instructions are not carried out.</p>

<p>The officers of the Administration are at all times anxious to investigate any complaints.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. HAY:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister whether he is aware that the fastening supplied on the railways on the deposit of half-a-crown does not fit easily into the slot?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#hay">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>No, I have no information on that point.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from><span class="col_943-944" refersTo="page_0509"/>Maj. RICHARDS:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware that when ladies deposit their half crown and they lose their receipt the Administration refuses to pay them back their money?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#richards">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I have no objection to that; surely that is an ordinary business precaution.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Typhoid.</heading>

<question by="#stals" to="#minister_of_public_health">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Dr. STALS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Health:</p>

<ol><li>(1) How many cases of typhoid fever were there in 1927 and in 1928;</li>

<li>(2) how many deaths from that disease were there during the above-mentioned period;</li>

<li>(3) whether it is a fact that there were more cases of typhoid fever during the last two years than during the previous three years; if so,</li>

<li>(4) to what must that increase be ascribed; and</li>

<li>(5) whether there is any reason to believe that local authorities are lax in the matter of precautionary measures?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_health" to="#stals">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Notifications by medical practitioners of cases of enteric or typhoid fever: Years ended 30th June, 1927, 4,018; 1928, 5,787.</li>

<li>(2) Deaths of Europeans registered as due to enteric or typhoid fever during 1927, 402; during the first half of 1928, 286. Figures for last half of 1928 not yet available. Deaths of non-Europeans not registered except in urban areas, and not tabulated except in the large towns.</li>

<li>(3) No. Notifications of enteric or typhoid fever during the period referred to were as follows: Years ended 30th June, 1924: 3,859; 1925, 4,390; 1926, 4,454.</li>

<li>(4) The main cause of the increase during the year ended 30th June, 1928, was probably drought and the existence of conditions more favourable to fly-breeding; the other factors of prevalence remained for the most part unaltered.</li>

<li>(5) I regret to say that many local authorities are lax in the matter of precautionary measures.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Irrigation Schemes.</heading>

<question by="#stals" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Dr. STALS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether a circular was recently issued proposing, in connection with irrigation schemes, to limit the advances made to applicants;</li>

<li>(2) what are the reasons for this proposed limitation, and who is responsible for the same;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government is aware of the effect of such limitations on occupiers under such irrigation schemes; and</li>

<li>(4) whether the Government proposes to take steps to remove this limitation?</li>

</ol>

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Influenza.</heading>

<question by="#stals" to="#minister_of_public_health">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Dr. STALS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Health:</p>

<ol><li>(1) What is the strength of the harbour health staff at the principal harbours;</li>

<li>(2) whether the Government considers the staff large enough for efficiently carrying out the precautionary measures which are necessary in view of the influenza epidemic in Europe;</li>

<li>(3) how many ships entered Union harbours during the last two months with influenza patients on board; and</li>

<li>(4) whether any of these patients were allowed to land, and, if so, what precautionary measures were taken in connection therewith?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_health" to="#stals">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH:</from>

<ol><li>(1) At each of the principal ports there is a port health officer, port sanitary inspector and assistants for disinfecting and rat-catching.</li>

<li>(2) Yes. The port health staff works in cooperation with the local authority at the port and can be quickly supplemented in case of need.</li>

<li>(3) Four.</li>

<li>(4) Six patients suffering from or convalescent after influenza were landed and isolated until free from infection.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Sheep, Transport of Lean.</heading>

<question by="#du_toit" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. DU TOIT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol><li>(1) What amount has already been paid by farmers for the transport of lean sheep during the recent drought;</li>

<li>(2) what amount is still outstanding; and</li>

<li>(3) whether a further extension will be given to farmers who find it difficult to pay at the present time?</li>

</ol></question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#du_toit">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol><li>(1) The information is not available.</li>

<li>(2) At 31st December, 1928, the total sum outstanding, in respect of all classes of stock, calculated in unredeemed promissory notes, was £86,682.</li>

<li>(3) Twelve months&#x2019; credit is allowed from the date of the return of stock to their original farms. If, at the expiry of this period, the owners are still unable to pay, the circumstances of each case are considered in consultation with the Agricultural Department, and an extension of the period of credit is granted, if warranted.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>*Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister to consider the writing off completely of the outstanding money inasmuch as at that time there was a great calamity.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#van_heerden">

<from>*The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The matter has largely had my serious attention, and I am sorry we cannot do that.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#jagger" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from><span class="col_945-946" refersTo="page_0510"/>Mr. JAGGER:</from>

<p>I would like to ask my hon. friend what security has he got?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>These farmers, of course, own their stock; that is some security. These are the amounts outstanding on December 31st. Large amounts have already been repaid, and we deal with every case on its merits in consultation with the agricultural department, on information supplied by magistrates.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>You said he had security.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I said the farmers owned the stock.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#du_toit" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>*Mr. DU TOIT</from>

<p>asked a question [inaudible.]</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#du_toit">

<from>*The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Those are cases where the people have already brought back their stock. They then got a rebate of half the amount of the account. This is the total amount which is outstanding.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#stuttaford" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. STUTTAFORD:</from>

<p>Is the Minister going to ask his colleague, the Minister of Finance, to charge the Consolidated Revenue Fund with any losses.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Any possible loss is shared between the two administrations, because that is the policy of the Government.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>East Coast Fever</heading>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Col. D. REITZ</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether he is aware that east coast fever is spreading in the Pilgrims Rest district from Kraarsfontein 104 (the site of the original outbreak in June last) both towards Sabie and southwards to the White River;</li>

<li>(2) how many deaths among cattle have there been in the said area during 1928 and 1929:</li>

<li>(3) what action has been taken by the department in connection with the local proposals last year to stamp out the disease by compulsory slaughter;</li>

<li>(4) whether the Minister is aware (a) that the fencing on the Kraarsfontein-Witklip boundary has not yet been started, (b) that local opinion ascribes the spread of the disease to the issue of permits to certain privileged persons on the buffer farms (i) to dip at 14 instead of 7 day intervals and (ii) to use ox transport to and from Malieveld station;</li>

<li>(5) who issued the permits and who are the privileged persons referred to in (4) (b);</li>

<li>(6) what are the names of the buffer farms in the quarantine area on which orders have been issued to dip at (a) 5 day intervals, (b) at 7 day intervals and (c) at 14 day intervals; and</li>

<li>(7) whether the Minister will cause steps to be taken to avoid any discrimination in the issue of permits which theretofore has led to considerable irritation and dissatisfaction amongst local farmers and prevented the efficient application of the east coast fever regulations?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) No, east coast fever did not spread from Kruisfontein since the outbreak was discovered in June last. Recently, however, one further outbreak occurred on Spitskop, near Sabie, but this is not due to any movement from Kruisfontein.</li>

<li>(2) On Kruisfontein 26 in 1928 and 8 in 1929: on Spitskop one in 1929.</li>

<li>(3) No action was taken in the direction indicated because the extent of the infection was not known and the European owners were not agreeable to slaughter.</li>

<li>(4) (a) Yes, the two owners did not comply with the fencing orders and tenders are now being called for the erection of the fencing. (b) No, I am riot aware of any person receiving special privileges either as regards dipping or transport movements.</li>

<li>(5) Falls away.</li>

<li>(6) The names of the buffer farmers to Kruisfontein as originally gazetted are: Hebron, 529: Witklip, 95; Ophir, 6: Leith, 349; Lekkerlag, 442; Schoongelegen, 85; Crocodilespruit, 129; Diepkloof, 130; Ligfontein, 246; Swartfontein, 247 and Bultfontein, 248. Since then portion of farm Hebron adjoining Kruisfontein was fenced, cleared of all cattle and this portion of Hebron now remains as buffer. All buffer-farms are gazetted 5 day dipping, but only 7 day dipping was enforced as is the practice in other parts of the Union. No buffer-farms are allowed 14 day dipping.</li>

<li>(7) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading></heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether, in connection with an outbreak of east coast fever in the district of Richmond, Natal, during last winter, the Minister decided that a magisterial enquiry should be held as to whether certain dipping inspectors had been guilty of neglect of duty; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) what was the finding arrived at by the magistrate as the result of such enquiry?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) Not guilty of neglect of duty.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>In view of the fact that the magistrate found these officials not guilty, why did the Minister order their transfer to another district at their own expense?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>Because I was not quite satisfied that the man had done his duty properly.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>If the magistrate found them not guilty, where was the justification <span class="col_947-948" refersTo="page_0511"/>for punishing them in the way the Minister did?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>If the magistrate had found them guilty. 1 would have dismissed them.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister consider the question of refunding the expense they were put to by the arbitrary action of the department.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Anthrax.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK (for Mr. Nel)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol><li>(1) How many outbreaks of anthrax occurred in the Union (a) between 1st July, 1924. and 31st December, 1924, (b) during 1925, (c) during 1926, (d) during 1927, (e) during 1928; and</li>

<li>(2) whether the preventive inoculation against anthrax has proved satisfactory and effective in practice; if so, whether the Department of Agriculture makes it compulsory and enforces it promptly in all outbreaks?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) (a) 584 outbreaks during period July to December, 1924; (b) 890 during 1925; (c) 1,.051 during 1926: (d) 1,143 during 1927; (e) 931 during 1928.</li>

<li>(2) Yes, Onderstepoort vaccine is very satisfactory and inoculation is compulsory in all diagnosed outbreaks. By far the greater proportion of outbreaks occur in the native territories, but arrangements has been made for annual inoculation in the territories on an extended scale which should greatly reduce the incidence of infection.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>In view of the Minister&#x2019;s statement that anthrax inoculation is made compulsory, will he state whether he did not fail or neglect for fourteen months to compel a leading nationalist in Natal to inoculate after outbreaks of anthrax on two farms which were reported to the department?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>Not to my knowledge.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Did the Minister not fail to compel the owner of the farm&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member must give notice of that question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. GILSON:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware that in certain areas instructions are given to natives to open any beast that dies, take out the spleen and carry it, it may be for miles, to the nearest stock inspector, shedding infection all the way.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>It is impossible to have inspectors everywhere.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. GILSON:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware, that the experts agree, that it is a most dangerous thing to open up a carcase of an animal which has died of anthrax; it floods the surrounding ground with germs.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>How are we to know that the beast died from that disease before we had diagnosed it.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Public Service: G. Mentz and F. Fleck.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Upon what dates were Messrs. G. Mentz and F. Fleck promoted from the post of second grade magistrate to that of public service inspector;</li>

<li>(2) how many appointments of magistrates in the first grade and upwards have become vacant since the gentlemen referred to in (1) were appointed as public service inspectors;</li>

<li>(3) whether Messrs. Mentz and Fleck were considered for any of the vacancies referred to in (2) as soon as it became apparent to the Public Service Commission that they had appointed more inspectors than the work justified;</li>

<li>(4) how many more vacancies such as are mentioned in (2) will take place in 1929 in the ordinary course through the retirement of magistrates reaching pensionable age; and</li>

<li>(5) what real justification is there for the retirement from the post of public service inspector of so efficient and experienced an official as Col. Clayton nine years before his reaching the pensionable age?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol><li>(1) 1st May, 1928, in both cases.</li>

<li>(2) Thirty-four.</li>

<li>(3) Messrs. Mentz and Fleck were not additions to the inspectorate but filled vacancies that had occurred. They were specially selected on account of their judicial attainments and the appointments were justified by the volume of work in sight at the time.</li>

<li>(4) Eight.</li>

<li>(5) The Public Service Commission deems the retirement necessary on the ground of reorganization involving a reduction of the inspection establishment and the officer named being in receipt of a personal salary in excess of the present scale of his post.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWTCK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister lay upon the table of the House the correspondence in regard to the retrenchment of Col. Clayton.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I have not considered the matter, and I am therefore not prepared to make a reply.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister follow the usual course of allowing members to have access to these documents? In view of the appointments of the two gentlemen in Question within twelve months of the retrenchment of Col. Clayton, how can the Minister justify the <span class="col_949-950" refersTo="page_0512"/>retrenchment of that officer when over thirty vacancies have been filled to which Messrs. Mentz and Fleck could have been promoted?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I would remind the hon. member that questions must not be argumentative.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister adopt the course followed by most of his colleagues and allow members to have access to the papers relating to this question?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I cannot say yes or no offhand. Put the question on the paper, and I will reply to it.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: J. F. van Rensburg, Law Adviser.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Acting Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether a young and inexperienced advocate named J. F. van Rensburg has recently been appointed as law adviser in the Department of Justice;</li>

<li>(2) what was the age of this young man on his last birthday;</li>

<li>(3) when did he qualify for the bar, and where was he admitted to practice;</li>

<li>(4) whether he had a sufficiently extensive legal practice after his admission to qualify him for the very important post of law adviser to the Government;</li>

<li>(5) how many officials are there in the Department of Justice holding degrees in law which would fit them as candidates for the office in question;</li>

<li>(6) how many of these officials have been actively engaged in legal work, and for what total period in each case;</li>

<li>(7) whether none of these men by virtue of their training and long experience were regarded as being better equipped for this highly important office than the young man in question;</li>

<li>(8) whether the appointment was made on the initiative of the Public Service Commission or by a ministerial recommendation to the Public Service Commission;</li>

<li>(9) if the latter, by whom was the recommendation made;</li>

<li>(10) if the appointment was made on the initiative of the Public Service Commission, what particular legal or other achievement on the part of Mr. van Rensburg was it that influenced the Commissioners in deciding that he was more suitable for the office than the other highly-trained and experienced officials whom he superseded:</li>

<li>(11) whether this is the same gentleman who was at one time private secretary to the present Minister of Justice:</li>

<li>(12) when was he first appointed to the public service, and at what salary;</li>

<li>(13) how long was he in receipt of this salary prior to his first promotion;</li>

<li>(14) what was his first promotion, and what was the salary attaching to the post to which he was promoted;</li>

<li>(15) what was his occupation prior to his first appointment;</li>

<li>(16) what is his present scale of salary; and</li>

<li>(17) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table all correspondence relative to Mr. van Rensburg&#x2019;s appointment?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<heading>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</heading>

<ol><li>(1) Yes Mr. J. F. van Rensburg was appointed as junior law adviser on the 1st of January last. He holds the M.A. and LL.B degrees and had legal experience in a firm of attorneys in Pretoria and in the Government attorney&#x2019;s office.</li>

<li>(2) Thirty.</li>

<li>(3) In 1925. He has not yet been admitted to practice at the bar because the Supreme Court rules require that before he can be so admitted a period of six months must elapse after he ceased practising as an attorney.</li>

<li>(4) As will be seen from the answer to question No. (1) Mr. van Rensburg has excellent qualifications for the post.</li>

<li>(5) and (6) There are 30 officials now junior to Mr. van Rensburg who ppssess the necessary legal qualifications for such a post. They have had experience in the magisterial or other branches of the department. It was necessary, however, by reason of the transfer of Mr. van den Heever to the Prime Minister&#x2019;s Department to select an incumbent who would be competent to draft bills in Afrikaans, and I do not think that any one of those officials would claim that he is able to do that efficiently.</li>

<li>(7) Yes.</li>

<li>(8) and (9) The department wrote to the Public Service Commission that Mr. van Rensburg was considered to be the best qualified candidate for the post and the Public Service Commission approved of his appointment.</li>

<li>(10) The commission was satisfied that on the ground of Mr. van Rensburg&#x2019;s qualifications as specified above, the proposal to appoint him was entirely proper and in the public interest.</li>

<li>(11) Yes.</li>

<li>(12) He was appointed as private secretary in July, 1924, at a salary of £25 per month, which salary was increased to £390 per annum plus a local allowance of £63 per annum from the 1st of April, 1925.</li>

<li>(13) From the 1st of April till the 31st of July, 1925.</li>

<li>(14) He was appointed as costs and conveyancing clerk in the Government Attorney&#x2019;s office in August, 1925, at a salary of £450 on the scale £450&#x2014;30&#x2014;600.</li>

<li>(15) He was employed in an attorney&#x2019;s office in Pretoria.</li>

<li>(16) £950&#x2014;30&#x2014;1,100.</li>

<li>(17) No, but the hon. member can see it in my office.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>In view of the very wide range of important duties falling to a legal adviser to the Government, does the Minister consider that the transcendant qualification for this appointment was the mere capacity to draft Bills in Afrikaans?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from><span class="col_951-952" refersTo="page_0513"/>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I think it must be evident to other hon. members that Mr. van Rensburg possesses very excellent qualifications in other directions besides being able to do this particular work.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#oost" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>*Mr. OOST:</from>

<p>I should like to know whether it is correct that Dr. Bok, Secretary for Justice, and Mr. Brebner, legal adviser, were both private secretaries of the late Gen. Botha.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#oost">

<from>*The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>That is so, as far as I can remember.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. GILSON:</from>

<p>Can the Minister inform the House what particular qualification influenced the Public Service Commission in giving preference to Mr. van Rensburg over the claims of the following, all M.A.&#x2019;s and LL.B.&#x2019;s&#x2014;Messrs Jarvis, Beardmore, Chisnall, Dickinson, Rawlins, vas Gaas, Voight, J. C. Collins, C. G. Wiggett, A. E. M. Jansen, J. S. Midgley, E. J. Pienaar and E. M. Simons.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#gilson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I must remind the hon. member that questions must not be argumentative.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Can the Minister tell me how it is that the claims of Mr. van Rensburg were considered superior to those of the following officers, all of whom are employed in the Law Department&#x2014;Messrs. B. V. Callanan, M. Isaacs, D. M. Grebler, C. Willman, W. B. Stuart, E. G. liaise, L. F. Dawson, G. S. Frank and C. J. B. Joubert?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I must refer the hon. member to the reply given by me to Nos. 5 and 6 of this question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Why have the claims of Mr. van Rensburg been considered superior to those of the following officers whose degrees are in most cases equal and in some cases superior to those of Mr. van Rensburg, and who have, in addition, years of experience and service in their favour&#x2014;Messrs. M.G. Apthorp, J. S. Allison, M.A., LL.B., H. Rogers, B.A., LL.B., W. E. Clark, T. L. Osman, M.A., LL.B., and W. G. Mears, B.A.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I do not know, sir, whether you are going to allow a repetition of this sort of thing. I give the same reply.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Iris Gordon Case and Sergeant&#x2019;s Dismissal.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Acting Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether the detective sergeant who was in charge of the first case against Iris Gordon at Johannesburg, in September, 1927, was (a) dismissed under section 39 of the police regulations after having been found guilty of a crime or offence or of the police regulations without having (b) merely discharged under section 6 (1) been either charged or found guilty of any offence;</li>

<li>(2) if he was found guilty of a crime or offence, when was he charged, before what court, and of what offence was he found guilty;</li>

<li>(3) whether his discharge was recommended either by the district inspector, C.I.D., Durban, or the deputy commissioner, S.A. Police, Natal Division, under whom he was serving at the time of his discharge, and, if so, upon what grounds;</li>

<li>(4) whether he was performing his duties to the satisfaction of the district inspector, C.I.D., Durban, up to the time of the discharge;</li>

<li>(5) what period of service had he completed at the time of his discharge;</li>

<li>(6) whether he was commended by the commissioner of police in General Orders for excellent work in August, 1923;</li>

<li>(7) whether the commissioner of police sanctioned his being paid two monetary rewards for diligent and efficient work in (a) investigation of compensation claims in 1922, (b) the case of Rex vs. Rudick and Rosin, and, if so, of what amount in each case;</li>

<li>(8) whether he was entrusted with the investigation of the Johannesburg tram coupon swindle, bribery charges against town councillors, Johannesburg, forgery of five-pound notes, cigarette coupon forgery, fraud on mining commissioner, epidemic of arson at Barberton, and other important cases;</li>

<li>(9) by whom was his discharge recommended and upon what grounds;</li>

<li>(10) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table any such recommendation;</li>

<li>(11) whether any confidential report adverse to his character was ever received by the commissioner of police; if so,</li>

<li>(12) whether such report was ever shown to the detective sergeant concerned as required by section 51 (a) and (b) of Police Standing Orders, and, if so, when and where and by whom;</li>

<li>(13) whether he had reached his retiring age, and, if not, how many years he had still to serve before reaching that age;</li>

<li>(14) whether he received any pension or other consideration in respect of his years of service;</li>

<li>(15) what pension would he have earned had he been allowed to serve for two years longer;</li>

<li>(16) whether in connection with the refund of his pension contributions his case was treated as that of one who was retiring to avoid discharge on account of misconduct or as that of honourable retirement under sub-section (2) of section 50 of the Public Service and Pensions Act, 1923; and</li>

<li>(17) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table the detective sergeant&#x2019;s appeal to the Minister of Justice, dated the 12th July,. 1928, and the Minister&#x2019;s reply thereto, together with the sergeant&#x2019;s letter dated the 1st September, 1928, to the <span class="col_953-954" refersTo="page_0514"/>commissioner of police and the reply thereto dated the 7th September, 1928?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) The ex-sergeant concerned, namely, one Atkinson, was discharged under section 6 (1) of the police regulations.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

<li>(3) No.</li>

<li>(4) Generally, yes. He had, however, at the time of his discharge only served in the Natal command for a period of seven months.</li>

<li>(5) Fourteen years and 8 days.</li>

<li>(6) Yes.</li>

<li>(7) I have only been able to trace approval for a grant of £50 by the Witwatersrand Disturbances Committee.</li>

<li>(8) Yes.</li>

<li>(9) The discharge was recommended by both the deputy commissioner commanding the South African police on the Witwatersrand and by the senior officer in charge of the Criminal Investigation Department of the Witwatersrand.</li>

</ol>

<p>He was discharged, however, because of the facts which emerged from the proceedings in connection with the trial of one Beard, at that time a sub-inspector in the C.I.D. on the Witwatersrand.</p>

<p>The facts of this case are briefly as follows:</p>

<p>Beard was tried in accordance with the regulations at Johannesburg by a board consisting of the chief magistrate of Pretoria, a public service inspector and an inspector of the South African police in connection with the disappearance of a certain corpus delicti in a criminal case, which case could not be proceeded with owing to its absence&#x2014;the very thing of which the hon. member for Illovo complained so bitterly in his speech during the &#x201C;No confidence&#x201D; debate.</p>

<p>Beard was found guilty and was dismissed from the force by order of the Governor-General-in-Council.</p>

<p>Owing to the facts which were disclosed in that case and because of his conduct both before and during that case, the then commissioner of police, Col. Sir Theo. Truter, deemed it advisable in the interests of the force to terminate the service of Detective Sergeant Atkinson and did so by notice in writing dated the 29th May, 1928.</p>

<ol><li>(10) No, but the hon. member can see them in my office if he wishes to.</li>

<li>(11) Other than those mentioned under paragraph 9: No.</li>

<li>(12) No.</li>

<li>(13) He had not reached retiring age. He was 50 years and 11 months old when he was discharged and under Act No. 27 of 1923 the retiring age is 55.</li>

<li>(14) He received £152 12s. 4d. in terms of section 50 (2) of Act No. 227 of 1923 plus £5 18s. 8d., being the surrender value of his contribution to the Union Widows&#x2019; Pension Fund.</li>

<li>(15) The calculation of the pension would have been a matter for the Pensions Department and in view of the retirement under section 50 (2) of Act No. 27 of 1923 the amount has not been assessed.</li>

<li>(16) The case was dealt with in terms of subsection (2) of section 50 of Act No. 27 of 1923.</li>

<li>(17) No, but I am prepared to give the hon. member copies of these if he wants them.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is it not a fact that the letter of September 7th, 1928, was signed by I. P. de Villiers, on behalf of the commissioner of police?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>My information is that Sergeant Atkinson was dismissed under authority of Col. Truter, who was then certainly commissioner of police.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Would the Minister be surprised if I showed him the letter bearing Mr. de Villiers&#x2019; signature? In regard to the proceedings against Beard, is it not a fact that the court of inquiry&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>It seems to me that the hon. member is asking for information in a manner that he ought to use in debate.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>My effort was to elucidate the reply of the Minister, which, as it stands, makes an unwarrantable reflection both on Beard and Atkinson.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>The hon. member can see all the documents in my office.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>But the public cannot.</p>

</question>

<question by="#anderson" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Was the man denied the right of appeal by the Minister?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#anderson">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>The hon. member should give notice, as I do not know the facts. My colleague was responsible.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#pretorius" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>*Mr. J. S. F. PRETORIUS:</from>

<p>I want to ask whether the Minister considers it fair that the names of officials&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#pretorius">

<from>*Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>Order.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#duncan" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. DUNCAN:</from>

<p>Did I understand the Minister to say that this particular sergeant was dismissed without any charge being made against him?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#duncan">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>My information is that during the trial of Beard, Sergeant Atkinson was called upon to supply certain information, but he refused, and also his conduct subsequently did not give satisfaction, and proceedings were taken under section (1) which does not require the laying of a formal charge.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>Is this the only case in the force in which a man has been dismissed without trial?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#blackwell">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>The hon. member must see that I must have notice of that question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister not say whether Inspector Beard was not charged on three different counts, and was found guilty <span class="col_955-956" refersTo="page_0515"/>of a technical offence in not having obtained the magistrate&#x2019;s order for the return of a certain mattress? In regard to the other more serious charge&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I am afraid the hon. member is giving information and not seeking it. The hon. member will have full opportunity of discussing the matter later on.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Do I understand, sir, from the Minister&#x2019;s reply, that a member of the police force can be put out of the force after 14 years&#x2019; service without&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member is putting a question argumentatively.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>I desire to elucidate one point. In view of the fact that an appeal lies to the Minister of Justice in all cases of discharge, why was no investigation held, when Atkinson appealed to the Minister against his arbitrary discharge?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I think I have already replied to a similar question. I do not know the facts under which an appeal was made to Mr. Roos. If the hon. member wants the facts, he can put a question on the paper.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister give us any specific charge that was made against Atkinson to which he was called upon to reply?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I must refer the hon. member to the reply I have given; he will find his question fully answered.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Public Service: L. P. van Zyl Ham.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior whether he will define what were the qualifications which were regarded as essential to the due performance of the duties attaching to the particular post held by Mr. L. P. van Zyl Ham beyond those of the numerous public servants superseded by him in each instance of his successive promotions,</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I would remind the hon. member that the duty of selecting and recommending officers of the public service for promotion to higher graded posts is not a function of any individual Minister, or for that matter, of the Government, but is one which Parliament has vested in a Statutory Body&#x2014;the Public Service Commission&#x2014;(vide Section 3 (2) (a) of the Public Service and Pensions Act, 1923).</p>

<p>I would add that as Parliament has seen fit to vest the commission with full discretionary powers in the matter of promotions in the public service it must be assumed that that body, in exercising those powers, satisfies itself in all cases as to the qualifications and fitness of individual officers before recommending their promotion to particular posts.</p>

<p>My reply to the question previously asked by the hon. member (No. XII) in this connection&#x2014;and to which I refer him&#x2014;contains the reasons which influenced the commission in recommending the promotion of the officer in question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister lay on the Table correspondence referring to the promotion of the officer in question?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>No, it is not in my possession.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister allow us access to those papers?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I supposed that every man of intelligence knew that if the papers are not in my possession I cannot give anybody access to them.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>I pass over the display of bad manners, but I want to know the real reason for the appointment of Mr. van Zyl Ham. The Minister has not told us yet. May I ask him another question? Can he enlighten this House as to the reason why Mr. Nixon was passed over when Mr. van Zyl Ham was appointed?</p>

</question>

<question by="#naudé" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Mr. A. S. NAUDÉ:</from>

<p>In connection with all these questions from the Opposition, may I ask whether it is in order constantly to be digging in these old cemeteries?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Steel Cartel.</heading>

<question by="#strachan" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. STRACHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether, owing to the existence of a cartel among the steel manufacturers of Germany, Britain and America, the Union Railway Administration cannot obtain rails and fishplates by public tender without paying the same contract price to the successful tenderers whether they are German, British or American firms; and, if this is not so, what are the actual circumstances?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#strachan">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The position is that the rail market is controlled by the European Railmakers Association which consists of British and continental manufacturers. It is understood that American suppliers work in conjunction with the association although they are not members of it. The same prices are not quoted by manufacturers in the countries mentioned. The association allocates orders in accordance with the quota allotted to each country. When tenders are invited, prices depend upon the position in regard to the quota. For example, if German manufacturers at the date tenders are invited have reached their allotment, they are required by the association to quote high prices, in order that manufacturers in other countries, who have quoted lower prices and have not secured orders up to their allotment, may be protected.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Sandflats Deviation.</heading>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XIX.</num>

<from>Mr. STRUBEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether, in view of the fact that the Administration has under consideration <span class="col_957-958" refersTo="page_0516"/>the deviation of the main line of railway northward from Port Elizabeth in order to avoid the &#x201C;Bellevue Bank&#x201D; north of Sandflats station, and in view of the estimated high cost of the deviation now under consideration by the Administration, he will cause a survey to be made and estimated costs taken out of the alternative route for the deviation in question, namely, from Sandflats via Grahamstown to rejoin the main line at a point in the neighbourhood of Sheldon, Commadagga or Middleton; and</li>

<li>(2) whether the Minister will stay action in regard to the proposed deviation pending a survey of the alternative deviation suggested?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#struben">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Alternative routes for the Port Elizabeth-Cradock main line are reported upon in Cape blue book A. 5-1874, and from the comparisons on pages 15 and 16 it will be seen that the distance via Commadagga and Cookhouse was estimated at 176 or 179 miles (constructed mileage 181), whereas the distance via Grahamstown was estimated at 231 miles. The hon. member will appreciate that, as the main line was constructed by the Cape Government via the shorter route, with a branch line to Grahamstown, the Administration cannot now consider the reconstruction of such a lengthy section of line.</li>

<li>(2) The proposal the Administration has under consideration is for a purely local deviation, with a view to reducing the gradients at the Bellevue Bank, and I am prepared to consider at any time representations in regard to the location of the deviation, provided that the scope of the scheme is not enlarged.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. STRUBEN:</from>

<p>Am I right in understanding that the deviation is not likely to be made for some time to come, and in view of that would the Minister have a rough survey made of the alternative route and have the matter considered?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>With regard to the proposed deviation, it depends upon the availability of the necessary funds, and I cannot say when it will be possible to undertake it. I cannot undertake to have a survey made of the route suggested by the hon. member.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Namaqualand Farmers in Barberton.</heading>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XX.</num>

<from>Col. D. REITZ</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol><li>(1) How many families are being transferred from Namaqualand to Barberton; and</li>

<li>(2) whether, before doing so, he will consider the possibility of putting these families to work on irrigable areas along the Orange River in their own environment instead of sending them hundreds of miles from their homes?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>(1) and (2). Although such a suggestion has been made, no definite proposal to move any families from Namaqualand to Barberton has been formulated, as the whole question of the best means of dealing with distressed families in Namaqualand and elsewhere is receiving the consideration of the Government.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Publicity, Subsidy for.</heading>

<question by="#coulter" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XXI.</num>

<from>Mr. COULTER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether the attention of the Government has been drawn to the resolution passed at the South African Publicity Conference held at Kimberley on the 22nd and 23rd November, 1928, having reference to Government aid by way of subsidy on local efforts in the development of outstanding natural features of the Union; and</li>

<li>(2) whether the Government is prepared to accept the principle referred to in this resolution?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#coulter">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) The Government is not prepared to increase the present provision on the Estimates for publicity purposes.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Convict Labour.</heading>

<question by="#snow" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<num>XXII.</num>

<from>Mr. SNOW</from>

<p>asked the Acting Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol><li>(1) Whether he is aware that, although strong protests have been made from time to time by organized labour in the Cape Peninsula, convicts are still being hired out to perform work that ordinarily could and would be carried out by unemployed free labourers; and</li>

<li>(2) whether ten convicts were recently employed digging out foundations for buildings to be erected on a site at Willow Road, Observatory, and a gang of convicts with armed guard has recently beer! employed at the sports ground known as Kelvin Grove, Newlands?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#snow">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) It is the practice in accordance with the policy laid down by the legislature in section 93 (1) of Act No. 13 of 1911 to hire out to public bodies or private persons, prisoners who are under sentence of hard labour and who cannot be employed in the prison or upon public works. The Minister has, however, instructed that they are only to lie hired out to perform unskilled work and those instructions are being adhered to.</li>

<li>(2) Yes, ten convicts were recently hired out to an employer at Willow Road, Observatory. They were there employed on clearing and levelling ground, throwing sand from the river and while there they were incidentally and only for a short period also employed in digging trenches for foundations. It is not the practice <span class="col_959-960" refersTo="page_0517"/>to hire out prisoners for the specific purpose of digging trenches for foundations. A gang of convicts was employed at Kelvin Grove, weeding the sports&#x2019; grounds.</li></ol>

</answer>

<question by="#snow" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SNOW:</from>

<p>I want to ask the Minister if it would not be possible to arrange that applications for all classes of labour be made through the Labour Department.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#snow">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>The hon. member will appreciate it is the duty of the Prisons Department to try and find work for the convicts they have on hand, and they are carrying out the policy laid down by the legislature.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#struben" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. STRUBEN:</from>

<p>In view of the manifest objection of his Labour colleagues to the useful employment of convict labour by private people does the Minister not think it time that convict labour was used on the construction of public roads?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#struben">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I think that in proximity to large towns where there are large numbers of convicts, they are used on roads where they can be used to advantage, but it would not be possible to extend that right up the country.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#snow" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SNOW:</from>

<p>Do I understand that even where you have large numbers of unskilled unemployed free labourers, registered at the various Labour Bureaus preference is given to convicts?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#snow">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>My hon. friend knows we have a special department to deal with the question of unemployment, and it is always out to find work for these people, but on the other hand we have to employ convicts we have in our gaols. The hon. member would not suggest that we keep them in ildeness in the prisons.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#snow" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SNOW:</from>

<p>Do I understand that an unskilled labourer may have to commit a crime in order to secure employment?</p>

</question>

<question by="#kentridge" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. KENTRIDGE:</from>

<p>I should like to ask the Minister whether he has received representations from his colleague, the Minister of Defence, in connection with the matter.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Diamonds: Illicit Buying.</heading>

<question by="#gilson" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<num>XXIII.</num>

<from>Mr. GILSON</from>

<p>asked the Acting Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol><li>(1) How many cases of (a) illicit diamond buying and (b) illicit gold buying were before the courts in the years 1927 and 1928;</li>

<li>(2) how many convictions were obtained, and what sentences were imposed;</li>

<li>(3) how many cases of stock theft were before the courts during the same period; and</li>

<li>(4) how many convictions were obtained, and what sentences were imposed?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#acting_minister_of_justice" to="#gilson">

<from>The ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I will endeavour to obtain this information and a return will be laid on the Table of the House in due course.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>War Pensions Act.</heading>

<question by="#madeley" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XXIV.</num>

<from>Mr. MADELEY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether he has had his attention drawn to a petition from the British Empire Service League and Die Bond van Oud-Stryders requesting improvements in the War Pensions Act, and, if so, whether the Government will favourably consider such request?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#madeley">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The matter is under consideration.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Police Houses.</heading>

<question by="#de_villiers" to="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<num>XXV.</num>

<from>Mr. W. B. DE VILLIERS</from>

<p>asked the Acting Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol><li>(1) What steps have been taken, in the event of the police requiring horses, to buy such horses direct from farmers;</li>

<li>(2) how many horses were bought direct from farmers in 1928 and how many, in the same year, from speculators;</li>

<li>(3) how many horses belonging to farmers in the different parts of Griqualand West were bought from speculators in 1928;</li>

<li>(4) what steps are taken to inform farmers whenever the police intend to buy horses;</li>

<li>(5) who are employed to buy horses for the police; and</li>

<li>(6) by whom are these horses approved?</li>

</ol>

<p>[The reply to this question is standing over.]</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Plant Diseases.</heading>

<question by="#krige" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXVI.</num>

<from>Mr. KRIGE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What arrangements have been made with the University of Stellenbosch in regard to research work into plant diseases and the administration of the land in combating such diseases in the western and south western districts of the Cape Province;</li>

<li>(2) whether it is a fact that the University of Stellenbosch is now solely responsible for such research and administration, and to what extent the Agricultural Department has divested itself of responsibility in the matter; and</li>

<li>(3) whether he will lay upon the Table all correspondence between the department and the University of Stellenbosch in reference to these matters?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#krige">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol><li>(1) In terms of Act No. 45 of 1926 the Stellenbosch-Elsenburg College of Agriculture of the University of Stellenbosch and not the university itself is charged with experimental and investigational work in agriculture apart from such research work as may be regarded as ordinarily falling within the scope of a university faculty of agriculture, and steps have been <span class="col_961-962" refersTo="page_0518"/>taken to give effect to the terms of the Act accordingly. I would refer the hon. member to the regulations published under Government Notice No. 523 of 1928. I am not clear as to what the hon. &#x2019;member means by &#x201C;administration of the land.&#x201D;</li>

<li>(2) No. All research work save that of an academic or universal nature which is subject only to financial control by the Minister is under the control of the department in terms of Section 2 of the Act. There has been no question of divesting the department of responsibility.</li>

</ol></answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Defective Engines.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXVII.</num>

<from>Mr. SWART</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether he will lay upon the Table (a) the reports of the Special Committee which was appointed to investigate and determine responsibility for the ordering and acceptance of certain locomotives with mechanical defects, “U” class engines, and (b) the correspondence which has taken place in connection therewith?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#swart">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I regret I am unable to comply with the hon. member&#x2019;s request. Any hon. member who wishes to do so may, however, peruse the reports of the special committee and subsequent correspondence in my office.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister say when we may expect the full statement which he promised in respect of the question I asked dealing with the engines manufactured by Messrs. Maffei and Messrs. Henschel &amp; Sohn? No reference has been made to the latter firm whatever.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>When the railway finances are considered by the House.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Rebates.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF FINANCE replied to Question VI, by Dr. Stals, standing over for 5th February.</p>

<question by="#stals" to="#minister_of_finance">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<p>What were the respective amounts for the years 1919 to 1928, inclusive (a) of the rebate granted by the Union of South Africa to England on imported English manufactures and (b) of the rebate granted to the Union of South Africa by the British Government?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#stals">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<p>(a) Amount of preference granted by the Union to Great Britain for the years: 1919, £586.168; 1920. £1,314,356; 1921, £751,218; 1922. £695,052; 1923, £766,421; 1924, £812,100; 1925, £643,184; 1926, £392,519; 1927. £420,957; 1928 (eleven months), £366,000. (b) Amount of preference granted by Great Britain to the Union for the years: 1919, £33,200 (for period 1st September, 1919, to 31st December, 1919); 1920, £127,000; 1921, £227,600; 1922, £227,100; 1923, £197,100; 1924, £75,200 (due to the big drop in the export of sugar); 1925, £127,400; 1926, £284,800; 1927, £274,500; 1928, £318,600.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the information be available to the public?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Can the Minister tell us whether the figures now laid on the Table take full account of the total preference granted on wines and sugar?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The figures are furnished in reply to the questions which were asked, and the hon. member will find that they are fully answered.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Preference and Great Britain.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF FINANCE replied to Question X, by Mr. Blackwell, standing over from 5th February.</p>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_finance">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol><li>(1) What was the value of the preference given and received between Great Britain and South Africa from 1920 to date; and</li>

<li>(2) what would have been the value of the preference granted to Great Britain in 1926, 1927 and 1928 if the old 3 per cent, all-round rate had remained in force?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#blackwell">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol><li>(1) Amount of preference granted by the Union to Great Britain for the years: 1920, £1,314,356; 1921, £751,218; 1922, £695,052; 1923, £766,421; 1924, £812,100; 1925, £643,184; 1926, £392,519; 1927, £420,957; 1928 (eleven months), £366,000.</li>

<li>(2) Amount of preference granted by Great Britain to the Union for the years: 1920, £127,000; 1921, £227,600; 1922, £227,100; 1923, £197,100; 1924, £75,200 (due to big drop in export of sugar); 1925, £127,400; 1926, £284,800; 1927, £274,500; 1928, £318,600.</li>

<li>(2) The approximate amounts of preference that would nave been granted to Great Britain under the tariff in force prior to 1925 are as follows: 1926, £816.000; 1927, £801,000; 1928 (eleven months), £752,000.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#miners&#x2019;_phthisis_act,_1925">

<heading>MINERS&#x2019; PHTHISIS ACT, 1925.</heading>

<speech by="#fordham">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FORDHAM</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion and pursuant to notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a select committee be appointed to enquire into the administration and working of the Miners&#x2019; Phthisis Act, 1925, the committee to have power to take evidence and call for papers.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#strachan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRACHAN</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>My hon. friend, the hon. member for Springs (Mr. Allen) withdrew his motion. Have we a right to assume that the scope of the committee will be sufficiently wide to consider the amendment of my hon. friend?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from><span class="col_963-964" refersTo="page_0519"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, it is very comprehensive.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_j._p._harmzen_and_others">

<heading>PETITION J. P. HARMZEN AND OTHERS.</heading>

<speech by="#conroy">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CONROY</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion, and pursuant to notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition from J. P. Harmzen and 240 others, inhabitants of Regina and surrounding district, praying for the construction of a bridge across the Vaal River at Regina Station, or for other relief, presented to this House on the 12th February, 1929, be referred to the Government for consideration.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#brink">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BRINK</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#dismissal_of_w._t._mctaggart">

<heading>DISMISSAL OF W. T. McTAGGART.</heading>

<speech by="#rider">

<from>The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">RIDER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a select committee be appointed to enquire into all the circumstances that led to the dismissal of William Thomson McTaggart from his position of first class special engine driver under the Railways and Harbours Administration after 27 years of unbroken service, the committee to have power to take evidence and call for papers.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Has the hon. member seen the Minister? It is usual in these cases to obtain the consent of the Minister beforehand.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rider">

<from>The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">RIDER</person>:</from>

<p>I ask him.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I am afraid I cannot.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_j._r._hull">

<heading>PETITION J. R. HULL.</heading>

<speech by="#bawden">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BAWDEN</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition from J. R. Hull, of Johannesburg, who was deprived of certain property as the result of a magisterial order, praying for in enquiry into the circumstances of his case and for relief, presented to this House on the 12th February, 1929, be referred to the Government for enquiry and report.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Has the hon. member seen the Minister?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bawden">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BAWDEN</person>:</from>

<p>I understand that the Minister was seen by the hon. member for Ermelo (Col.-Cdt. Collins).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#marwick">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MARWICK</person>:</from>

<p>As the hon. member is absent, it is only right for me to say that he saw the Secretary for Justice, who demurred to the motion being taken as an unopposed motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member must see the Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#ba_wren">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BA WREN</person>:</from>

<p>Under the circumstances, I will see the Minister myself.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#attorney-general_and_prosecutions">

<heading>ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND PROSECUTIONS.</heading>

<speech by="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MARWICK</person>:</from>

<p>May I, with the indulgence of the House, ask that Order No. 14, standing in my name, be dealt with as an unopposed motion, viz.&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That a select committee be appointed to enquire into and report upon&#x2014;</block>

<ol><li>(a) criminal cases in which public prosecutions have been abandoned before or since the coming into operation of Act No. 39 of 1926, where the decision of the Attorney-General not to prosecute has, on legal grounds, given rise to dissatisfaction on the part of the complainant or of the public;</li>

<li>(b) the influence which has been responsible for the refusal of the Minister of Justice and his deputies to prosecute in such cases; and</li>

<li>(c) the effect upon the morale and efficiency of public prosecutors and police of the non-prosecution of accused persons and of the transfer or discharge of members of the police who have been connected with such cases;</li></ol>

<p>the committee to have power to take evidence and call for papers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Has the hon. member obtained the Minister&#x2019;s consent?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MARWICK</person>:</from>

<p>I have seen the Minister, but to be quite frank, I must say he has not given his consent.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#acting_minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I object.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#german_treaty">

<heading>GERMAN TREATY.</heading>

<p>First Order read: Adjourned debate on motion on treaty between Germany and the Union of South Africa, to be resumed.</p>

<p>[Debate, adjourned at last sitting, resumed.]</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>When I addressed this hon. House on a previous occasion in connection with this motion, I mentioned, inter alia, that the spirit with which this matter had been approached by our friends opposite was typical of their stereotyped attitude with regard to other important questions in our country. Well, if you want confirmation of that you need only refer to the speech made by the hon. member for Weenen (Maj. Richards) last night. He had hardly opened his mouth when out came the truth and the confirmation. He referred to what this Government has done in regard to status, in regard to the flag, in regard to language, and in regard to appointments in the public service. There you have confirmation of what I said. That is the attitude, and it is, therefore, easy to explain the attitude of hon. members on the other side. I am not surprised at it. The leader of the Opposition said I was on the defence. What presumption! On <span class="col_965-966" refersTo="page_0520"/>the defence! When the right to enter into this treaty is common cause, and when the desirability of entering into similar treaties is also common cause, and when the right hon. gentleman himself had so admirably paved the way for these treaties by his speeches in 1923. I understood from the remark made by the hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls)&#x2014;I have to judge by an interjection of his&#x2014;that the hon. member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts) had changed his attitude in regard to what he said in 1923. Did I understand the interjection of the hon. member correctly?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>No, he was perfectly consistent.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member said he had changed his attitude. The hon. member was on his legs soon after he made that interjection, but he did not think it worth while to explain why his leader had changed bis position. If his position is the same, then all the better for my purpose, and all the more incomprehensible is the present attitude of the hon. member&#x2019;s leader. I had very little to say on the real point in the treaty, because my friend, the Minister of Finance, said that the whole point at issue lies in a nutshell, and I am not accustomed to dwell upon issues that lie in a nutshell. What I did refer to was the enormous smoke-screen thrown up to befog the issue in the form of ah apparently impregnable fortress. But, of course, it soon vanished. After all, it was only smoke. Another smoke-screen was thrown up. Their press has thrown out a smoke-screen, and every subsequent speaker has attempted to throw out a smoke-screen. But they will all vanish, as the first did. The right hon. leader of the Opposition dealt with the matter as though the onus was on the Government to defend itself. What presumption! If they had only acted on the lines laid down in 1923 by him, and the necessity existed then to find fresh markets overseas for our products, surely the necessity is all the greater five years later. No, sir, I have shown that the onus is strictly upon the Opposition to prove what they allege, and they have not made an approach towards discharging that onus. Where is the empire ring we are supposed to have broken? I deny there is any empire ring that I have broken. I say the Government is not going to allow hon. members opposite to impose the ring fence they are seeking to impose. This is our first treaty; we are dealing with a clean slate, and the right hon. gentleman opposite wants ab initio, ab limine, to put up a ring fence. But we refuse to follow the advice of the leader of the Opposition, who is the exploited mouth-piece of the Unionists. He talks of fairness when he and his supporters and their press are making propaganda right and left. I say that those who bring charges of the nature I am about to cite should discharge the onus of proving those charges. There is no onus upon the Government. I will give you a few samples of those charges, and that is why I used the expression that this was a campaign of calumny, racialism and misrepresentation; and, I add, a malicious press.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rider">

<from>The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">RIDER</person>:</from>

<p>Good old racialism once more; the only argument.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I will give you some samples.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>On a point of order, doesn&#x2019;t the Minister come under Rule 90 for undue repetition?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>The first sample is that we deliberately chose Germany. I am going to deal with this specially. I had hardly opened my mouth when the question was put by a prominent member opposite. Is the onus on us? The next sample was that this was a deliberate slap in the face for Great Britain. Another sample of the onus they are seeking to impose upon us was that this was due either to my incompetence or to the Government being an accomplice of Germany. Another sample was the charge of ingratitude. Another was that this was a calculated blow, that it was dictation from Germany: that it was malevolent anti-British feeling and a nullification of the solemn assurances of my friend, the Minister of Finance, a gross breach of faith, a desire to hurt and exacerbate the feelings of the British. There you have it. They have the temerity&#x2014;I don&#x2019;t want to us a stronger word&#x2014;to say that the onus lies on us to show that we are not guilty of these charges. We have had distortion of the treaty&#x2019;s import, especially of Article 8, a constant removal of a portion of the picture, and then we have been asked to look at all the rest. Then we have it from the hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige) that we are making Germany a part of the British empire, and cutting out England and putting Germany in its place in the British empire. Can absurdity go further? I want to ask the hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls), and the hon. member for Illovo (Mr. Marwick), whose questions are so few in this hon. House, whether they said this about me&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">We have Mr. Beyers, the guest of the Canadian Government on an empire delegation of British engineers, telling his hosts to their disgust that they thought too much about Great Britain and not enough about Canada.</block>

<p>Is that true?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>That is precisely what I was told by people who heard the hon. gentleman speak in Canada.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>Did the hon. member say that publicly or privately?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>I was told it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I deny it absolutely in toto, and I challenge the hon. member to adduce an iota of proof of it. That is the way the minds of our British fellow citizens are being poisoned.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from><span class="col_967-968" refersTo="page_0521"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>Will the hon. the Minister tell us what he did say?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>It is like telling a man: &#x201C;You are a thief,&#x201D; and when you cannot prove it, then you say: &#x201C;What are you then?&#x201D; And these are the people who talk about the onus of proof, and of our being on the defence. This is the second statement&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Mr. Beyers told another empire gathering of chambers of commerce at Cape Town that he was decidedly against empire trade.</block>

<p>Did the hon. member say that to the Natalians publicly or privately, either the hon. member for Zululand, or my good friend the hon. member for Illovo?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I was there and heard you.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>And the hon. member for Illovo had the hardihood to say, because I had put a question at this conference as to whether international economic co-operation was not the better thing, that that was poisonous stuff. I say that a statement like that of the hon. member for Zululand on mere hearsay is a good example of the poisoning of the minds of our English-speaking citizens.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#marwick">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MARWICK</person>:</from>

<p>I took your own words down verbatim.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I give an absolute denial to what is imputed to me by the hon. member for Zululand, and I challenge him to produce an iota of proof.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>If I have used words against the Minister which I am not justified in using, I apologize, but I only used words which I believed to be true.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>Then we have the hon. member for Pretoria (West) (Mr. Hay) bringing in the old, hoary charge of cutting the painter, and secession and he said that I have never in my life said a kindly word about England and the empire. First it is untrue, and, in the second place, it is another instance of trying to poison the minds of our English-speaking fellow citizens. Then we had the old charge that we are attempting to placate by this treaty our people who are secessionists and republicans.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deane">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEANE</person>:</from>

<p>You bragged about it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>It is said that I failed to explain the treaty, or that our side failed to explain the treaty. Again, my answer is that the whole issue is in a nutshell. It is an entire falsehood to say that the communication to the press by the Government was misleading or intended to mislead. I will prove that in a moment. Now the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger), who, after all, has a very keen business and commercial instinct, at once recognized that the whole issue in the treaty revolved around Article 8. If we had worded Article 8 as it is, then it logically follows that we should leave out the word &#x201C;foreign&#x201D; from the treaty. The hon. member rather naively said that if we had only in Article 8, instead of making the reservation or exclusion partial, made it general and absolute, there would be nothing to be said further. There you have it, and under the circumstances, hon. gentlemen say that the treaty remains unexplained. Then one of the great points they sought to make was that we had not indicated the advantages of the treaty. I pointed out that, in the first place, it was a friendly gesture. It was in accordance with what was contemplated. It is in accordance with what the right hon. gentleman contemplated in his speeches, and, in the second place, I pointed out that our trade with Germany had increased materially. Our trade with the outside world over a long period of years has increased materially, and our trade with Great Britain&#x2014;I further pointed out&#x2014;had fallen off appreciably. Surely these facts are very important in making treaties of this kind desirable. Under this treaty we become entitled to the benefits of the conventional tariff quite apart from an specific concessions which may accrue by virtue of Article 7 of the protocol. The hon. member (Mr. Jagger) says we have got it by virtue of the Anglo-German treaty of 1924. Quite right, but that treaty is subject to termination at three months&#x2019; notice. The hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge) is under the misapprehension that if Germany gives England three months&#x2019; notice thereby Great Britain would become entitled to terminate the treaty with Germany if Germany wished to eliminate us. The treaty is for five years certain, and I think is subject to twelve months&#x2019; notice. What then did the right hon. gentleman (Gen. Smuts) expect in 1923 with his contemplated treaties with foreign countries other than those very advantages I am getting now? If we should come to a tariff agreement with Germany there are these things that we can bargain about: Lemons, under the usual tariff, would pay 12 Reich marks; under treaty tariff they would be free. The corresponding figures for other articles being: Oranges, 20 marks and 2 marks 50; other citrus fruits, 12 marks and 2 marks; peaches, 50 marks and 5 marks; grapes, 30 marks and 15 marks, etc. These are seasonal advantages for which we could bargain.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deane">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEANE</person>:</from>

<p>What about hominy chop?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>That is free. We come to fresh fruits sent by post: General tariff, 30 marks, convention tariff, 5.50; fruit otherwise imported in receptacles: General tariff, 45 marks, convention tariff, 7 marks.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>England lets our fruit in free.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>These are advantages we can get&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from><span class="col_969-970" refersTo="page_0522"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>You can get them under the Anglo-German treaty.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>Why should we not have a treaty direct? Hon. members opposite say we are treating England as a foreign country. That is absolutely untrue. You are shutting your eyes deliberately to one part of the picture; you cannot deal with these things in water-tight compartments. You must look at the special reservation and Article A as a whole. The hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger) made a big fuss about the treaty not providing for the future, but we have made a special reservation dealing with the future in Article 8. We provide that the present position shall be maintained for the future. Are you demanding more preference to-day?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>Then where is your grievance? You want us to bind ourselves to England and the rest of the commonwealth when no necessity has arisen, and our policy covers the whole field.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>It does not.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>We deal with the matter according to the evolution of the thing. Every indication shows that there is not the least likelihood&#x2014;in fact, you can say it is certain&#x2014;that nothing of the sort will arise within the next two-and-a-half or three years. Another great point of the hon. member&#x2019;s was that we have abandoned empire co-operation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>As far as the future is concerned.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>Has the hon. member any proof of that?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Of course.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>Where did we ever say, or our predecessors say, that we will co-operate and never deal with the outside world? Is what we are doing to-day in conflict with empire co-operation? Of course not. What did your leader mean in 1923? I would like the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) to explain why his leader, in 1923, protested against exclusive preferences for England or the commonwealth. Was the right hon. gentleman in favour of empire co-operation in 1923? The greater part of the speech to which the right hon. member treated us the other night was not founded on fact. Was the right hon. member in favour of empire co-operation in 1923? Then why, in the same breath, did he object to exclusive preferences to the British commonwealth? It is pretty hopeless the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger) referring me to the leader of the Opposition, because, as usual, he will run away from a straight question. He has always done it, and he always will do it. It is part of his nature. It was said the other day that Lord Melchett had said: &#x201C;If we only had courage to put a ring fence round the British empire,&#x201D; and Sir Benjamin Morgan said: &#x201C;We want free trade for the British empire and a tariff for foreign countries.&#x201D; These very statements show there is no ring fence of the kind members over there want, and are trying to impose upon this Government. Much has been said about the Empire Marketing Board. Let me show what the &#x201C;Statist,&#x201D; a responsible and reputable paper in England said about it. I have never opposed the board, but I have pointed out there are certain defects in it. I recognized certain merits of the board publicly at the banquet in the Queen&#x2019;s Hotel.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>You sneered at it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I did not. The &#x201C;Statist,&#x201D; on the 22nd July, 1928, said this&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">On the whole, less publicity and more research would be a wise policy for the board.</block>

<p>That was my criticism. As regards the million pounds, we all know the explanation of that. Owing to political occurrences and exigencies in England, the preference that was contemplated could not be granted, and this was given as compensation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>Why have you not included it in your quid pro quo?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I refer you to what Mr. Amery said in the House of Commons the night before last. Another statement made by the hon. member for Cape Town (Central)&#x2014;and it is very significant&#x2014;was that the imports by Britain in 1927 of raisins, currants, wines and that sort of thing amounted to about £49,000,000, and only a quarter came from the empire. Well, now I put the question that was put by the hon. member for Pretoria West (Mr. Hay)&#x2014; why? The English purchaser purchases in what he considers the best market and in spite of preference we have this position, and, of course, it shows that the English purchaser is actuated, not by sentiment, but by hard business principles, as the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) is in purchasing his goods from Germany. That also answers his criticism when he says Britain will get a preference which will go automatically to Germany. The whole political situation shows she will not have the opportunity of offering further preferences in the immediate and very likely the long future.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_members">

<from><person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBERS</person>:</from>

<p>Nonsense.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member, while I have a great regard for him, is sometimes extremely dogmatic, and he does not realize that even his great commercial experience may be fallible sometimes. He told me I was ignorant about these things, and said practically I did not know what I was talking about, and the amusing <span class="col_971-972" refersTo="page_0523"/>part was that immediately after he made a reckless statement that Rhodesia was being injured, but when pressed why and how, he had not the information to answer.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I said nothing of the kind.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>Then we have this absurd statement by the leader of the Opposition that this treaty is both gratuitous and unnecessary. Again I ask, why did he say these things in 1923? This opposition emanates mainly from this coterie of purchasers and importers of German goods and &#x201C;make-snuggers.&#x201D; They have got the position in the hollow of their hands. If they want to be so loyal towards England or any other member of the British empire and to do business on sentimental lines, let them stop importing German goods or the products of any other country with whom we may conclude a similar treaty. It was an amusing contrast, the speech of the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) compared with the utterances of 1923, and the utterances of the leader of the Opposition on this occasion compared with his utterances in 1923. Anybody can detect the palpable difference. Then we had the fallacy that England is our best customer, and, therefore, we should not conclude this treaty. What an absurdity! Was not England our best customer in 1923, when the leader of the Opposition told the Imperial Conference that the matter was a very serious one? Do not you see the absurdity of the argument? If a man takes 51 per cent, of your products, then you must keep on selling the rest to him because he has got 51 per cent., more than half! These sort of futile puerile arguments are hobby-horses. The hon. member for Cape Town (Hanover Street) (Mr. Alexander) dealt with the treaty and, of course, he also, in his argument, wants what they want&#x2014; the absolute ring fence. To-day we are giving these preferences, which are very substantia], but what members opposite want is an absolute ring fence, and this Government is not going to do that. I want to deal with the statement of the hon. member for Hanover Street that a ring fence round the empire is impossible. All the more reason that we should reject the criticisms of the Opposition, because they are attempting the impossible. Oh yes, you wanted a ring fence, you wanted the whole of the British empire excluded from Article 8, and that is the absolute ring fence, and not one of them had the courage to suggest what sort of treaty we should substitute for this. The only suggestion came from the hon. member for Cape Town (Central), and that was the absolute ring fence. I come to the observations of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (South) (Sir William Macintosh), who said that I unjustly quoted and cited the right hon. gentleman&#x2019;s speech of 1923; so far from doing so unjustly and unfairly, the citation was &#x201C;hear, heaved &#x201D; by hon. gentlemen opposite, and the right hon. leader himself assented to it; I defy him to deny these features of his speeches. The first was that he objected to exclusive preference, that is, preference being confined to the British empire; he asserted that the whole position was one-sided, and it was necessary for the Union and a very important and urgent matter that the Union should have foreign markets; that we should keep our hands clear and stimulate our trade with other foreign markets. Can he deny these simple facts; if he cannot, where have I quoted him unfairly? Do you deny in substance these were his points?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#william_macintosh">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILLIAM MACINTOSH</person>:</from>

<p>Give his whole speech.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>That is too absurd for words. Constantly hon. members are quoting from &#x201C;Hansard.&#x201D; and is it the suggestion that I should read the speech from A to Z? It is an absurd suggestion. I now come to this objection with regard to the U.S.A.&#x2014;I come to the point as stated by my hon. friend opposite. That was explained by the Minister of Finance. Take the Cape delegates&#x2019; conference of 1903; the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (South) took exception to what I stated. The hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) cited from &#x201C;Hansard&#x201D; what was the feeling in the old Cape House&#x2014;the feeling of Mr. Merriman, Mr. Burton and these people was in substance what I said&#x2014;what I said was correct. The hon. member said we were further abusing the goodwill of England. That is untrue; time will show. We had a member who quoted the &#x201C;Manchester Guardian,&#x201D; which shows that this objection comes only from a section of the people. The hon. member admitted that these treaties are desirable; I challenged him to say what he would substitute for this, and as usual he ran away from that question. A treaty such as hon. members desire is practically an insult to such countries as France, Italy and the Argentine. They have to give us full most-favoured-nation treatment and we are asked to give them most-favoured-foreign nation treatment after cutting out the whole of the British empire. Is that a quid pro quo? We have shown our goodwill and sympathy and carried out the Act of 1925 both in the letter and spirit, and we are continuing that policy as is shown in Article 8 of the treaty. Then we come to the hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford) and his Rhodesian tobacco five times that of the Union. Does he not know that it is due entirely to the fact that Rhodesia produces Virginia tobacco? Then I come to deal more particularly with the points raised by the right hon. leader of the Opposition, who does not profess to take notice of the things he said. He abused the occasion at the Rosebank Show the other day and made propaganda in connection with this treaty. His speeches are, of course, very specious and plausible, but when you examine them they have little foundation in fact. I admit it is the specious and plausible things of his speeches that make them worth listening to, and why they are so eagerly listened to by his followers. He had this cheap argument that with reference to what I said about the covenant of the League of Nations that it never contemplated by its provisions in Article 23 the abolition of preference; whoever said so? He has a marvellous <span class="col_973-974" refersTo="page_0524"/>capacity for making the worse appear the better reason and a wonderful capacity for closing his eyes to facts which are palpable and clear. He protested, and it was too amusing to see how he was followed by almost every other speaker on that side of the House, that it was not because they were against Germany, but because they were anxious about the interests of the Union. He said it was not only Article 8, but other important articles in the treaty. He did not take the trouble to point them out, except Article 3, and it was the same fallacy the hon. member for Newcastle (Mr. Nel) fell into&#x2014;they are constantly confusing the word &#x201C;foreign&#x201D; with something else. The logical reservation of Article 8 leads to the omission of the word &#x201C;foreign.&#x201D; When we have stated the problem under Article 8 of the treaty, we have done so throughout. The omission of the word &#x201C;foreign&#x201D; is only another aspect of the very same problem. The right hon. leader of the Opposition also said that I was out to break the circle of the British empire whatever that may mean. W&#x2019;e are now entering into a treaty for the first time, and there is no circle to break. Where is that circle? Where have we bound ourselves? Look at the Act of 1925, and even there is not a circle, and if there ever was one before, that it was broken by the Act of 1925, because you will find in terms of that Act there was no automatic accrual of benefits, granted to foreign countries by the Union, to any of the dominions, but only an automatic accrual there to Great Britain herself. I do not admit there is any circle, and, therefore, I resent very deeply the attempt to impose this circle. Another statement made by the right hon. gentleman was that we were hanging the sword of Damocles over the producers of the Union. What an absurdity! I remember having read that Mr. Woodrow Wilson stated that on certain occasions &#x201C;Smuts spoke much academic nonsense.&#x201D;. I can only say that he spoke much actual nonsense. I am going to show that what the right hon. gentleman stated to this House was incorrect. He told the House that I had stated that Mr. Sturrock, of Johannesburg, had said that he was glad the trade barriers were being removed, and that Mr. Sturrock made that statement before the treaty had been published. The treaty appeared in the &#x201C;Government Gazette&#x201D; of Friday. 16th November, 1928, and that &#x201C;Gazette&#x201D; reaches Johannesburg on Friday afternoons. The statement I have referred to was made by Mr. Sturrock in an interview given to the &#x201C;Star&#x201D; on the 17th of November, so you will see that Mr. Sturrock had the full text of the treaty before him. The statement was also made that Mr. Sturrock had been misled by the official communique issued by the Government, which had appeared some weeks before. That is absolutely incorrect. This is the gentleman who talks about being fair. I will give the House Mr. Starrock&#x2019;s own words. This is what he said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The treaty is strictly on the lines of the treaty between Great Britain and, Germany, and provides for the reciprocal fair treatment of the nationals, commerce and industry of the two countries. For the purposes of this treaty it is agreed that no concession will be given to any other country which is not automatically granted to Germany, but there is a specific exclusion, inasmuch as the German Reich shall not have the right to claim any minimum rates or rebates granted to any part of the British empire by South Africa, that is to say, that, whilst no foreign country will be treated on a more favourable basis than Germany, it is competent for the Union to maintain its special arrangements with Great Britain, the British dominions or colonies. An important part of the treaty is that the contracting parties shall now proceed to conclude an agreement on mutual customs tariff concessions. This proposed customs tariff will be watched with great interest, since in the past Germany has levied very heavy duties on imported articles of South African production. It will be very satisfactory if, as a result of this new tariff, these restrictions of trade in Germany and South Africa are removed. In South Africa we are anxious to develop all the trade we can with Germany, and anything that makes for the removal of trade barriers is all to the good. Under the existing customs arrangement with Great Britain, no tariff concession can be given to Germany which does not automatically apply to Great Britain. There is, therefore, no fear of British trade suffering as a result of this treaty, but there is a distinct likelihood that our export trade with Germany may be considerably improved.</block>

<p>Hon. members will see from this that Mr. Sturrock understood the treaty fully and correctly. Then there was also Mr. Victor Kent. This is what he says as president of the Johannesburg Chamber of Commerce&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">From a first glance at the terms of the treaty, it would appear that it did not affect the position as between the various parts of the British empire. There is nothing in it to which we can take exception, but, on the other hand, there is nothing in it to be unduly jubilant about.</block>

<p>I say that Mr. Sturrock at that time had the treaty before him, and what he said was absolutely correct in the light of the actual terms of the treaty. And so with all the other speakers. For instance, let me read what Mr. Henderson said on a first reading of the terms of the treaty&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">He saw nothing in it of extraordinary importance beyond the limitation of imperial preference.</block>

<p>So it will be seen that this point was clearly before the minds of these gentlemen at that time. Why does the right hon. gentleman opposite now say that Mr. Sturrock did not appreciate the position? Mr. Sturrock has never repudiated this statement. I will refer to his further statement presently. The right hon. gentleman added that Mr. Sturrock was misled by the communique, issued to the press. I am going to read that <span class="col_975-976" refersTo="page_0525"/>communique and I will show that there again the right hon. gentleman is altogether off the rails. This communique was communicated to the press, and appeared in &#x201C;Die Burger&#x201D; and the &#x201C;Cape Times&#x201D; of the 4th September, 1928. Here is the communique which the right hon. gentleman stigmatizes as incorrect&#x2014;a very serious statement to make. There is always the old imputation of bad faith, and then he has the cheek to say that we are on the defence. Now for the communique&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The following is the text of an official communique by the Department of External Affairs on the treaty of commerce and navigation entered into between the Union of South Africa and Germany: &#x201C;On the 1st of September, 1928, a treaty of commerce and navigation on a broad basis was signed between the Union of South Africa and Germany by the plenipotentiaries of both Governments. The treaty which follows in its main lines the Anglo-German treaty of 1924, is based on the principle of unconditional most-favoured-nation treatment. The preferential tariffs which the Union at present grants to Great Britain continue to be reserved for Great Britain and the British dominions and possessions. The existing preference given to Canada and New Zealand is also safeguarded. An agreement regarding reciprocal preferential customs duties is reserved for later consideration. The treaty also contains provisions dealing with immigration, settlement, the legal position of the nationals of the contracting parties, companies and associations, the admissions of consuls, etc.&#x201D;</block>

<p>That statement was in its spirit and in its letter a correct statement as regards all matters to which it refers, and I say that the statement of a leading Cape Town newspaper that this was intended to mislead, is mendacious, and that the statement of the right hon. gentleman that Mr. Sturrock was misled, and that he had not had the treaty before him is also incorrect. And then he talks about my wriggling. His whole record has been that of an arch-wriggler. He wriggled out of the four versions of his speech at Ermelo, and he had to get a specially-edited version. He gave a very lame explanation of his statement in his Zionist Hall speech: &#x201C;If you sup with the devil you must have a long spoon.&#x201D; As was pointed out yesterday, he mentioned a number of countries, and then he said: &#x201C;But as to Germany.&#x201D; Then I come to a question raised by the hon. member for Gardens (Mr. Coulter) as regards standardization. There is nothing in the point at all. The position is safeguarded in the treaty. I do not often refer with commendation to one of the leading newspapers of Cape Town, but I refer him to the &#x201C;Cape Argus&#x201D; of the 12th February, 1929, which deals with the supposed snag in a leading article, and which gives a very fair explanation of the whole thing. Wriggling and hairsplitting has been characteristic of this whole debate on the other side, purposely shutting their eyes to all the important points in connection with this treaty, and especially with regard to Article 8. Then I come to this amusing statement of the hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford), that England takes seven times the amount of products that Germany takes from us, and that, therefore, we stand to lose seven times. What lovely logic.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I did not say it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>You gave the figures, and said we, therefore, lose seven times as much. It is only excelled by his very stupid statement that we have made provision in the treaty for German prison-made clothes. Now I come to this first charge of theirs&#x2014;why was Germany chosen? Look at the &#x201C;Cape Argus&#x201D; of the 7th December, 1928; &#x201C;Cheap goods of an enemy state,&#x201D; referred to as such by Sir Arthur Duckham; two speeches by the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) reported in the Cape Town papers during February, and both deliberate and malicious. The &#x201C;Star&#x201D; of Johannesburg of the 1st January, &#x201C;The new German danger&#x201D;; it is true it is not in connection with the treaty; it was in connection with iron and steel, but very closely akin. The &#x201C;Sunday Times&#x201D; and the &#x201C;Rand Daily Mail&#x201D; had to protest against the racialistic tendency of the criticisms on the German treaty&#x2014;two of your own papers. Then we had the pathetically farcical and the farcically pathetic spectacle of member after member following in the lead of their leader, systematically in an organised way, in a palpably artificial way, and protesting their new love for Germany. &#x201C;Thou dost protest too much.&#x201D; We had the spectacle of the hon. member for East London (North) (Brig.-Gen. Byron) claiming kinship with the Teutonic race, when only a few years ago they were stigmatized and rejected and ejected and interned and burnt out as &#x201C;Huns.&#x201D; The right hon. gentleman himself, by playing the role of lawyer instead of statesman, imposed upon them through his advice in the shape of reparations burdens heavy to be borne. I refer moreover to the &#x201C;Natal Advertiser&#x201D; and its leading article of the 19th December and the 11th January. We have the hon. member for Albany (Mr. Struben), who, as a rule, is very fair, even in suite of what he had just previously stated, asking the question why this particular country should be chosen. What did he go on to suggest? Something sinister is always being suggested, always the idea of malafides runs throughout their speeches. He suggested that when I had, unfortunately, to visit Europe in 1926 in connection with the accident to my eye, I had, in some way got into touch with Germany, and prepared the ground for this treaty. That is the only fair construction I can place on the remarks of the hon. gentleman. I can state that, although I went to Leipzig for a day or two in connection with medical advice, I never directly or indirectly during my whole visit to Europe, discussed the question of a treaty with anybody. The hon. member suggested that we chose Germany because she was a big power, and she had to bell the cat. I will remind him of a proverb of his little country of origin and <span class="col_977-978" refersTo="page_0526"/>also my country of origin, of which I am very proud. &#x201C;Hy heeft de klok horen luiden, maar weet niet waar de klepel hangt.&#x201D; [He heard the bell ring, but couldn&#x2019;t find the hammer.] We had the same sort of vague imputations, and they always run away from these imputations. They never materialize into something concrete. We had the same vague imputation from the hon. member for Rondebosch (Mr. Close) that Mr. Gundelfinger was inspired by the Government or the Board of Trade and Industries. There is not a shadow of truth in that. When I contrast this short-sighted petty jingoism of the hon. member for Rondebosch with the far-sighted, broad-minded statesmanship of a man like the late Sir Henry Campbell Bannerman, I see the illimitable difference between them. Our critics are willing to wound, but afraid to strike, and we always have from them these vague insinuations of bad faith. Even the hon. member opposite, who is always extremely courteous, and to whom I always listen with admiration, said the other night that he did not trust the Government. How then can hon. members opposite take it amiss when I refer to calumnies and to what their leading mouth-piece in the Cape Province said&#x2014;that I was either incompetent and did not appreciate the true import of the treaty, or was an accomplice of Germany. I do not object to the first statement, but why these imputations of bad faith, these positive accusations? Another mendacious statement, which is on a par with the others, appeared the day before yesterday in a leading article in the chief Cape Town daily paper&#x2014;the statement that I had said that this treaty was purely an accident. If these falsehoods can be uttered under the nose of everybody who is aware of the truth, and when the thing is hardly cold, what can we expect when a little time has elapsed? I never said anything of the kind, but that the fact that Germany was the first to get a treaty was a pure accident. Then we heard about voluntary preference, but the whole bottom was knocked out of that case by the frank admission of the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) that he and his friends here bought in the cheapest market. The hon. member for South Peninsula (Sir Drummond Chaplin) said that we were following a policy of isolation. We used to be reproached for not looking over the boundaries of our country to the outside world, but now that we are doing that, the reproach is that we should not do what they desired us to do. Another statement the leader of the Opposition made was that the Prime Minister of Australia said that this was a very serious matter. What the Prime Minister of Australia really said was that it was not for him to comment on the action of a sister dominion. It was the correspondent of the &#x201C;Cape Times&#x201D; who said that this was regarded as a serious question, another terminological inexactitude of the leader of the Opposition, and I have exposed a good many of them this afternoon. Mr. Amery said on February 27th that the South African preference, which was greater than the preference Great Britain accorded South Africa, would continue. I believe the hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) said the figures I gave were not correct, but they were obtained from the British Board of Trade.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>They have been questioned too.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I challenge hon. members to give a straight answer to this question. Sir Benjamin Morgan said that he desired free trade within the empire and tariffs against foreign countries. Do hon. members opposite subscribe to that? Where is there a single paper that ever supports us, not that I set any value on the support of any of these papers. The Government has to fix its policy, and its policy on this point has been fixed for years. The &#x201C;Rand Daily Mail,&#x201D; in its issue of November 28th of last year, says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The argument that this country and other dominions, because they have made treaties with foreign countries, are treading divergent ways from Great Britain, is not sound&#x2026;. The existing preference to Great Britain is specifically safeguarded in the treaty. &#x2026; If it is true that British manufacturers are losing their hold on South Africa, it is largely because they do not take the same trouble to establish personal contact with their customers as do manufacturers in other countries.</block>

<p>With regard to the Persian treaty, I can only repeat that what I read to the House is absolutely correct.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Can we see the treaty?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>No, because it is attached to a document that is confidential.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>But surely the treaty can be detached from that document.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I want to say this, that it has been brought to my notice that his Majesty&#x2019;s British Government, although the words &#x201C;most-favoured-nation treatment&#x201D; occur and not the words &#x201C;most-favoured-foreign-nation treatment,&#x201D; contend it is competent to read the word &#x201C;foreign&#x201D; into it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Why did you not put it in?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I read the clause word for word in the agreement now in force and the word &#x201C;foreign&#x201D; does not occur. I have all along admitted that, although Great Britain in her treaties has not imposed the absolute ring fence that hon. members want, she has referred to other countries as &#x201C;most-favoured-foreign-nation.&#x201D; I stated the other day, and I repeat, that if you analyse the Anglo-German treaty you will find out of 29 articles there are 17 that do not make any distinction between Germany as a foreign country, and England, or any other member of the British commonwealth, as a domestic country. I admit England has made treaties of this <span class="col_979-980" refersTo="page_0527"/>sort, and I told the House that in 1897 she deliberately denounced treaties with Belgium and Germany in order to make such provision. The hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Dncan) has raised the argument: &#x201C;What is the value of a treaty that has to be terminated?&#x201D; I have just given the instance where England terminated treaties in order to be able to insert the word &#x201C;foreign&#x201D; in future treaties and it gave rise to no difficulties. Yet you ask us, if we terminated the treaty afterwards, won&#x2019;t we have difficulties? The idea of a treaty of hon. gentlemen over there is this&#x2014;that we must limit another country to foreign-nation treatment, but we take from that country the full benefits of most-favoured-nation treatment. That is hardly a quid pro quo. It was said by the right hon. the member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts) that we were afraid to lay on the Table communications between us and the other members of the commonwealth with regard to this treaty. Nothing of the kind. Hon. members must understand that in the nature of the case, these communications are always confidential, and that it is not a light thing, it is not a matter, of course, to ask any other Government within the empire: &#x201C;May we publish this confidential correspondence?&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#richards">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">RICHARDS</person>:</from>

<p>It is done every day.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>You expose them to a false position, and you expose yourselves to a false position.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#richards">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">RICHARDS</person>:</from>

<p>That is very likely.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I will tell hon. gentlemen what the position is, but I am not going to lay the correspondence on the Table, because that would be improper.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#robinson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROBINSON</person></from>

<p>made a remark [inaudible].</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>Well, then if you don&#x2019;t want to know it, I will refrain from giving it. I come to the great concern and apprehension of the hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) about men-of-war and Article 3 of the treaty. Let me tell him that men-of-war are entirely outside this treaty, and it is an accepted axiom of international law that, unless in a treaty of this sort specific provision is made for the entry of men-of-war, that entry is entirely at the discretion of the country concerned, so we can say to-morrow to Germany &#x201C;We are not going to allow your men-of-war within a certain distance of pur harbours.&#x201D; That is the simple answer to that, I am very much indebted to the hon. member for Von Brandis (Mr. Nathan), and I am glad to see the South African party has its jester.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_members">

<from><person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBERS</person>:</from>

<p>Shame.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I apologize; I withdraw that. I am glad to see they have in their ranks an hon. gentleman who assumes the House in the way he did last night. He was kind enough to defend me and to say it had been suggested I was a rebel. I suppose I am considered a rebel in connection with this treaty, but there you have the admission out of the mouths of babes and sucklings; there you have the admission of the mentality of hon. gentlemen opposite when they regard this whole treaty as a rebellion against England. Merely to look for other markets is considered an act of rebellion towards the Mother Country. I come to the question of Australia. It was strenuously denied that Australia refused to take our mealies because of black labour. I would like hon. gentlemen to refer to the &#x201C;Hansard&#x201D; of Australia that was cited by the hon. member for Pretoria (South) (Dr. van Broekhuizen). Very uncomplimentary things were said about South Africa. The fact is that Australia terminated the whole arrangement with us. The fact is further that the fluctuations in Australia in the rainfall are so great that the importation of mealies fluctuates with them. Let me give some figures. In 1913, Australia imported from us 10,000,000 lbs. of mealies; in 1915, 78,000 lbs.; in 1916, 41,000 lbs.; in 1918, only 5,000 lbs.; in 1919, 32,000 lbs.; in 1921, 307,000 lbs.; and in 1922, 51,000,000 lbs.; in 1923 it was 159,000,000 lbs.; in 1924, it was 4,000,000 lbs.; in 1925, 23,000,000 lbs.; and in 1926, 117,000,000 lbs.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What about 1928?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I have not 1928. They terminated the arrangement. In any case, they definitely adopted it as their policy that they would not support stuff grown by black labour. What about your sugar grown in Natal? Now I come to sugar, and I can only say, as to the observation of Sir Benjamin Morgan, he is personally interested in sugar refineries in England. That is all I have to say. I come to New Zealand, which was also raised by the hon. member. She produces what we produce&#x2014; cheese, butter, oats, mealies, and so on&#x2014;and it is very difficult, therefore, to trade under these circumstances. Then I want to repeat, because I think it ought to be repeated, because hon. members did not follow it so clearly, that as to the investment of trust moneys in colonial securities, the position is simply, firstly, that there is not sufficient scope in the United Kingdom for the investment of those moneys at a sufficiently high rate of interest; secondly, our securities are perfectly satisfactory from every point of view; and, thirdly, in any case, it is the duty of those who invest trust moneys to invest them safely. Therefore, I do not see the particular virtue of this argument, that it is of particular benefit to us to have the investment of this money. I do not think I need deal with the hon. member for Griqualand (Mr. Gilson), except to say that all he could discover was a rolling stone that could gather moss. I want to deal with an aspect of the debate which I regard as a very undesirable one&#x2014;the constant threat that, although the British Government as such had been correct in its conduct and would not retaliate, the <span class="col_981-982" refersTo="page_0528"/>British public would retaliate. I regard that entirely as a bogey, and I can only say that we can deal with other countries and the people of other countries on a basis of reasonableness, and I am not going to presume for a moment that the British public are going to act unreasonably. We are acting reasonably and in accordance with the principles of 1923, which, I understand, are still applicable, and we expect the people of England to do the same thing. The Government, and I personally, have not the least doubt that they will do the same. I repeat what I said previously, that as to these threats and references to retaliation, if they indicate, anything, it is that the Government has, taken a wise step in inaugurating a series of treaties with other countries, because if we are to be exposed to these threats and the realization of these threats and of retaliation that are being held out to us, the sooner we ensure our position in the world generally, the better. I do not attach any value to these threats, so far as England and her people are concerned. And then hon. members have the effrontry to say they are dealing with this treaty as good South Africans. The whole thing has been an election move, and has been engineered. We are quite prepared to abide by the verdict of; the people on this treaty, and on many of the other important measures with which this Government has dealt, and the solution of many great problems we have found in this country.</p>

<p>Motion put and the House divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;62.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Barlow, A. G.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Hertzog, J. B. M.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Malan. C. W.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naudé, A. S.</p>

<p>Naudé, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pienaar, B. J.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer. I. van W.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Tellers: Mullineux, J.; Vermoten, O. S.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;51.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arrott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Bawden, W.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Chaplin. F. D. P.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>Deane, W A.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Geldenlrays, L.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Lennox, F, J.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Miller, A. M.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Nel; O. R.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Oppenheimer, E.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Robinson, C. P,</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Tellers: De Jager, A. L.; Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly agreed to.</p>

<p>Upon the Prime Minister proposing to move the adjournment of the House,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>&#x2020;Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>Before the motion moved by the Prime Minister for the adjournment is put, I should like to ask whether it is the intention of the Government to follow the ordinary rule and transmit this resolution as a message to the Senate for its concurrence. It seems to me to be a matter of extraordinary importance, and it has been the usual course in this House in similar cases to send a message to the Senate and ask for its concurrence.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>This is a point on which the Government decided at once that we had merely to do with an administrative act, but the Government considered it of so much importance that they thought it advisable to lay the matter before the House of Assembly to make it possible for representatives of the people to signify disapproval of the treaty. I am not going to accept the view that where we have to do with a matter of an administrative nature the Government must necessarily bring it also before the Senate.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>&#x2020;Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to ask whether it is not competent for my motion to be taken on the motion for the adjournment of the House. I believe it is the practice in the British House of Commons, where the rules are silent, that a motion of this kind can be moved on a matter of importance upon a motion for the adjournment, and we follow the House of Commons&#x2019; practice where our rules are silent. This certainly seems to me to be a matter of extreme importance, and I think the House should have an opportunity of discussing it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from><span class="col_983-984" refersTo="page_0529"/>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The right hon. member is raising a very important point of procedure, and one which is very difficult for me to decide. I should like to hear what hon. members may have to say on the point. Otherwise I must take time to consider it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>As a result of the vote that has just been taken, should not a message follow automatically from this House, asking the Senate for its concurrence, and if no such message is sent, could we not ask why and debate the whole question from that point of view?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>That is another point. I think that in the discussion on the other treaty it was admitted that it does not necessarily follow that the confirmation of a treaty must be submitted to the Senate.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>It was a matter of common cause that there was no necessity to submit the Kellogg Pact to either House. But this is quite a different matter, and the two questions do not stand on the same footing. You will appreciate that the machinery for the application of this treaty is actually provided for in the statute and in the treaty itself. Therefore no precedent can arise from the Kellogg treaty with regard to the ruling you have to give. It is an entirely different point whether automatically, on the adoption by this House of the motion that it has adopted, there should not at once be moved in this House a resolution transmitting the treaty to the Senate, and, in the absence of such resolution, may we not actually on the spot, before any motion for the adjournment is moved, draw attention to the absence of the motion, and debate the whole question?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>That is a different point to that, raised by the right hon. member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>I think the only point of order raised was the one raised by the right hon. gentleman. When a motion has been carried, there is nothing before the House until the next thing is moved, and it usually has to be with notice. The point has been raised by the right hon. member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts) as to whether the procedure in this House has or has not conformed to the procedure of the House of Commons; that is to say, that on a motion of adjournment the opportunity is taken to raise matters of importance. I will relate my own experience, which you will find in the record, that very frequently in the first Parliament of the Union, knowing that procedure is adopted in the House of Commons, my friends and myself tried to have that procedure followed, but it was ruled that a motion for adjournment could not be used as a pretext for raising a discussion. It was also ruled that in any matter of that sort, your opportunity was either by way of motion on private members&#x2019; day, or when a money Bill came before the House. Otherwise, if it was a matter of urgency, your only other course was to move under the rules the adjournment of the House to discuss a matter of urgent public importance. I believe what I have said is a correct statement of what the ruling is that has been given by your pre decessors.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>As far as I remember, the practice established has been that on the last day of a session of Parliament, it being the last day, any point can be raised, on the principle that the House does not meet again. I would submit that there is a great analogy between the position at the end of the session and the position now. We are now taking final leave of this treaty, as far as the House is concerned. I would like to know from you upon what other occasion we can specifically raise this question unless we raise it now. I submit that, owing to the importance of this question, you will allow me the same lattitude that is allowed at the end of a session. The hon. the Minister speaks about a money Bill. You cannot specifically raise such an important issue upon a money Bill, where you discuss various items of importance. I submit that this is the opportune time, before we take leave of this meeting, to discuss this very important point. My hon. friend has raised the question of the Kellogg treaty. The Kellogg treaty is on a different basis, I frankly admit, to this treaty. This treaty is a trade treaty, and there is provision made in the treaty itself that this treaty has to be approved by a competent legislative authority. The question is, what is the competent legislative authority. In the terms of the Act of Union, we only know one legislative authority, and that is the Parliament of the country, consisting of the King, the Senate and the House of Assembly. That is a most important constitutional point. I hope you will allow discussion, even if you are not quite clear in your mind on the point as to whether it should take place now.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member is now going into the merits of the case, and he is not discussing merely whether it shall be permitted or not. I object to his proceeding further.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Will the hon. member confine himself to a point of order.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>I expected that the Deputy-Speaker of this House would try to assist us in this matter. I was only pleading with you that if you have any doubt in your mind, you should give members the benefit of the doubt, and allow them to discuss this very important question.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige) expressed the expectation that I would assist the House in a matter like this. I will gladly try to do so. I want in the first place to point out to the House that we have not yet reached the end of the session. If that were so, then Mr. Speaker could give permission for a motion on the order paper, which in all probability would not be reached, to be <span class="col_985-986" refersTo="page_0530"/>debated on some relevant question or other before the House, as for instance the Estimates. Otherwise not. If the hon. member for Standerton wants to debate the question he has raised he must give notice of motion for the purpose, and if there is no time for it, obtain the desired information by means of questions after notice. To discuss other questions on a motion for the adjournment of the House is unprecedented. Otherwise an hon. member could rise and object to the adjournment of the House, because he has grievances about the fish industry or any other matter.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>&#x2020;Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>I understand naturally the difficulty of the point which has been raised by me, and as you do not wish to give a ruling at once on a point which is, of course, of great importance to the practice of this House, I do not want to argue the question on its merits whether this treaty should be sent to the Senate or not. I am simply now addressing myself to the question of procedure, and I put the question to you whether this important point cannot be discussed on the motion of the adjournment of the House, and you say you have difficulty in giving a ruling now, a difficulty which I appreciate. I appeal to the practice of the House of Commons, which we follow as a supplementary practice where our rules are silent; according to the House of Commons practice, undoubtedly a discussion like this would be allowed on a motion for the adjournment of the House. Perhaps another way can be found out of the difficulty&#x2014;if we put a motion on the paper, will the Prime Minister give us time to discuss it? We are in this difficulty&#x2014;the Government has taken all the time of the House and it is impossible for any member on this side to raise this matter, which is of the greatest constitutional importance. We must know what the relations of the two Houses are. It is right to the country and the House that an opportunity should be given for a debate on the question, and debate should not be smothered. We must clear up the position and know where we stand and what the functions of the two Houses are, and we must decide the matter after proper argument and consideration. I am prepared to put the motion on the Paper if the Prime Minister will give us time for its discussion. It will not be an unlimited debate and should be finished in an afternoon or evening. Certainly the matter should not be left in its present state of uncertainty.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reyburn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REYBURN</person>:</from>

<p>There are a lot of other more important matters&#x2014;matters material to the people&#x2014;which I would like to bring up on a motion for the adjournment if such a thing is permissible. There are a number of motions on the Paper which we shall have no chance to discuss this session, which are far more important as affecting the life of the people than the point which has just been raised.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I may point out to the hon. member for Durban (Umbilo) (Mr. Reyburn) that I have no difficulty whatever in saying that a general discussion on any other matter except the procedure of Parliament would be out of order. The difficulty I have is whether this, as a question of procedure, can be discussed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot do as the right hon. gentleman suggests. I can quite understand that a motion would be put down asking that this House shall decide either all treaties, or that certain classes of treaties shall be approved of by both Houses of Parliament. But to come here on such an occasion to ask that we shall in a hurry decide whether this treaty has to go to the Senate will only leave us where we are to-day. It is leading to nothing. Either the position is correct, that it is a matter of Government administration for which the Government is responsible and which the Government can choose to lay before one or both Houses, or it is something which has to have the approval of both Houses to be valid. If the latter, my right hon. friend need not be afraid. If he wants the other decided, he should come with a proper motion, so that it can be thrashed out calmly and on its merits, but to do it on an occasion of this kind would lead nowhere, and it would give an opportunity for any member to bring forward matters on a motion for the adjournment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>It is quite clear that the practice of the Union House has been to confine discussion on the motion for the adjournment of the House to reasons for opposing the motion or to questions touching procedure or the conduct of the business of the House, and to disallow questions which can be raised upon financial measures or after notice. I do not feel that this is a matter which can be regarded as a question touching procedure or the conduct of the business of the House, and therefore do not think that the matter can be discussed on the motion for the adjournment. As to whether it can be raised in other ways, I am not prepared to give any opinion! at the present time.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1929-03-01T17:45:00">5.45 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

