---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol72 - FRIDAY 27 JANUARY 1978'
layout: debate
year: 1978
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading><span class="col_1-2" refersTo="page_0018"/>FRIDAY, 27 JANUARY 1978</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Members assembled in the Assembly Chamber at 8h30.</p>

<p>The Secretary read the following Proclamation of the State President, dated 8 December 1977, summoning Parliament to meet today:</p>

<p>No. 368, 1977.]</p>

<block name="quote">Under and by virtue of the power and authority vested in me by section 25 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961, I hereby declare that the First Session of the Sixth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa will commence at Cape Town on the Twenty-seventh day of January 1978 for the dispatch of business.</block>

<block name="quote">Given under my Hand and the Seal of the Republic of South Africa at Pretoria, on this Eighth day of December, One Thousand Nine hundred and Seventy-seven.</block>

<p>N. DIEDERICHS,</p>

<p>State President.</p>

<p>By order of the State President-in-Council,</p>

<p>H. S. J. SCHOEMAN.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING</heading>

<p>The Secretary announced:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) That the following letters had been received from the Secretary to the Prime Minister:

<ol><li>(a) Letter stating that the State President would open Parliament at 11h00 today in the Assembly Chamber;</li>

<li>(b) Letter notifying the names of persons declared duly elected as members <span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0019"/>of the House of Assembly at the general election;</li></ol></li>

<li>(2) that the Honourable Mr. Justice F. L. H. Rumpff, Chief Justice of the Republic of South Africa, had been authorized by a Commission from the State President to administer the oath or affirmation to members of the House of Assembly.</li></ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oath">

<heading>OATH</heading>

<p>The Serjeant-at-Arms announced the Honourable Mr. Justice F. L. H. Rumpff, who was received by members standing and, having taken his seat at the Table, administered the oath to the members present and thereupon withdrew.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#election_of_speaker">

<heading>ELECTION OF SPEAKER</heading>

<p>The Secretary intimated that the House would proceed to the election of a Speaker.</p>

<speech by="#kotz&#x00E9;">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">S. F. KOTZ&#x00C9;</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Victor, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Hon. Jan Jurie Loots do take the Chair of this House as Speaker.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#bamford">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">B. R. BAMFORD</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Victor, it is my honour to second the motion. I do not think it is at all necessary to refer to the details of Mr. Loots&#x2019;s public life because this is a matter of public record. I merely want to say that he will have the respect of this side of the House, not only by virtue of the occupancy of the Chair, but also because of his personality and his reputation. From this side of the House I cannot offer him tranquility at all times, but I can wish him everything else that is good in the years to come.</p>

<p>There being no other proposal, the Secretary called upon the Hon. J. J. Loots to indicate whether he accepted the nomination.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#loots">

<from>*The Hon. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. LOOTS</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Victor, I am pleased to submit to the choice of the House of Assembly.</p>

<p>Thereupon the Secretary declared the Hon. J. J. Loots duly elected.</p>

<p>Mr. S. F. Kotz&#x00E1; and Mr. B. R. Bamford conducted the Hon. J. J. Loots to the Chair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Before taking the Speaker&#x2019;s Chair, I want to express my sincere gratitude to the hon. the Prime Minister, hon. Ministers and hon. members of the Government, to the hon. the Leader and hon. members of the official Opposition and to the hon. members for Durban Point and Simonstown and hon. members of their respective parties for the honour they have bestowed upon me and the confidence they have shown in me by electing me once again to the distinguished office of Speaker. I accept, being aware of my shortcomings, but in the knowledge, too, that I shall dedicate myself wholeheartedly to the demands and responsibilities of my task. The nature of the Speaker&#x2019;s task is twofold. On the one hand he is the servant of the House and its traditions, authority and rules. On the other, he is the personification and bearer of that authority, of those traditions and rules, indeed, of the institution itself, and as such he is called upon to provide leadership and to set an example. Mindful of the example set by my esteemed predecessors, I believe it is my duty to uphold and promote this institution in which, in the words of the prayer, &#x201C;the representatives of the people are assembled&#x201D;, so that it may continue to assume its rightful place in the lives and thoughts of our country and people as one of the cornerstones of our State. There is perhaps a tendency today to disparage authority, institutions and values. With your help I shall strive at all times to uphold and to preserve with honour everything that is symbolized by this noble and respected institution.</p>

<p>&#x2020; The Parliament at Westminster has often been referred to as the &#x201C;Mother of Parliaments&#x201D;. I for my part like to think of our Parliament as the Mother Parliament of Southern Africa. Already two sovereign Parliaments have come into being, no doubt as a result of the will of their respective peoples, but as constitutional bodies they are the products of our Parliament. No doubt, more are to come. It therefore behoves all of us&#x2014; the Chair, hon. members and officials&#x2014;to set a high standard of conduct and achievement in what we do and produce so as to be an example and a source of inspiration and guidance to other Parliaments in Southern Africa. It is in this spirit that I assume this <span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0020"/>high office and beg to be your humble servant.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, allow me, in view of the time factor, to congratulate you very sincerely in a few words on your unanimous election as Speaker of this hon. House. The fact that hon. members have elected you unopposed to this exceptionally high office for a second term testifies to the esteem and respect in which hon. members of this House hold you and the confidence which they place in you. Your quiet, calm personality and your mature judgment have compelled hon. members to take this decision. On behalf of hon. members I should like to wish you a pleasant term of office and, in anticipation, give you the assurance from this side of the House that throughout this session we shall, as you will, be jealous of the dignity and prestige of this House and that you may, in this regard, rely at all times on our wholehearted co-operation because we wish, as you do, to uphold this dignity and prestige. Any actions on your part in this regard will receive the wholehearted co-operation of this side of the House, because the dignity of this House most certainly weighs as heavily with us as it does with you.</p>

<p>The Chief Whip of the new official Opposition has given the assurance that you may rely on their support as well, but that they cannot guarantee calm waters at all times. You need not be concerned about that. We shall deal with that ourselves.</p>

<p>With these few words I should like to convey once again the heartiest congratulations of this side of the House on your unanimous election. We shall lend you our united support in this regard.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#eglin">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. W. EGLIN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we of the official Opposition would like to congratulate you very much indeed on your unanimous re-election to the office of Speaker. We believe this unanimity is due to your own personal qualities, the dignity with which you have occupied the Chair in recent years, your wisdom and your impartiality in dealing with the very peculiar problems of ensuring orderly debate in this House. We also believe that you have a most remarkable feel for the House, for its dignity and authority, and that you recognize the very important part which the Speaker plays, not only in maintaining the dignity of the House, but also in seeing that there is a balance between the rights of majorities and minorities which, after all, is the essence of a parliamentary system. You will have our co-operation and we believe that your term of office will be a fruitful one.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#raw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. V. RAW</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I want to associate the hon. members in these benches with the words of the hon. the Prime Minister and with those of the hon. the Leader of the official Opposition. We too give you our full support in this regard in the session which lies ahead.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wiley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. W. E. WILEY</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we in these benches give you the assurance that we shall respect the position that you occupy and that we shall do our best to uphold the dignity of the House under your authority.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I want to express my thanks to the hon. the Prime Minister, the hon. the Leader of the Opposition and hon. leaders of the other parties for their friendly words of congratulation. I am deeply appreciative. I should just like to tell them and those hon. members of the House on whose behalf they spoke that it will serve as an encouragement to me in the execution of my duties to know that I have the goodwill and co-operation of hon. members, without which no Speaker can do his work properly. Thank you very much for your words.</p>

</speech>

<p>Proceedings Suspended at 9h30.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening_ceremony">

<heading>OPENING CEREMONY</heading>

<p>Members met in the Gallery Hall at 10h35 and accompanied Mr. Speaker to the Assembly Chamber to attend the opening ceremony.</p>

<p>Proceedings Suspended at 9h30.</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#mr_speakers_report">

<heading>MR. SPEAKER&#x2019;S REPORT</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I have to report that after the House had suspended proceedings this morning, I proceeded to Tuynhuys, accompanied by Ministers, the Leader of the <span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0021"/>Opposition and other honourable members, where we were received by the State President, to whom I presented myself pursuant to the Standing Orders of this House. The State President then congratulated me on my election.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#commission_to_mr_speaker_from_the_state_president_to_administer_oath_for_affirmation">

<heading>COMMISSION TO MR. SPEAKER FROM THE STATE PRESIDENT TO ADMINISTER OATH FOR AFFIRMATION</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER laid upon the Table:</p>

<p>Commission from the State President, dated 27 January 1978, authorizing the Hon. Jan Jurie Loots to administer, as long as he holds the office of Speaker of the House of Assembly during the continuance of the Sixth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa, the oath or affirmation to members of the House of Assembly.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#state_presidents_address">

<heading>STATE PRESIDENT&#x2019;S ADDRESS</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER stated that at the opening ceremony he had received a copy of the State President&#x2019;s Address to members of the Senate and of the House of Assembly, which was in the following terms:</p>

<p>MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<block name="quote">I am glad to welcome you to this the First Session of the Sixth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa.</block>

<block name="quote">*The Republic of South Africa continues to be the target of a total onslaught being made on it on the political, economic, psychological, security and other fronts in an attempt to force it to abandon its present system of government.</block>

<block name="quote">As in the past, it was in the United Nations in particular that determined efforts were made to initiate drastic measures against South Africa. Apart from a series of resolutions passed by the General Assembly against us, our opponents succeeded in enacting a mandatory arms embargo against South Africa in the Security Council. We totally reject the juridical and factual grounds for this step.</block>

<block name="quote">The arms boycott and the intensified general international pressure on us have, however, obliged South Africa to rely to a greater extent on her own ingenuity and resources, a challenge which is being accepted with determination, conviction and, where necessary, with a willingness to make sacrifices. Gratifying progress is being maintained in this direction.</block>

<block name="quote">During the past year Marxist and other interference again led to efforts to infiltrate the Republic with trained terrorists, which resulted in isolated cases of violence and sabotage. As in the past, these attempts were quashed by the prompt and effective action of the Defence Force and the Police.</block>

<block name="quote">The likelihood of urban terrorism is being borne in mind, and in this regard it is important for essential services and industries to be protected. Greater responsibility to render assistance in the sphere of civil defence will also devolve on our population.</block>

<block name="quote">Interference in our domestic affairs has not been entirely of communist origin, but has increasingly sprung from a multitude of bodies and organizations in the non-communist parts of the world, and especially in those countries of the West that have traditionally been counted among our friends.</block>

<block name="quote">It is regretted that responsible countries are aligning themselves with the communist countries and the radicals to fan the flames of the long-standing vendetta against South Africa. The hypocritical and cynical basis of this vendetta becomes obvious when one looks, on the one hand, at the aliveness to the need for renewal in South Africa, which is evident from what the Government is doing and planning to do, and, on the other hand, at the whitewashing by the community of nations of wrong and intolerable conditions in scores of countries in the world.</block>

<block name="quote">During the past year South Africa has been engaged in negotiations with the five Western members of the Security Council with a view to obtaining international recognition for an independent South West Africa. In line with the Government&#x2019;s accepted principle that the people of South West Africa must decide their own future, the Territory, as a unit, will become <span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_0022"/>independent in accordance with their wishes before the end of 1978. This will be preceded by free elections for a Constituent Assembly which will in turn decide the constitution for South West Africa.</block>

<block name="quote">Negotiations are continuing, but in order to honour the Government&#x2019;s undertakings, especially in regard to independence this year, it is essential for the election of a Constituent Assembly to take place timeously. South Africa is also committed to ensuring the safety of the inhabitants of South West Africa and maintaining law and order until such time as the new government decides otherwise.</block>

<block name="quote">It is a fundamental principle of South Africa&#x2019;s foreign policy not to interfere in the affairs of others. While the Government of South Africa would prefer to see a peaceful solution in Rhodesia and is trying where possible to bring the various parties together and to point out alternatives, decisions on the future of Rhodesia rest with its people. South Africa has noted with interest the progress being made in this regard in Rhodesia itself.</block>

<block name="quote">The Government considers the most effective counter to the destructive criticism and the subversive attacks on us to be the upliftment of all the inhabitants of our country, the improvement of their social conditions and material welfare, and the institution of a political dispensation which will be fair and just to every population group, without losing sight of the realities of the South African situation. It is the Government&#x2019;s intention to continue on this tried and true course.</block>

<block name="quote">It is against this background that steps such as the following should be viewed and appraised: The spectacular progress made with housing projects, especially for the indigent; the making available of R250 million over and above the normal appropriation for the housing of Asians, Coloureds and Blacks; measures against illegal squatting, coupled with the provision of housing in given circumstances; experimental housing schemes for persons with very low incomes; the rebuilding of slums; urban renewal schemes; the establishment and forthcoming opening of the Medical University of Southern Africa, the first full-fledged university for the training of Black doctors, dentists and veterinarians, as well as staff for the auxiliary health services; incentives to Black teachers who wish to improve their qualifications for their profession; the election of community councils in urban Bantu residential areas; and an inquiry by a Cabinet committee into the position of Blacks in White areas.</block>

<block name="quote">In this spirit negotiations will be continued in connection with the Government&#x2019;s proposals to give Indians and Coloureds, under a new constitutional plan, not only a full say in their own affairs, but also the opportunity of expressing their views on matters of common concern and of assuming joint responsibility in this regard. Real rights are therefore envisaged for these population groups.</block>

<block name="quote">Although the onslaughts on the Republic have not yet harmed the country&#x2019;s international economic position to any appreciable extent, the Government has for some time been applying precautionary measures to fortify South Africa&#x2019;s economy against hostile foreign action and has of late considerably stepped up its efforts in this connection.</block>

<block name="quote">Mainly as a result of the stringent fiscal and monetary policy applied by the authorities and the Government&#x2019;s export promotion policy, the improvement in the current account of the balance of payments, which was observed in the latter half of 1976, continued and accelerated in 1977, the result being that a substantial surplus on current account was achieved over the year. This significant improvement reflects a marked decline in imports, an increase in the physical volume and value of merchandise exports, made possible, in part, by the expansion of port facilities and other infrastructure, and a recovery in the price of gold.</block>

<block name="quote">Present economic conditions in the Republic, the linking of South Africa with political instability elsewhere in Southern Africa, and the large-scale repayment of overseas short-term debt by both the private and the public sectors, combined to produce a net outflow of foreign capital, especially short-term capital, in 1977.</block>

<block name="quote">The net result of these counter movements in the capital account and the current account of the balance of payments was that the Republic&#x2019;s gold and other foreign <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_0023"/>reserves remained relatively stable over the year.</block>

<block name="quote">Although, in consequence of the stringent financial policy, the money supply increased only moderately in 1977, the rate of inflation rose early on in the year, mainly because of unavoidable increases in certain administered prices. Later in the year, however, the rate of inflation again showed an encouraging decline. It remains the aim of the Government to curb inflation further.</block>

<block name="quote">The success achieved with regard to the balance of payments and inflation made it possible for the Government to introduce certain moderate and selective relaxations in fiscal and monetary policy towards the end of 1977, with the object of stimulating economic growth and employment, without unduly affecting the balance of payments or the rate of inflation.</block>

<block name="quote">&#x2020; In contrast with the primary production sectors, namely agriculture and mining, secondary industry, like the building and construction industries, has been through yet another difficult year. The demand for most industrial products has been at a comparatively low level, and this has led to some degree of under-utilization of production facilities, which has in turn resulted in cost rises and a further weakening in profitability in the industries concerned.</block>

<block name="quote">The boycott actions that have already been taken against us, as well as those with which we are being threatened, are creating excellent opportunities for our own industrialists. If full use is made of these opportunities, and the measures which have already been taken to stimulate the economy begin to show results, a substantial improvement should set in in various sectors of secondary industry which ought to have an appreciable ripple effect.</block>

<block name="quote">Favourable weather conditions in almost every part of the country enabled the farming community to push up the volume of production to about 10% above the previous year&#x2019;s level, with the result that production broke all records last year.</block>

<block name="quote">Consequently it was possible amply to supply the local demand for agricultural products, while considerable quantities were available for export. The good local grain crops, however, coincided with equally favourable crops in the northern hemisphere, and this had a depressing effect on our exports, particularly of maize and wheat.</block>

<block name="quote">The rapid increase in population in Southern Africa makes it imperative to maintain an increase in food production, and this is making growing demands on our limited agricultural resources. In order to meet the expected needs of the eighties, special emphasis is placed on in-depth agricultural research, extension, the sophisticated evaluation and classification of resources and the development of optimal production systems. The extension of agricultural training for prospective farmers is being given very high priority.</block>

<block name="quote">The financing of waterworks is a steadily growing problem, mainly because most of the cheaper water resources have already been developed and more expensive schemes must now necessarily be built and water conveyed over long distances. Systematic increases in water tariffs and rates are consequently unavoidable.</block>

<block name="quote">The forestry industry made a substantial contribution to the national income during the past year, and products to the value of R105 million were exported or re-exported.</block>

<block name="quote">The mineral industry in the Republic stood up well to world recessionary conditions. There was again a significant improvement in mineral earnings, especially from exports. The growth in the earnings from coal and iron ore exports was notable, and was directly attributable to the newest mineral outlets of Richards Bay and Saldanha Bay. The steady rise in the price of gold throughout the year resulted in the revenue from gold sales also reaching a peak in 1977.</block>

<block name="quote">Uranium has made an exceptional contribution to the economy. As a result of expansions, the Republic&#x2019;s uranium production capacity could reach 8 000 tons per annum by 1985.</block>

<block name="quote">South Africa continues to enjoy industrial peace, which is a prerequisite for economic stability and future industrial development. This is indeed a compliment to our labour force and is indicative of the responsible attitude adopted by our people in their employer/employee relationships.</block>

<block name="quote"><span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0024"/>Employees have displayed a particular sense of responsibility in regard to their wage demands, setting an example in the field of labour discipline.</block>

<block name="quote">The number of registered unemployed was higher than in the previous year, but the Government is making every effort to alleviate the position.</block>

<block name="quote">The year 1977 saw a decrease in the number of immigrants and an increase in the number of emigrants, compared with the previous few years. A satisfactory immigration rate has nevertheless been maintained, and considerable interest continues to be shown by prospective immigrants.</block>

<block name="quote">The most important policy objectives in the energy field in South Africa are, first, to ensure adequate supplies of crude oil in the short term and, secondly, to formulate a comprehensive programme in order to effect the rational supply and consumption of energy. The Government has taken ample steps to protect South Africa&#x2019;s interests and is constantly exploring various possibilities of ensuring the availability of sufficient energy.</block>

<block name="quote">The Republic can pride itself on having at its disposal the resources and the expertise to cope with the challenges ahead.</block>

<block name="quote">During 1978, prospecting for oil will be confined mainly to the off-shore areas, since the exploration programme on land has almost been completed.</block>

<block name="quote">Effect will soon be given to the petition submitted by the Provincial Councils of the Cape of Good Hope and Natal for the incorporation of East Griqualand into Natal. This will be the first time since Union that provision will be made for an alteration of provincial boundaries.</block>

<block name="quote">During the past year South Africa has very successfully hosted various international congresses, five of which were organized by the Department of Sport and Recreation.</block>

<block name="quote">The Government wishes to record its sincere appreciation of the manner in which all public servants and other employees of the State have served our country and its people in the past year. It is trusted that the authorization of the 5% improvement in salaries, the prospect of which had been announced earlier, and the implementation of a revised education structure, will be interpreted and accepted as proof of the Government&#x2019;s good faith.</block>

<block name="quote">As we look back on the year that is past, we are filled with deep gratitude for all the good things that have been bestowed upon us, for commendable efforts, and for meritorious achievements.</block>

<block name="quote">Our country is facing the threats and dangers of the unknown in the new year we are entering. Why should this unknown be more menacing and more dangerous to us than to others? Should the threats to us in fact prove to be greater than to others, however, it would also mean greater challenges to us and better opportunities to work and to achieve.</block>

<block name="quote">In the past year South Africa has given unmistakable proof of its moral courage and resolution in preventing others from undermining and destroying its confidence in itself and in its future. The way in which our people, and especially our young people, have done their duty in this regard fills us with great pride and gratitude and we honour the memory of and pay tribute to those who have made the supreme sacrifice for their country. Let us, firmly trusting in the God of our fathers, face the unknown fearlessly, and let each one of us do what his hand finds to do.</block>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<block name="quote">Additional estimates of expenditure for the current financial year and estimates of revenue and expenditure for the ensuing financial year will be laid before you.</block>

<p>MR. PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF THE SENATE:</p>

<p>MR. SPEAKER AND MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY:</p>

<block name="quote">I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations.</block>

<block name="quote">I now declare this the First Session of the Sixth Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacancies">

<heading><span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0025"/>VACANCIES</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that a vacancy had occurred in the representation in this House of the electoral division of Vryheid, owing to the death on 11 January 1978 of Mr. J. P. C. le Roux.</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER further announced that there was a vacancy in the representation in this House of the electoral division of Springs, owing to the withdrawal of Proclamation 261 of 1977 in respect of the General Election in so far as it concerned that electoral division.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#appointment_of_deputy_speaker_and_chairman_of_committees">

<heading>APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY SPEAKER AND CHAIRMAN OF COMMITTEES</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Dr. Cornelius Visser van der Merwe be appointed Deputy Speaker and Chairman of Committees of the whole House.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#appointment_of_deputy_chairman_of_committees">

<heading>APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY CHAIRMAN OF COMMITTEES</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#leader_of_the_house">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">LEADER OF THE HOUSE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Mr. Johannes Petrus du Toit be appointed Deputy Chairman of Committees of the whole House.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#motion_of_condolence">

<heading>MOTION OF CONDOLENCE</heading>

<summary><i>(Late Mr. J. P. C. le Roux)</i></summary>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move without notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 11 January of Mr. Josua Pieter Christiaan le Roux, who represented the electoral division of Vryheid for a period of more than 11 years, and desires to place on record its appreciation of his Parliamentary service.</block>

<block name="quote">This House further resolves that its sincere sympathy be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased in their bereavement.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker, the deceased hon. member, Josua le Roux, who was only 56 years old when he died, came to this House on 30 March 1966. He therefore represented the electoral division of Vryheid in this House for 11 years. Before coming to this hon. House, he represented the same electoral division in the Provincial Council of Natal for six years. His sudden death upon his arrival in Cape Town for the opening of this Parliament, came as a shock to all his colleagues in this House.</p>

<p>The late Josua le Roux was a high-spirited and energetic person until, during the course of last year, he experienced several warning signs of a heart condition which eventually led to his untimely death. He was a high-spirited and energetic person, and in his young days he played first league rugby in very good company in the Transvaal. After he had established himself in Natal, he not only immersed himself whole-heartedly in the farming business but also in Natal politics where he very soon won the confidence of his fellow-party members and became the chairman of the National Party of Natal. In this House, too, his colleagues showed their confidence in him by making him the Whip for Natal in this House, and in that capacity he made his contribution to the orderly functioning of this House.</p>

<p>He was a colourful personality. His actions were sometimes a little unorthodox, perhaps, but he had his own way of doing things, and his colleagues were thoroughly aware of this. He was a good member of this House and a loyal colleague. He was also a staunch patriot. We shall miss him as a colleague, not only in his association with his colleagues, but also as regards the exceptional service which he rendered on our side of the House and also in the party context and the way in which he played his part in the political life of Natal.</p>

<p>We pray that Almighty God may grant his wife, Mrs. Le Roux, and the children to <span class="col_17-18" refersTo="page_0026"/>whom he was passionately attached and devoted, His profound consolation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#eglin">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. W. EGLIN</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we, the official Opposition, second the motion and should like to associate ourselves with the words of the hon. the Prime Minister concerning our departed friend. We were shocked at his sudden and unexpected death on the eve of this session. We did not, of course, get to know him as well as did hon. members opposite, but we nevertheless came to know him as a friendly man, as a member and as a Whip who did his duty in a thorough and also in a helpful way. We should like to extend our sympathy, too, to his next-of-kin and his family in their great personal loss.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#raw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. V. RAW</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I want to associate hon. members of this party with the motion and with the hon. the Prime Minister&#x2019;s words.</p>

<p>&#x2020; As a fellow Natalian I knew our late colleague for more years than his presence in this House as he was also a member of the Provincial Council of Natal for a period of six years. To me his death was a particular shock because we had travelled together to Cape Town on the same train and had been on the station chatting together while waiting for our motor-cars, only hours before his tragic and sudden death.</p>

<p>I would like on behalf of this party and my colleagues to join in extending to his widow and to his family our sincere sympathy. He was a family man. I still remember some of the discussions we had on the platform, at times warm political arguments, but particularly I remember his pride in the achievements of his family, especially his daughter who had done so well at university. It was that family bond which I think will cause him to be so deeply missed by his wife and his family. We extend our sincere sympathy to them in their loss.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wiley">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. W. E. WILEY</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we in this party associate ourselves with the tribute paid to our departed colleague by the hon. the Prime Minister.</p>

<p>&#x2020; We offer to his widow and the members of his family our sincere sympathy.</p>

</speech>

<p>Motion agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#adjournment_of_house">

<heading>ADJOURNMENT OF HOUSE</heading>

<summary>(Motion)</summary>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the House do now adjourn.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1978-01-27T12:10:00">12h10.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

