---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol8 - TUESDAY 8 FEBRUARY 1927'
layout: debate
year: 1927
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>TUESDAY, 8th FEBRUARY, 1927.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1927-02-08T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#wesleyan_methodist_church_(private)_bill">

<heading>WESLEYAN METHODIST CHURCH (PRIVATE) BILL.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER laid upon the Table&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Report of the examiners on the petition for leave to introduce the Wesleyan Methodist <span class="col_119-120" refersTo="page_0129"/>(Private) Bill (presented to this House on the 7th February), reporting that the Standing Orders of the House have been complied with.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Pensions and Act 49 of 1926.</heading>

<question by="#o&#x2019;brien" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Mr. O&#x2019;BRIEN (for Mr. Papenfus)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What amount has so far been paid to beneficiaries in terms of the provisions of Act No. 49 of 1926, and what amount, if any, does the Minister anticipate still remains to be paid;</li>

<li>(2) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table a list of the beneficiaries referred to, and the respective sums paid to each; and</li>

<li>(3) by what amount has the annual payment of pensions been increased as a result of the Act?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#o&#x2019;brien">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The amount paid up to 31st January, 1927, is £331,000, and the total expenditure, including cases not yet disposed of and cases that may still come in, is estimated at £365,000.</li>

<li>(2) A list is in the course of preparation and will be laid on the Table in due course.</li>

<li>(3) £15,000.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#papenfus" to="#minister">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. PAPENFUS:</from>

<p>Question withdrawn.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Grain Elevator at Glencoe Junction.</heading>

<question by="#thomas_watt" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Sir THOMAS WATT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether, in view of the large quantity of maize grown in the Dundee and adjoining districts, the Railway Administration will consider the necessity of constructing a grain elevator at Glencoe Junction?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#thomas_watt">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>In the event of the Administration deciding to make provision for additional country elevators, the claims of the Dundee and adjoining districts for an elevator will be given careful consideration in conjunction with those of other maize producing districts.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Labourer&#x2019;s House at Tayside, Natal.</heading>

<question by="#thomas_watt" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Sir THOMAS WATT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether, in view of the fact that a white railway labourer, his wife and children are occupying railway quarters at Tayside, Natal, consisting of one room measuring about 12 feet by 9 feet and a kitchen measuring about 6 by 5 feet, for which 9s. a month is paid, the Administration will consider the necessity of providing more suitable accommodation for this man and other white married labourers similarly housed?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#thomas_watt">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>As proper departmental accommodation is not available at Tayside, the labourer referred to is being paid an allowance of 1s. per diem in lieu of free quarters. At his own option he took possession of the building he now occupies, which is slightly larger than the dimensions given, and in respect of which a rental of only 9s. per month is charged. Actually, therefore, there is a margin in favour of the man between the house allowance granted to him and the rental he is required to pay for the accommodation he elected to occupy. Additional quarters for labourers at Tayside are at present in course of erection, and it is expected that they will be available for occupation at an early date. Everything possible is being done to provide suitable quarters for labourers, and accommodation in existing buildings is being made as comfortable as possible. Transfers are also being arranged for labourers as opportunity offers to centres at which accommodation exists.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Drought Distress Relief Act, 1924.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. SWART (for Dr. Stals)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How much of the money advanced under the Drought Distress Relief Act of 1924 is still in arrear;</li>

<li>(2) whether any of the money so advanced has become irrecoverable, and, if so, approximately how much;</li>

<li>(3) whether, in view of the terrible drought, the Government will not again proclaim the Drought Distress Relief Act; and, if not,</li>

<li>(4) what other steps the Government intends to take to relieve the distress caused by the drought?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#swart">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) and (2) Amount voted by Parliament, £500,000; amount recovered up to 31.1.1927, £117,840 3s. 11d.; amount written off as irrecoverable up to 31.1.1927, £1,164 0s. 1d.; amount outstanding as at 31.1.1927, £299,351 15s. 9d.; total amount paid out, £418,355 19s. 9d. The arrears as at 31st January, 1927, were: In respect of capital, £11,023 5s.; in respect of interest, £1,777 17s.</li>

<li>(3) It is not the intention of the Government to proclaim the Drought Distress Relief Act.</li>

<li>(4) The hon. member is referred to the reply given on the 1st instant to the hon. member for Graaff-Reinet in regard to the steps taken by the Government to relieve distress caused by the drought.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Groot Constantia Farm, Lease of.</heading>

<question by="#drummond_chaplin" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Sir DRUMMOND CHAPLIN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Groot Constantia farm has been let, and, if so, to whom; and</li>

<li>(2) whether tenders for the lease of the farm were invited, and, if so, whether the highest tender was accepted?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#drummond_chaplin">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes, to Mr. Isaac Stern.</li>

<li>(2) Yes, by Government Notice No. 1593 of the 8th September, 1926. The highest tender <span class="col_121-122" refersTo="page_0130"/>which conformed to the requirements of the notice was accepted with the approval of the Department of Agriculture.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Asiatics: Property Transfers, Trading Licences and Population.</heading>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many transfers from Europeans to Asiatics of immovable property have been registered since August, 1925, to date in the Transvaal and Natal;</li>

<li>(2) what is the total value of such properties;</li>

<li>(3) what are the respective values of rural and urban properties so transferred in Natal;</li>

<li>(4) what were the total numbers of trading licences granted to Asiatics for the years 1920, 1924, 1925, 1926, respectively, (a) in the Transvaal, (b) in Natal;</li>

<li>(5) what are the total numbers of new trading licences granted to Asiatics in Natal since August, 1925, (a) in rural areas, (b) in urban areas;</li>

<li>(6) what is the total number of Asiatics who have permanently left South Africa under the voluntary repatriation scheme during 1924, 1925, and 1926, respectively, with particulars of the men, women and children so repatriated; and</li>

<li>(7) what is the present estimated Asiatic population of (a) the Cape Province, (b) Natal Province, (c) the Transvaal Province?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>The information asked for under heads (1) to (5) is being collected and will be made available as early as possible.</p>

<p>(6) The figures are as follows:&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Men</p></td>

<td><p>Women</p></td>

<td><p>Children</p></td>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1924</p></td>

<td><p>569</p></td>

<td><p>220</p></td>

<td><p>274</p></td>

<td><p>1,063</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1925</p></td>

<td><p>709</p></td>

<td><p>292</p></td>

<td><p>399</p></td>

<td><p>1,400</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1926</p></td>

<td><p>1,024</p></td>

<td><p>439</p></td>

<td><p>708</p></td>

<td><p>2,171</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>2,302</p></td>

<td><p>951</p></td>

<td><p>1,381</p></td>

<td><p>4,634</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>(7) The estimated Asiatic population as at the 30th June, 1926, is as follows:&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Males</p></td>

<td><p>Females</p></td>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Cape Province</p></td>

<td><p>4,578</p></td>

<td><p>2,077</p></td>

<td><p>6,655</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Natal Province</p></td>

<td><p>83,045</p></td>

<td><p>68,345</p></td>

<td><p>151,430</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Transvaal Province</p></td>

<td><p>10,409</p></td>

<td><p>5,338</p></td>

<td><p>15,747</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

</answer>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>VIII.</num>

<p>Standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>East Coast Fever.</heading>

<question by="#deane" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. DEANE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the number of infected and in-contact farms in the various East Coast fever areas throughout the Union of South Africa on the 31st January, 1927; and</li>

<li>(2) What was the number of infected and in-contact farms on the 31st December, 1924, throughout the Union of South Africa?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#deane">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>(1) and (2). All returns for January, 1927, have not yet been received. On 31st December, 1926, the number of infected farms was 169, viz.: Transkei 10; Natal 124: Transvaal 29; Cape Province 6. On 31st December, 1924, the number was 318, viz.: Transkei 29; Natal 269; Transvaal 20; Cape Province nil. These figures do not include in-contact farms, but these may be taken on an average of four in contact farms to each infected farm.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#deane" to="#minister">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. DEANE:</from>

<p>Question withdrawn.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Native Affairs Proclamations.</heading>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Mr. BLACKWELL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Native Affairs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What Proclamations have been issued applying the Native Urban Areas Act to Johannesburg, when were they issued, and how many of them have been declared by the Courts to be ultra vires and upon what dates;</li>

<li>(2) what convictions resulted and what fines were paid under these Proclamations before they were declared ultra vires, and what fines, if any, have been refunded;</li>

<li>(3) whether it is a fact that by these Proclamations all unexempted natives in Johannesburg, to the number of over 60,000, were compelled to live in locations, under criminal penalty, when in fact there were no locations for them to live in, and that on this ground the Supreme Court declared the last Proclamation to be ultra vires, as being oppressive and unjust;</li>

<li>(4) what opinion or legal advice, if any, was taken by the Native Affairs Department before issuing the Proclamation;</li>

<li>(5) why was the whole of the Johannesburg area proclaimed and simultaneously only a part of Krugersdorp;</li>

<li>(6) what accommodation does the Johannesburg Municipality provide for (a) married natives, (b) single male natives, (c) single female natives; and</li>

<li>(7) whether the accommodation for single male natives only is in compounds or barracks under conditions similar to those of mine natives?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_native_affairs" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) (a) Proclamation No. 301 issued on the 25th November, 1924. This was found by the Supreme Court on the 15th June, 1926, to be technically invalid and was replaced by (b) Proclamation No. 166 dated the 23rd July, 1926, which, on the 31st December, 1926, was declared by the Supreme Court to be ultra vires.</li>

<li>(2) So far as can be ascertained, there have been one hundred and thirty-two convictions, with a total amount of £230 paid in fines. No refunds have been made.</li>

<li>(3) Technically all unexempted natives in Johannesburg municipal area, were liable under Proclamation No. 166 of 1926 to criminal prosecution if not resident within a location or <span class="col_123-124" refersTo="page_0131"/>native hostel. The position was, however, fully safeguarded by the Department, before taking steps for the proclamation of the whole urban area, obtaining from the municipality of Johannesburg a definite assurance that the restrictions would be administratively enforced only ill direct relation to the progress of the municipal building scheme, so that no hardship and injustice would be inflicted upon natives by reason of a lack of accommodation. In order to ensure this, a central board consisting of the town clerk, Johannesburg, the medical officer of health and the chief native commissioner, Witwatersrand, was created and the duty of applying the provisions of the Act, after proclamation, to sections of the town, strictly in relation to the accommodation available from time to time, was definitely imposed on this board The board met periodically and, in effect, divided up Johannesburg into small sections applying administratively the provisions of the Act to various sections with a view to the elimination of slum conditions pan passu with the provision of suitable accommodation for the natives affected in the sections concerned Boundaries were widened and new sections dealt with as the building scheme progressed As and when housing became available formal notice was given to each native in the section which was being dealt with, usually about six weeks beforehand, requiring him to remove from his place of residence, and by a certain date to take up his abode in an approved place or obtain exemption. Warning was at the same time given to those persons, who provided accommodation for natives in the section or sections concerned, that they must desist from doing so. Further the conditions of housing of domestic servants, who, when proper accommodation is provided by their employers are exempted from living in a location were carefully reviewed and the claims of applicants for exemption were examined by the board. Prosecutions were instituted only after the administrative precautions indicated had been taken and then only against such natives and other persons as failed to comply with notices or warnings issued by the board. In the cases of Amod Jaghbay v. Bex and Nicholaas Hodos v. Bex, who were prosecuted and convicted in the magistrate&#x2019;s court for harbouring natives who had been warned to live in a location, the Supreme Court declared the proclamation ultra vires on the ground that it was inequitable to make the natives potentially liable to criminal action for failing to reside in a location or hostel when accommodation had not been provided, and that accordingly the exercise of the Governor-General&#x2019;s discretion in respect of the issue of the proclamation had not been reasonable. The court, of course, regarded only the technical operation of the proclamation and ignored the administrative arrangements which had been made. The words &#x201C;oppressive and unjust&#x201D; were not made use of in the judgment. In consequence of this judgment an unfortunate position has arisen, but the method adopted of proclaiming the whole urban area simultaneously was the only satisfactory one under the circumstances. The only alternatives were to defer proclamation of the whole urban area until such time as adequate housing in locations or hostels might be available for all natives requiring it or to proclaim the area piecemeal. The first alternative would have involved an immediate colossal expenditure and the useless locking up of capital until the vast building programme had been completed in detail, while a canker in the shape of notorious slum areas continued to eat into the vitals of the community. Had the method of proclaiming the area piecemeal been pursued, the whole object would have been defeated, as under these circumstances natives, on being warned to remove from a proclaimed portion, would simply have taken up their abode in an unproclaimed portion, thereby accentuating in the latter the very slum conditions which it was essential to eliminate. In other words, had this course been adopted, portions of the town would have been cleansed at the expense of others.</li></ol>

<p>It is not correct that over 60,000 unexempted natives were affected by the simultaneous proclamation of the whole urban area of Johannesburg under the Act. The number of natives in Johannesburg, exclusive of those employed on mines and works, is, according to the pass office records, approximately 60,000, which figure includes domestic servants and numerous other natives who are, or can be, exempted under the Act. The accommodation still to be provided for unexempted natives in Johannesburg is, as nearly as can be determined, in respect of 4,000 families and 11,000 single natives.</p>

<p>In view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the cases referred to, it has become necessary to abandon a system which has been operating satisfactorily, and as the position is to-day I have been advised that I shall have to come to Parliament to have the existing Act so amended as to give the Government greater powers in dealing with this matter than it has at present.</p>

<ol>

<li>(4) No legal advice outside the Department was taken.</li>

<li>(5) Johannesburg is a very much more difficult area to deal with than Krugersdorp, which presented no problem. In so far as Johannesburg was concerned, it was felt that if only separate portions of the area were proclaimed, it would be easy for natives to remove to an unproclaimed portion and to make conditions in existing slums worse or to create new slums. Further, it would have been impossible to deal with persons, e.g., Indian landlords, who beyond any particular area which had been proclaimed harboured natives who had been warned to remove into a location.</li></ol>

<p>The Krugersdorp municipality had to face a position much less acute, and considered that they could deal administratively with two areas proclaimed successively in view of the fact that accommodation for the whole native population was at the time in process of completion. The remainder of the Krugersdorp area has now been proclaimed.</p>

<ol>

<li><span class="col_125-126" refersTo="page_0132"/>(6) Johannesburg has already provided accommodation for&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(a) Married natives who are ordinarily accommodated in two-roomed brick houses with small verandah and garden plot; 2,117 houses, huts, etc., are available. There are also 628 native-owned houses and some 2,100 additional building stands.</li>

<li>(b) 2,900 single male natives. Of these 2,000 are accommodated, ten to a room, in the Wemmer Hostel, a modern brick building of the barrack-room type with balconies. The remaining 900 are housed in accommodation of the compound type.</li>

<li>(c) Single female natives who have been accommodated in 20 houses pending final decision by the municipality, which inclines towards the provision of hostel accommodation for them.</li></ol></li>

<li>(7) The 2,000 single male natives already referred to as accommodated in the Wemmer Hostel are supplied with beds and reasonable conveniences far superior to those enjoyed by mine natives. Extensions to this hostel now in progress provide for special accommodation for natives of superior class.</li></ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Accidents at Level Crossings.</heading>

<question by="#robinson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Mr. ROBINSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether he will furnish a return giving details of accidents which have occurred at level crossings on the South African Railways during the past two years and showing (a) the number of lives lost, (b) the number of persons injured, (c) the damage to stock, vehicles, etc.?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#robinson">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>During the two years ended 31st March, 1926, there were 255 accidents at level crossings on the South African Railways under the following headings: 1. Running into crossing gates or booms which were closed or being closed to road traffic, 34. 2. Endeavouring to cross while gates were being closed, or to cross in advance of approaching trains, 121. 3. Running into trains occupying crossings, 9. 4. Walking over or loitering at crossings without keeping a look-out or heeding warnings or signals, 35. 5. Drivers losing control of animals, 10. 6. Road vehicles breaking down on crossings, 12. 7. Other accidents, 34. Total, 255. The further information desired is as under: (a) number of lives lost, 52; (b) number of persons injured, 77; (c) the vehicles, stock, pedestrians, etc. involved in these accidents were: Motor-cars or lorries, 68; motorcycles, 13; animal-drawn vehicles, 94; pedestrians, 35: tramcars, 1; animals, 10; other accidents, 34; total, 255.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Mines: Chief Inspector of Machinery and Government Mining Engineer.</heading>

<question by="#duncan" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>Mr. DUNCAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the previous occupation of the recently appointed Chief Inspector of machinery and what are his qualifications for the appointment;</li>

<li>(2) what was the recommendation, if any, of the Public Service Commission in regard to the appointment;</li>

<li>(3) what were the circumstances which led to the resignation of Sir Robert Kotzé, formerly Government Mining Engineer; and</li>

<li>(4) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table all papers in connection with the matter?</li>

</ol></question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#duncan">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The present Chief Inspector of Machinery was Inspector of Machinery, Krugersdorp District, from 1917, previous to which date he had been an Assistant Inspector of Machinery in the Mines Department to which he was appointed in March, 1913, being one of three successful candidates from a large number of applications. He holds the Electrical and Mechanical Engineers&#x2019; Certificates of Competency.</li>

<li>(2) The Public Service Commission after hearing Sir Robert Kotzé, recommended the appointment of the present occupant of the position on the 29th September, last.</li>

<li>(3) The late Government Mining Engineer having recommended another officer, intimated, prior to the matter coming before the Public Service Commission, that if the present incumbent were appointed, he would feel compelled to resign. Thereafter Sir Robert Kotzé was informed that the Government would not require his services after the completion of his current year of office. Sir Robert Kotzé having reached the age of retirement had been re-appointed on two occasions for a further period of twelve months.</li>

<li>(4) I have no objection to laying the paper on the Table.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Drought and Transport.</heading>

<question by="#du_toit" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>Mr. DU TOIT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many sheep and cattle were, as a result of the recent drought, carried by rail to better grazing veld;</li>

<li>(2) how many were carried on the Hutchinson-Calvinia line;</li>

<li>(3) for how many more sheep have trucks been ordered;</li>

<li>(4) what is the amount owing the Department by farmers for such conveyance and for what amounts have promissory notes been signed;</li>

<li>(5) whether investigations have been made into complaints by farmers about unnecessary delay of trains for the transport of stock; if so,</li>

<li>(6) whether the Department is convinced that unnecessary delay took place as a result of which farmers suffered substantial losses;</li>

<li>(7) whether the Department is prepared to pay compensation in such cases:</li>

<li>(8) whether any railway employees were discharged or punished for negligence in this connection; and</li>

<li><span class="col_127-128" refersTo="page_0133"/>(9) whether the inspector who investigated the complaints was bilingual?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#du_toit">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I assume the hon. member&#x2019;s question refers to the Hutchinson-Calvinia line, and the following answers have reference to that section.</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) and (2) 303,487 sheep and goats as well as 1,889 cattle, horses, mules and donkeys.</li>

<li>(3) 13,425 sheep.</li>

<li>(4) £16,461 16s. 4d. is owing, promissory notes having been signed for this amount.</li>

<li>(5) and (6) Investigations have been made into complaints by farmers of delays to trains transporting stock. Considerable difficulty has been experienced in regard to the moving of drought-stricken stock to better pasturage, primarily due to the following causes:&#x2014; (a) the abnormal number of poor stock which the Administration was called upon to move at very short notice; (b) the shortage of water owing to the extensive drought, causing the departmental water supplies to be seriously affected and necessitating the provision on trains of water tanks displacing truckage which would have been available for traffic purposes; (c) the failure of engines owing to bad water; (d) it was only possible to take limited loads, owing to the light section rails on this line. In some instances, where complaints were made to the Administration, it was found that the transit of stock was protracted to some extent in order to ensure arrival at destination in daylight. The hon. member, will, I am sure, appreciate that there would have been no advantage in bringing stock to their destination during night time.</li>

<li>(7) Everything possible was done by the Administration with the means at its disposal to cope with a situation which it was fully realised was most serious from the point of view of the farming community. The Administration has given the most careful consideration to claims for compensation, but, in all the circumstances and bearing in mind the conditions under which this traffic is conveyed, it has not been found possible to give favourable consideration to such applications.</li>

<li>(8) No.</li>

<li>(9) The investigations were made by an Inspector who has a working knowledge of Afrikaans assisted by another officer who is fully bilingual. The hon. member will, I am sure, appreciate the abnormal and exceptional circumstances which prevailed and under which the Administration laboured not only in connection with the Hutchinson-Calvinia line but also on other sections.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Police: Officer at Newcastle.</heading>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is correct that the commissioned police officer is to be removed from Newcastle and a sergeant placed in charge of the district; and if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether the Minister will state the reason for this change?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes, except that the N.C.O. will only have charge of the Newcastle police station.</li>

<li>(2) This is in accordance with the policy which has been adopted in all parts of the Union, viz., to place a commissioned officer in charge of a police district and to place non-commissioned officers in charge of the police stations. The district commandant at Dundee is in charge of the police district, which includes the Newcastle magisterial district with all police stations therein.</li></ol>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>What happened to that sergeant at Kuruman?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I do not know that that has anything to do with this case, but it shows the irrelevance of the hon. member.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Free Passes for Mr. and Mrs. Russell.</heading>

<question by="#reyburn" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Mr. REYBURN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether Mr. Kingston Russell, editor of the &#x201C;Natal Mercury,&#x201D; was recently granted a free pass from Durban to Johannesburg in order to report on the Natal electrification system; if so,</li>

<li>(2) what were Mr. Russell&#x2019;s qualifications;</li>

<li>(3) whether Mrs. Kingston Russell was also granted a free pass on the same occasion; and, if so,</li>

<li>(4) for what reason was such free pass granted?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#reyburn">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes. Mr. Kingston Russell was granted a press pass in terms of the regulations.</li>

<li>(2) Mr. Kingston Russell is a representative of a recognised newspaper in terms of Regulation No. 42 of the regulations governing the issue of free passes, privilege ticket orders and certain other concessionary orders and tickets.</li>

<li>(3) No.</li>

<li>(4) Falls away.</li></ol>

</answer>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Mr. NEL:</from>

<p>Have similar privileges been granted to other members of the press?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Certainly.</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#hon_member" to="#nel">

<from>An HON. MEMBER:</from>

<p>Mr. Reyburn.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Anthrax in Natal.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many farms were infected with anthrax in the Province of Natal on the 31st December, 1925, and the 31st December, 1926;</li>

<li>(2) how many farms were infected with anthrax in the Klip River Division, Natal, on the 31st December, 1925, and on the 31st December, 1926; and</li>

<li>(3) whether, if there has been an increase in the number of infected farms in the Klip <span class="col_129-130" refersTo="page_0134"/>River Division, the Department is able to state the cause of the spread of the disease?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) On 31st. December, 1925, 8 farms in the province of Natal were infected with anthrax, and on 31st December, 1926, 11 farms were infected.</li>

<li>(2) In the Klip River Division, the number of farms infected with anthrax on the 31st December, 1925, and on 31st December, 1926, was nil and three, respectively.</li>

<li>(3) It is not considered that the increased number of anthrax outbreaks reported at the end of 1926 indicates that the situation in the Klip River Division has become worse, but that the increased supervision rendered possible with the additional staff employed has made it possible for outbreaks to be detected which otherwise would have remained unknown.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>High Commissioner, Motor Car For.</heading>

<question by="#william_macintosh" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Sir WILLIAM MACINTOSH (for Mr. Jagger)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether a motor car has been provided at State expense for the use of the High Commissioner in London, and, if so, what was the cost and what is the estimated annual expense of the car&#x2019;s running and maintenance?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#william_macintosh">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The answer to the first portion of the hon. member&#x2019;s question is in the affirmative. The purchase price of the car was £1,356 and the estimated annual cost of running and maintenance, based on a mileage of 20,000 per annum, is £675.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>Was that a Ford car?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#close">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#henderson" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. HENDERSON:</from>

<p>Did the predecessor of the present High Commissioner enjoy these privileges?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#henderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The predecessors of the present High Commissioner used to hire taxis but as the High Commissioner has to represent the Union in a worthy and dignified manner, we thought that practice was undesirable.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Fruit Pulp Imports.</heading>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XIX.</num>

<from>Mr. STRUBEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What quantities and varieties of fruit pulp were imported into the Union from overseas during the years 1922, 1923, 1924, 1925 and 1926, respectively;</li>

<li>(2) from what countries were such importations made, showing how much was imported from each country;</li>

<li>(3) who were the largest importers of fruit pulp during the respective years mentioned above; and</li>

<li>(4) for what purposes was the fruit pulp imported during the said respective years?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#struben">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>lbs.</p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(1)</p></td>

<td><p>1922</p></td>

<td><p>88,341</p></td>

<td><p>2,614</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1923</p></td>

<td><p>504,023</p></td>

<td><p>8,978</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1924</p></td>

<td><p>228,059</p></td>

<td><p>3,991</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1925</p></td>

<td><p>342,990</p></td>

<td><p>7,485</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1926</p></td>

<td><p>*194,304</p></td>

<td><p>4,504</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>* For eleven months.</p>

<p>The principal varieties are those not ordinarily obtainable in the Union such as rasberry and blackberry.</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>lbs.</p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(2)</p></td>

<td><p>1922</p></td>

<td><p>86,007</p></td>

<td><p>2,560 from Australia.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Nil</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014; from Holland.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>2,262</p></td>

<td><p>50 from United Kingdom.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>72</p></td>

<td><p>4 from Other Countries.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1923</p></td>

<td><p>483,308</p></td>

<td><p>8,523 from Australia.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>11,755</p></td>

<td><p>255 from Holland.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>8,960</p></td>

<td><p>200 from United Kingdom.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1924</p></td>

<td><p>194,942</p></td>

<td><p>3,417 from Australia.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>32,099</p></td>

<td><p>546 from Holland.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1,018</p></td>

<td><p>28 from Other Countries.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1925</p></td>

<td><p>294,557</p></td>

<td><p>6,535 from Australia.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>48,047</p></td>

<td><p>932 from Holland.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>386</p></td>

<td><p>18 from Other Countries.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1926</p></td>

<td><p>179,667</p></td>

<td><p>4,112 from Australia.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>(11 mths.)</p></td>

<td><p>7,467</p></td>

<td><p>139 from Holland.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>4,932</p></td>

<td><p>212 from Italy.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>2,238</p></td>

<td><p>41 from Other Countries.</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<ol>

<li>(3) It is regretted that this information cannot be supplied.</li>

<li>(4) The pulp is used principally in the manufacture of jams and confectionery.</li></ol>

<p>The Customs Department is not supposed to disclose the names of particular importers.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>†Mr. STRUBEN:</from>

<p>Does the Minister think that that reply discloses a position encouraging to agriculture? As our progressive production of fruit proceeds so does the progressive introduction of fruit pulp from overseas, and that is not fair to South African farmers nor encouraging to settlers&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Is this one of the cases in which the Board of Trade and Industries makes a discrimination in regard to the assistance given to certain factories?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>If the hon. member will put a question on the paper I will give him a reply. If manufacturers make representations to the board I have no doubt they will be considered. My department is only considering the matter from a tariff point of view.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>I thought the board looked into these things without representations being made to it.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Banks and Imported Clerks.</heading>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XX.</num>

<from>Mr. BLACKWELL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is correctly reported to have said at Maitland that the big banking concerns in South Africa regarded the <span class="col_131-132" refersTo="page_0135"/>youth of South Africa as too irresponsible to do the work required of them, and imported their officials from overseas, an honourable exception being the Netherlands Bank;</li>

<li>(2) upon what authority was this statement made;</li>

<li>(3) has he since learnt that during the past five years the Standard Bank imported only 18 men from overseas, while they took into service 1,145 South Africans;</li>

<li>(4) has he ascertained before or since his speech what proportion of the officials of the Netherlands Bank are South African born; and</li>

<li>(5) whether, if the Minister is not prepared to support his statement, he will withdraw it?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I said at Maitland that the statement had been made on behalf of the banks that they would be compelled to import clerks owing to the South African youth being irresponsible and that the Netherlands Bank had said that it did not support this statement.<br/>

In reference to this point I stated that, judging from my experience, there was nothing very difficult in the work done in South African banks, and it was absurd to say that South African youths were unsuited to be bank clerks.</li>

<li>(2) Statements in the press.</li>

<li>(3) Yes. Also from statements in the press.<br/>

I may add that a like statement has not been made by Barclays Bank, nor is it now stated what the future policy of these banks will be.</li>

<li>(4) No.</li>

<li>(5) No.</li></ol>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>Is it a fact that nearly all the branch managers of the Netherlands Bank and the general manager as well came from Holland? And what is the proportion of overseas to South African born men engaged by the Netherlands Bank?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#close">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>That is one of the questions put to me. I said I had no information.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Why don&#x2019;t you get information before you say such stupid things?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>Will you be quiet for a minute? If the position is as disclosed, that position is absolutely wrong. With the exception of some highly placed bank officials, every position in the bank could be held by South Africans.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>Did the Minister take the trouble to ascertain the facts in regard to the other banks which he now professes he is ignorant about?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#close">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>With regard to that point, if he reads the question he will naturally take it I did not make enquiries. My statement had nothing to do with the proportion of people employed. My statement was as in my first answer, which I repeat.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>You have tied yourself into a nice knot. You are a naughty little boy.</p>

</question>

<question by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>Order.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>If I had said I approved of the policy of importing people to do this work nobody on the other side would have had any objection.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Do I understand rightly that the Minister said he was not prepared to withdraw any of the statement, even if on investigation of the position at the Netherlands Bank he finds himself incorrect?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>Yes, I did say so, and I speak English clearly enough.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>†Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>The Minister said that no statement had been made by Barclays Bank. Has he not seen the statement since my question was put on the paper?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>No, I have not.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#hon_member" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>An HON. MEMBER:</from>

<p>All the members of the Opposition are looking for an overdraft.</p>

</question>

<question by="#arnott" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Brig.-Gen. ARNOTT:</from>

<p>Is it not a fact that not more than twelve men have been imported from Great Britain to Barclays Bank?</p>

</question>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>You must not make statements at meetings about things you don&#x2019;t know anything about.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Public Service: Appointments and Promotions.</heading>

<question by="#giovanetti" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXI.</num>

<from>Mr. GIOVANETTI</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior whether he will lay upon the Table a list of names showing new appointments from the 1st July, 1924, to (a) the administrative, (b) the clerical, and (c) the professional branches of the public service; also a list of names showing promotions to posts from senior clerks upwards since the same date?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#giovanetti">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>Yes. The lists have been prepared and are laid on the Table to-day.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: European and Native Labourers.</heading>

<question by="#swart" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXII.</num>

<from>Mr. SWART</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many European labourers have been retired from the railway service at Bloemfontein since the 1st December, 1926, and why were they retired;</li>

<li>(2) how many of them have been taken in service again; and</li>

<li>(3) how many natives have been taken on in place of those Europeans retired as above?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#swart">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Thirty European labourers who were employed in a casual capacity to meet the requirements of the service have been dispensed with since the 1st December, 1926, on account of their services being no longer required.</li>

<li>(2) Twenty-two European labourers have since been re-engaged either temporarily or in a casual capacity. These casual appointments <span class="col_133-134" refersTo="page_0136"/>have been made to meet traffic requirements. It is a fairly common practice for labourers to be employed casually to meet pressure of work and to augment the regular staff and for them to be paid off when their services are no longer needed.</li>

<li>(3) No natives have been taken on at Bloemfontein in place of Europeans.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Sedition Bill.</heading>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XXIII.</num>

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice whether it is the intention if the Government to re-introduce the Sedition Bill; if not, why not?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>The provisions of this Fill are being included in a more comprehensive measure which is to be introduced this session.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Members of Parliament and Commission Fees.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XXIV.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been directed to paragraph 46 of the Report of the Controller and Auditor-General, 1925-&#x2019;26, relating to members of Parliament and Commissions;</li>

<li>(2) whether the Parliamentary allowance of £700 per annum and the free ticket over the railways are not intended to cover all subsistence and travelling expenses of members attending the Parliamentary session;</li>

<li>(3) if so, why was a special subsistence allowance of £3 3s. per day paid to certain members of Parliament during their attendance in Cape Town for the 1924 and 1925 sessions, as indicated in paragraph 46 of the Report of the Controller and Auditor-General;</li>

<li>(4) whether the members in question have been requested to make any refund in respect of the said subsistence allowance paid to them;</li>

<li>(5) if they have not been so requested, why was not such a request made;</li>

<li>(6) if they were so requested, has any refund been made; and if they have refused to make a refund, on what grounds was such refusal based;</li>

<li>(7) what accounting officer made the payment of the subsistence allowance, and upon what authority; and</li>

<li>(8) on what Commissions did the members referred to sit?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The report of the Controller and Auditor-General for 1925-&#x2019;26 has been referred to the Select Committee on Public Accounts and as the matter to which the hon. member refers will doubtless be examined and reported on by the Committee it seems preferable that it should not be dealt with at this stage by way of question and answer in the House.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>†Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>Does the Minister of Finance know how many members of the Public Committee on Accounts are included in this list of nine members? Is he going to get them to sit in judgment on themselves.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I did not appoint them, and if there are any members sitting on their own cases the House must take cognisance of it.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. NEL:</from>

<p>Are there any members who refused to sit on this Committee, and if so to what parties do they belong?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#blackwell">

<from>†Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>This matter will be dealt with by the Public Accounts Committee and I do not think any further questions need be asked.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: S. L. Harris, Embezzlement by.</heading>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XXV.</num>

<from>Mr. BLACKWELL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the amount embezzled by S. L. Harris, a trustee of estates, and how much of this was recovered;</li>

<li>(2) what was the sentence imposed upon him and how long did he serve;</li>

<li>(3) what restitution of stolen moneys, if any, was made by him or on his behalf;</li>

<li>(4) what were the representations made to the Minister to secure his release, why was the release granted, and upon what conditions;</li>

<li>(5) whether it is a fact that upon release Harris, accompanied by his wife and a maid, went to England, first class, on a mail steamer; and</li>

<li>(6) whether the Minister will lay all the papers upon the Table?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>When an identical question was asked on the 1st instant, I stated that I would reply to it when dealing with a similar question on the Paper for today. That question has been withdrawn, but as part of the information sought by the hon. member for Bezuidenhout is contained in the reply which had been prepared, I will read that reply and add the information on points desired by the hon. member which are not covered.</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Pottle was convicted of culpable homicide and Harris of theft. The first-named killed a neighbour by means of a revolver shot, the second-named embezzled some £9.500 odd.</li>

<li>(2) Pottle was sentenced to three years&#x2019; imprisonment with hard labour, and served 191 days before he was released. Harris was sentenced to three years&#x2019; imprisonment with hard labour, and served 116 days before he was released.</li>

<li>(3) The cost of the proceedings in the case against Pottle came to about £86, and in the case of Harris to about £13, but these figures do not include the cost of the salaries of the court officials and members of the police force who dealt with the cases.</li>

<li>(4) In the case of Pottle representations were made to me by Colonel Rowlands, the chairman of the British Empire Service League of Bloemfontein, on the basis of the league&#x2019;s bearing the cost of sending Pottle and his family to England. In the case of Harris representations on his behalf were made to me by his legal adviser, Advocate Morris.<br/><span class="col_135-136" refersTo="page_0137"/>In both cases the accused, on the offer made by the gentlemen mentioned, had to depart and not return to South Africa.</li>

<li>(5) I considered that in both these cases the mere fact of having been convicted and having served a short period of imprisonment involving a loss of status was a severe punishment for these offenders, and that there was not much to be gained by keeping the prisoners at the public&#x2019;s expense for the full period of three years if arrangements could be made for them to leave the country for good. I was of opinion that it would be in the public interest to rid the country of their presence as soon as possible, and I also regard it as a severe punishment for anyone to be deprived of the right to reside in this country.</li></ol>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>†Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>It will not be worth living in if you carry on like that.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>(6) Pottle was released on condition that he would be on 4½ years&#x2019; probation; that he would commit no further offence, and that if he were found during his period of probation in any part of the Union save Port Nolloth, he would be recommitted to prison to serve the balance of his sentence. Harris was released on similar conditions.</p>

<p>The condition was made in this form, as the Law Advisers were of opinion that if couched in wider language, it would be illegal.</p>

<p>I may add that in one case the offence was not a deportable one, and in the other case, owing to its being a first offence, it was quite possible that the Department of the Interior would not have seen its way clear to deport.</p>

<p>In view, however, of the nature of the offences, coupled with the undertakings given on behalf of the accused, I have no doubt that that department will not readmit them to the Union.</p>

<p>As far as paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 are concerned, the estate of the prisoner was made insolvent, and little or nothing has been recovered. As to paragraph 4, that question has been sufficiently answered.</p>

<p>As to paragraph 5, my information at the time was that he went by an intermediate. I know nothing about Mrs. Harris&#x2019;s movements, nor am I interested in the question of her being accompanied by a maid.</p>

<p>As to paragraph 6, the file can be inspected by the hon. member in the office of the Secretary for Justice.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>As the Minister went to such trouble to get rid of Harris, why did he take the trouble to get Wilson back from Australia? He was also accused of embezzlement.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>That does not bear on the question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Does the Minister know that his thoughtful clemency to Harris has resulted in the establishment by that gentleman of an agency in London for the sale of South African land upon alluring conditions?</p>

</question>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>†Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Is this man associated with the Doornkop Estates which the Minister strongly recommended to the public?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#blackwell">

<from>†The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I have never heard anything of the kind.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Would you be surprised to hear that it is so?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#byron">

<from>†The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>In view of his making releases to save money wherewith to defray the expense of the visit of the Prince of Wales, may I ask the Minister whether he is prepared to make similar releases in future on the recommendations of the solicitors and counsel of the prisoner?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#nathan">

<from>†The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>That is a very good idea, and I will consider it.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Language Examination.</heading>

<question by="#hattingh" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXVI.</num>

<from>The Rev. Mr. HATTINGH</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether all officials who pass the promotion examination either in English or in Afrikaans are able to address the public in the language in which they passed the examination; and, if not,</li>

<li>(2) what is the percentage of those who cannot do so?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#hattingh">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) All officials who pass the promotion examination either in English or Afrikaans are required to have sufficient knowledge of the language to enable them to address the public in the language in which they pass the examination.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Coloured Servants.</heading>

<question by="#louw" to="#minister_of_defence">

<num>XXVII.</num>

<from>Mr. J. P. LOUW</from>

<p>asked the Minister whether he is prepared to lay upon the Table i copy of a letter from the Secretary for Labour to the Provincial Secretary, Cape Town, dated the 27th August, 1926, on the subject of the employment of coloured servants?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#louw">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>I will be glad if the hon. member will allow this question to stand over until Friday, when the Minister of Labour will have returned.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>What is the difficulty in this matter? Surely a simple letter of this kind could be laid on the Table of this House by any other Minister acting on behalf of the Minister of Labour.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#close">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>I have no further information to give than that already given.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Emigration from South Africa.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior how many persons of the following or other nationalities left the Union during 1926 expressing their intention not to <span class="col_137-138" refersTo="page_0138"/>return, viz.: (a) British; (b) British Naturalized: (c) American (U.S.A.); (d) French; (e) German; (f) Netherlander: (g) Norwegian; (h) Lett; (i) Lithuanian; (j) Pole; (k) Russian; (l) Greek; (m) Italian; and (n) Portuguese?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>The following figures show the number of persons according to nationality who assumed or relinquished domicile in the Union during the year 1926:&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>Race and Nationality.</p></td>

<td><p>Assuming Domicile.</p></td>

<td><p>Relinquishing Domicile.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>European:</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>British</p></td>

<td><p>4,046</p></td>

<td><p>3,438</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>British Xoturalized</p></td>

<td><p>48</p></td>

<td><p>73</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total British</p></td>

<td><p>4,094</p></td>

<td><p>3,511</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>American, South</p></td>

<td><p>5</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>American, U.S.A.</p></td>

<td><p>76</p></td>

<td><p>38</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>American, Other North</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Belgian</p></td>

<td><p>8</p></td>

<td><p>8</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Dane</p></td>

<td><p>15</p></td>

<td><p>9</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>French</p></td>

<td><p>19</p></td>

<td><p>16</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>German</p></td>

<td><p>344</p></td>

<td><p>67</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Netherlander</p></td>

<td><p>147</p></td>

<td><p>45</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Norwegian</p></td>

<td><p>202</p></td>

<td><p>15</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Swede</p></td>

<td><p>17</p></td>

<td><p>5</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Swiss</p></td>

<td><p>30</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Finn</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Austrian</p></td>

<td><p>11</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Bulgarian</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Czecho-Slav</p></td>

<td><p>18</p></td>

<td><p>3</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Hungarian</p></td>

<td><p>6</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Jugo-Slav</p></td>

<td><p>24</p></td>

<td><p>3</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Lett</p></td>

<td><p>94</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Lithuanian</p></td>

<td><p>974</p></td>

<td><p>6</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Pole</p></td>

<td><p>170</p></td>

<td><p>4</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Roumanian</p></td>

<td><p>6</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Russian</p></td>

<td><p>74</p></td>

<td><p>11</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Slav</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Turk</p></td>

<td><p>4</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Greek</p></td>

<td><p>80</p></td>

<td><p>7</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Italian</p></td>

<td><p>71</p></td>

<td><p>26</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Portuguese</p></td>

<td><p>57</p></td>

<td><p>8</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Serb</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Spanish</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>2</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Hebrew</p></td>

<td><p>13</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Syrian</p></td>

<td><p>15</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Other European</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total European</p></td>

<td><p>6,575</p></td>

<td><p>3,798</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Non-European:</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>British</p></td>

<td><p>613</p></td>

<td><p>2,297</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>British Naturalized</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>American, U.S.A.</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Chinese</p></td>

<td><p>59</p></td>

<td><p>16</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>French</p></td>

<td><p>2</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Italian</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Japanese</p></td>

<td><p>3</p></td>

<td><p>2</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Portuguese</p></td>

<td><p>3</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Syrian</p></td>

<td><p>5</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Turk</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Other Nationalities</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Total</p></td>

<td><p>7,260</p></td>

<td><p>6,123</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>†I would like to say here that there was some misunderstanding in connection with a reply I gave to a similar question which was asked a few days ago by the hon. member for Illovo (Mr. Marwick). He asked what the nett gain was in immigration from certain countries, and what was given was the nett gain, that is to say, the balance of entrants over departures.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†Mr. STRUBEN:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister whether he and his Cabinet are completely satisfied with the position disclosed by the figures which he has just read to the House in regard to the nationality and type of immigrants coming into our country.</p>

</question>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>Before the Minister replies I would ask him whether he will inform the House how he becomes aware of the fact that a person has relinquished his domicile in South Africa?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#nathan">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I obtained these figures from the Census Department. These questions are asked from people arriving and people leaving the country, whether they are going to settle here permanently or whether they are departing to settle overseas permanently. In regard to the question by the hon. member for Albany (Mr. Struben), I can only say that, whatever my personal opinions may be, that does not alter the position at all. It is just a question as to whether the country is going ahead or not. If the country is going ahead then the position in regard to European immigration will improve and these figures show that the position is improving rapidly.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Flag Commission.</heading>

<question by="#stuttaford" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXIX.</num>

<from>Mr. STUTTAFORD</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Flag Commission has been called to meet on the 22nd February in Cape Town under the Chairmanship of Prof. Dr. Blommaert, of the University of Stellenbosch; and</li>

<li>(2) whether Sir William Campbell has resigned the chairmanship of the commission, and, if so, what reasons has he given for doing so?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#stuttaford">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) Yes. The reasons given will appear from the correspondence, which will be published at an early date.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Arising out of that question, I would ask the Minister whether he proposes placing the Flag Bill on the Table before the 15th of this month, and if not, why not?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#reitz">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>With all due respect to the hon. member, I must say that in view of the known facts that is a very silly question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Col, D. REITZ:</from>

<p>I don&#x2019;t quite see where the silliness comes in. The Minister has refused to answer my question. When is he going to put his Bill on the Table and is he going to do so before the 15th, because the voters of this country want to see that Bill?</p>

</question>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from><span class="col_139-140" refersTo="page_0139"/>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Will the Minister tell the House what he means in regard to the letter of Sir William Campbell by placing it on the Table of the House at an early date? I presume the Minister has got the letter and that there is nothing to prevent him from laying it on the Table now.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I am afraid the hon. member has misunderstood me. I did not say I would lay the letter on the Table of the House. The correspondence will be published, and possibly that will be done to-morrow.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†Mr. STRUBEN:</from>

<p>What does the Minister mean by the two words &#x201C;known facts&#x201D;?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#struben">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>Let me explain further the reply I gave to the other hon. member. I stated in my reply to the question that the Flag Commission will meet for the disposal of its work on February 22nd. It is certainly a silly question to ask, seeing that the Flag Commission is going to start its work on the 22nd, whether the Bill will be laid on the Table of the House before the 15th.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister whether he purposely fixed the meeting for the 22nd, so that the Commission would meet after the 15th?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#hon_member" to="#reitz">

<from>An HON. MEMBER:</from>

<p>Another silly question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister consent to the inclusion on the Flag Commission of the wives of any hon. members on this side of the House, in view of the fact that members on the opposite side seem to be represented in that manner?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#hon_member" to="#marwick">

<from>An HON. MEMBER:</from>

<p>Another silly question.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Tenders for Locomotives.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF FINANCE (for the Minister of Railways and Harbours) replied to Question III. by Sir William Macintosh, standing over from 4th February.</p>

<question by="#william_macintosh" to="#minister_of_finance">

<heading>Question;</heading>

<p>Whether he will give the House full information regarding the tenders for the supply of locomotives recently purchased, and lay upon the Table all papers incidental thereto?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#william_macintosh">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<p>The papers, including tender forms, specifications, tenders, designs, etc., are very voluminous and would involve considerable time and expense in preparation to lay on the Table, but I am prepared to allow the hon. member and any other hon. members interested an opportunity of perusing the papers in my office. Tenders were considered for&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) 37 Class G. F. Garratt and/or modified Fairlie engines. 23 tenders were received, of which there were: 12 Continental, 6 British. 2 American, 3 on behalf of a combination of Henschel &amp; Sohn, Germany, J. A. Maffei, Germany, and Beyer, Peacock <i>&amp;</i> Company, England. The tender accepted was that submitted on behalf of Hanomag, Germany, at £10,250 each f.o.r. Durban. The lowest British tender (which was not to specification) was £10,365. The next lowest British tender (to specification) was £11,312.</li>

<li>(2) 13 Class G.C.A. engines. 23 tenders were received, of which there were: 12 Continental, 2 American, 7 British, 2 on behalf of the same combine as mentioned in (1) The tender accepted was that of Fried Krupp, Germany, viz: 9 engines at £8,000 each f.o.r. East London, 4 engines at £7,950 each f.o.r. Cape Town. The lowest British tender was £8,732 each f.o.r. East London, £8,682 each f.o.r. Cape Town.</li>

<li>(3) 2 Class G.H. engines. 13 tenders were received, of which there were: 6 Continental, 2 American, 2 British, 3 on behalf of the same combine as mentioned in (1). The tender accepted was that submitted on behalf of J. A. Maffei, Germany, combined with Henschel &amp; Sohn, Germany, and Beyer, Peacock &amp; Company, England, at £15.250 each f.o.r. Cape Town. The lowest British tender was £16,600.</li>

<li>(4) 3 Narrow Gauge engines. 15 tenders were received, of which there were: 8 Continental, 5 British, 1 American, 1 on behalf of the same combine as mentioned in (1). The tender accepted was that of Hanomag, Germany, at £6,050 each f.o.r. Durban. The lowest British tender was £6,505.</li>

<li>(5) 2 Three-cylinder engines. 19 tenders were received, of which there were: 11 Continental, 6 British, 2 American. The tender accepted was that of Henschel &amp; Sohn, Germany, at £12,250 f.o.r. East London. The lowest British tender was £15,600.</li></ol>

<p>Many of the tenders submitted did not conform to the Administration&#x2019;s specifications, but the most careful consideration was given by the Railway Board to all the tenders for the various types of engines before decisions were arrived at. I am satisfied the decisions taken are in the public interest.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#william_macintosh" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Sir WILLIAM MACINTOSH:</from>

<p>I quite understand that the papers as a whole would be too bulky to lay on the Table, but surely it would be quite possible to lay on the Table a synopsis embodying all the essential facts?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#william_macintosh">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I will put it to my colleague as to whether the wishes of the hon. member (Sir William Macintosh) could be complied with in that way. The hon. member will see that there is no intention of hiding the information. The papers are at the disposal of any member at the office of my colleague.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Arising out of that reply, may I ask the Minister, as he is good enough to suggest that he will consult his colleague, if he would also ask the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether in placing that information on the Table he would also put the House in possession of the facts as to what period of time these foreign engines go into the shops for repairs, as compared with English engines.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from><span class="col_141-142" refersTo="page_0140"/>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>That seems an important question. Perhaps the hon. member will give notice of that.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#jagger" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. JAGGER:</from>

<p>My hon. friend has promised to speak to his colleague about that, but when are we going to get the result of that? I want to raise an important question. If there is one thing about this Government, and especially about the Minister of Railways and Harbours, it is that they are afraid of publicity.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#jagger">

<from>†Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member must ask a question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#jagger" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. JAGGER:</from>

<p>It is a weakness of the Minister of Railways and Harbours that he is very much afraid of public opinion. This is one of the occasions. He was asked for this information by the public.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#jagger">

<from>Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>Order !</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#jagger">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>If the hon. member does not get the information which he desires, I am sure he will get an opportunity of pursuing the matter further.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister if he will impress upon his colleague the necessity of giving this information and of laying it upon the Table as early as possible?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I shall convey to my colleague the wishes of the hon. member.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Gounnz River Bridge.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF FINANCE (for the Minister of Railways and Harbours) replied to Question IV by Mr. Brink, standing over from 4th February.</p>

<question by="#brink" to="#minister_of_finance">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware that there are rumours that the Gouritz River bridge is not quite safe; and</li>

<li>(2) whether, in view of an expected increase of traffic, the Government intends to strengthen the bridge?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#brink">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<p>Yes; but I would repeat my assurance to the people of the south-west districts that the Gcuritz River bridge need not occasion anxiety and that the Administration will exercise all are and the public may be assured that the bridge is quite safe for present loads and speeds. When action is necessary to improve the facilities for crossing the river, suitable steps will be taken by the Administration.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Dr. Visser, M.L.A., Alleged Contract with.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF FINANCE (for the Minister of Railways and Harbours) replied to Question VI. by Major J. B. van Zyl, standing over from 4th February.</p>

<question by="#van_zyl" to="#minister_of_finance">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Government or the Department of Railways and Harbours entered into any contract with Dr. Visser (the hon. member for Vrededorp) prior to his visiting the Argentine during the recess; if so,</li>

<li>(2) what are the terms and the date of such contract; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister will lay the contract upon the Table?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#van_zyl">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Prior to his leaving South Africa for the Argentine, the Railway Administration entered into an agreement with Dr. Visser, the hon. member for Vrededorp, under which sleepers would be obtained for the requirements of the Administration. The sleepers were to be of a quality and type which the Administration had previously endeavoured to obtain from the Argentine without success, the price agreed to comparing favourably with that paid by the Administration for jarrah and other sleepers.</li>

<li>(2) and (3) The terms and the date of the agreement are as set out in the document, copy of which I lay upon the Table.</li></ol>

<p>As the guarantee provided for in Clause 9 of the agreement had not been furnished nor notification of cancellation given in terms of Clause 12, it was decided to terminate the agreement, and formal notice to this effect was given to Dr. Visser on the 30th November, 1926.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Arising out of that reply, may I ask what the qualifications of the hon. member for Vrededorp (Dr. Visser) were to go and buy sleepers in the Argentine? He has often put us to sleep in the House before. Why was this particular gentleman selected to go on this business mission? Was it another joy-ride, or has he qualifications for this particular job?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>If the hon. member will put that question on paper the Minister will no doubt give the information.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>†Mr. NEL:</from>

<p>Can the Minister give us the date on which that contract was made?</p>

</question>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>It should have been the 1st of April.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The 8th July, 1926, and the 9th of July, 1926.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>†Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>Would the Minister convey to his colleague this question? How was it that this House, when questions were put on this particular point at the end of the session last year, was left in complete ignorance of any negotiations with the hon. member for Vrededorp, and was given to understand that nothing of the sort was contemplated?</p>

</question>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>I should like to ask whether the hon. member for Vrededorp was also empowered to negotiate with regard to coal. I understand he was also trying to sell our coal in the Argentine, and I should like to know what qualifications he has Perhaps the hon. gentleman himself might tell us something about it. If so, on what commission?</p>

</question>

<question by="#van_zyl" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from><span class="col_143-144" refersTo="page_0141"/>Maj. G. B. VAN ZYL:</from>

<p>I should like to ask whether it is not a fact that a member of the Administration, one who is an expert in the choice of sleepers, was not, at or about this time, in or near the Argentine?</p>

</question>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Can the Minister tell us why, when I put a question last session to his colleague, as to whether he had decided to send anybody to the Argentine to buy sleepers, his colleague assured us that it was not his intention to do so, but to rely upon an expert of the Railway Administration who was at that time in the East?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I am sorry, but if hon. members want all that information, they had better adopt the usual course.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>Where is the Minister?</p>

</question>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Perhaps the Minister would get some information of an interesting character for the House as to how much this interesting joy-ride has cost the country.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#loan_funds">

<heading>LOAN FUNDS.</heading>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister of Finance a question with regard to the Loan Funds. When is he going to lay the additional Estimates of his own Department on the Table, and also the Estimates for the coming year? The House has been sitting for a considerable time and it is the rule to lay the Estimates on the Table as soon as Parliament meets.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>The hon: member will find he is mistaken when he says it is the rule to lay the Estimates on the Table as soon as Parliament meets. He will find that the Minister of Railways and Harbours was very early this year. As far as my own Additional Estimates are concerned, I hope they will be ready in a day or two. The main Estimates will still take some time. The hon. member will realise that what is an apparent delay&#x2014;not a real delay&#x2014;is due to a certain extent to the fact that I have been absent from this country.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#companies_(workers&#x2019;_shares)_bill">

<heading>COMPANIES (WORKERS&#x2019; SHARES) BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to Mr. Stuttaford to introduce the Companies (Workers&#x2019; Shares) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 25th February.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#apportionment_of_quitrent_further_amendment_bill">

<heading>APPORTIONMENT OF QUITRENT FURTHER AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to Mr. Roux to introduce the Apportionment of Quitrent Further Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 25th February.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#magistrates&#x2019;_courts_act_1917_further_amendment_bill">

<heading>MAGISTRATES&#x2019; COURTS ACT, 1917, FURTHER AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to Mr. Nel to introduce the Magistrates&#x2019; Courts Act, 1917, Further Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 11th February.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#chartered_accountants_designation_(private)_bill">

<heading>CHARTERED ACCOUNTANTS DESIGNATION (PRIVATE) BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to Mr. Swart to introduce the Chartered Accountants Designation (Private) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_c_de_waal">

<heading>PETITION C. DE WAAL.</heading>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion and pursuant to notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the petition from C. de Waal, of Pretoria, who was granted certain land in Secoecoeniland in respect of the defence of Fort Burgers in 1876 and who failed to apply in respect of his claim in terms of Proclamation No. 11 of 1910, praying for the consideration of his case and for relief, presented to this House on the 3rd February, 1927, be referred to the Select Committee on Crown Lands for consideration and report.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#moffat">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOFFAT</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#drought_and_settlers&#x2019;_instalments">

<heading>DROUGHT AND SETTLERS&#x2019; INSTALMENTS.</heading>

<speech by="#thomas_watt">

<from>†Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS WATT</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That in view of the inability of many purchasers of land from the Government to pay the instalments of the purchase price, owing to the high value placed on the land, to drought and to other causes, this House respectfully requests the Government to consider the advisability of not pressing these persons for payment at present; and, further, that this House is of opinion that the Government should take into consideration the necessity of causing an independent enquiry to be made as to the ability of such persons to meet their liabilities to the Government.</block>

<p>Hon. members will see from the notice paper that my motion is to the effect that, in view of the inability of purchasers of land from the Government to pay for same, owing to high prices and the high interest, due to the drought and other causes, I ask the Government respectfully not to press for payment at present; and I go on to ask the Government to consider the advisability of making an enquiry into the ability of these people to meet their engagements to the Government. I would like to preface my remarks by saying that I have no intention of attacking the Government in the least, because I am quite convinced that this Government is as anxious as their predecessors were to promote land settlement. I have had occasion to communicate with the Minister of Lands from time to time regarding individual cases, and I have invariably found him to be courteous and willing to help; but he is bound by the law and the regulations, and he must of necessity leave a great deal of power in the hands of his officials and members of the land boards, and they in turn have their hands tied <span class="col_145-146" refersTo="page_0142"/>by the laws and regulations. It is necessary. I admit, to have laws and regulations to prevent abuses, but I hope to show that our land laws are not conducive to land settlement. If I compare the position of the Minister of Lands with my own, I am bound to say that I am more responsible than he is, because I was a member of the Government during whose term of office most of these laws were introduced and passed. If I may say anything in excuse of myself, it is that it was only recently that I realized how badly our land laws worked, and it made me resolve to lay this matter fully before Parliament, because Parliament, as a whole, is responsible for the laws it has passed, and Parliament will be held responsible if these laws are not modified very much in favour of land settlement. Our land laws are defective in this&#x2014;that we expect far too much from settlers. In some other countries settlers can get a small farm free of charge. Owing to the fact that we have little land suitable for land settlement, it was necessary for us to buy land, and we have saddled the settler with heavy liabilities which he will never be able to discharge. The Government is responsible for these settlers, and has a special responsibility to see that everything in reason is done to enable the settlers, whom they themselves have placed on the land, to be successful. When the war was over, and our men came back from active service in 1919, the cry was for land. The Government of the day was very sympathetic, and Parliament voted the money. Land boards were told to get busy. The inevitable result was that land boomed; prices began to soar, and members of land boards, who were practical farmers themselves, must have felt, in many cases, that they were advising the Government to pay prices that were far too high; but they had no option. Every land board office was besieged by men clamouring for land, and price was a secondary consideration. When the land was allotted to an applicant, according to our law, he was bound to have a lease of five years. During the first year he made no payment; during the second and third years he paid rent equal to 2 per cent, of the purchase price, and during the fourth and fifth years the rent was increased to 3½ per cent, of the price. Then he was bound to pay the purchase price which the Government had paid for the land plus survey fees, the costs of transfer and other costs which the Government had incurred. He had to pay this price in half-yearly instalments extending over 20 years, and that period was increased recently by law to 40 years, so that the price was payable in 80 half-yearly instalments. But in addition to the purchase price the law provided that interest at the rate of 4 per cent. should also be paid, and there, I think, considerable hardship and an unnecessary burden were placed on the settler. In many cases they were quite ignorant of land values and trusted to the Land Board, and trusted that the officials of the Government would see that they got good land. In many cases, I am afraid, they did not get what they expected. With regard to the failure that has attended our land settlement since Union, the causes have been many. We have had farmers who failed because they were bad farmers. Other men failed who put their money into stock. We know that the value of cattle during the last few years dropped by 40 per cent. Others pinned their faith to cotton, but owing to drought and the drop in the price of cotton, they have not done well. The men I have principally in view in my motion have suffered from all these drawbacks, but in addition they have failed because of the high prices which the Government has expected them to pay for the land. The Government can do little to improve the prices of produce and cattle except in getting better markets oversea. With regard to drought, the only thing the Government can do, apart from giving temporary relief, is to construct irrigation works or assist land owners to do so. But in regard to the high prices the Government have it in their own power to mitigate the position. They can meet the point by not pressing for payment. I am afraid that unless relief is given to those who are at present on the land many more holdings will be abandoned, and the large army of unemployed will be swelled by men from the land. In order to show that the plight of these settlers is not only serious, but desperate, I want to instance a case to the House. A man, whose name I have given to the Minister, in 1919 bought from the Government 875 acres in the Dundee district at 47s. 3d. per acre, and 20 additional acres at 40s. an acre, the total price being £2,142. This man spent £400 in permanent improvements, and several hundreds more in equipping his farm and getting to work. He unfortunately, was told that the land he got was good arable land, instead of which it was found to be extremely poor. Although he used as much as 200 lbs. of fertilizer to the acre, the best crop he got was seven bags to the acre, and usually he got only three or four. He got the best soil on the farm analysed, and the report stated that it was deficient in every kind of plant food. This man was going back, and he got assistance from the Government and borrowed £250, but then hearing that the Government was willing to revalue the holdings he applied for a re-valuation, which he got, and the price was reduced to £1,743. But this re-valuation was a farce, because the Government added £291 arrear rent. The interest on arrear rent was added £22: and quite rightly, they added the loan £250, interest on the loan £60, making £2,366, which he was told was the price of his land. Then, in addition to that, according to the law&#x2014;the Minister had no option&#x2014;40 years&#x2019; interest at 4 per cent.&#x2014;£2,399&#x2014;was added, bringing the price up to £4,765. He was told he had to pay that sum in 80 half-yearly instalments of £59 11s. 3d. each. That works out at a little less than £5 an acre, omitting the loan of £250. A practical farmer, who knows this land, told me that the previous owner who sold the land to the Government could not make a living on it, and, in his opinion, it was never worth more than 12s. an acre. I put it to the farmers in the House, would any of them take on this proposition of trying to pay £4,765 for 900 acres of grazing land, and very <span class="col_147-148" refersTo="page_0143"/>poor land at that? Is it any wonder that these settlers look upon the Minister of Lands as a grasping Shylock who is trying to extract his pound of flesh from the unfortunate settlers? That is not my opinion, but it is theirs. I know the Minister would like to help them more than he has done, and I feel convinced that the Government will see that relief is given to these people. In the first part of my motion I ask the Government to give these men breathing time. The Minister, in a recent reply, said he was not pressing the settlers, but the settlers do not know that&#x2014;they can only take the letters which the Minister&#x2019;s department sends to them as expressing his intention. These men are very much perturbed because the Minister&#x2019;s officials are pressing them. One letter, dated September last, says it must be clearly understood that all arrears have been capitalized, and that the department will insist on the arrears being paid on due date. In November the same man received a letter warning him that unless a special endeavour was made by him to liquidate the outstanding amount at an early date, there would be no alternative but to consider the matter in a serious light. Another letter stated that unless the department heard from the settler at an early date there would be no alternative but to submit the matter for the consideration of the Land Board, as the non-payment of instalments was a decided breach of the lease. Another settler received a similar letter only a month ago. These men have had drought losses, stock has fallen fifty per cent, in value, they have put all their savings into their holdings, and they simply have not a penny with which to pay the Government. Surely it would be better to let them struggle on than to frighten them with these letters, which they take to mean that Government will turn them off the land unless they pay. A good case can be made out for the first part of my motion. With regard to the second portion, in which I press for an enquiry into the ability of the settlers to pay, I am very anxious to see an independent enquiry&#x2014;I mean an enquiry by a person or persons unconnected with the officials of the Land Department or with the semi-officials of the Land Board.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Why?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_watt">

<from>†Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS WATT</person>:</from>

<p>The officials of the Land Department look upon it as their particular business to collect the moneys due. Behind them is the Treasury, whose duty it is to see that everybody who owes money to the Government, is pressed for payment. In the past the price of land has been fixed by the Land Board, and it is too much to expect that they will reduce the price considerably, for if they did so it would be a reflection on themselves. It is highly necessary that a fresh start should be made, and that we should overhaul the whole of our existing land settlement system. The real problem is not to get in the money, but how are we going to keep on the land the settlers already there, and how best to increase their number? The Government extends very liberal help to men who have been driven off the land and to the unemployed generally. They take them in hand, find them work, and even pay them while they are being trained to go back on to the land, when the Government will give them houses and holdings, cattle and seed, probably spending £1,000 on a man who is down and out. Is it not better to help the man on the land so as to keep him there and to prevent him joining the ranks of the unemployed? The Department of Labour last year spent £391,000 in unemployed relief and in training the unemployed to go back on to the land. I think a good portion of that money should be diverted to helping men already on the land. I don&#x2019;t think our land settlement is likely to be a success unless we make up our minds that the Government must lose a certain amount of money. It is quite impossible for a settler to go on to a raw piece of veld and make sufficient profit to pay rent during the first five years. Even an experienced farmer with plenty of capital and no rent to pay will have a hard job to make a profit during his first five years. He would be very lucky indeed if he could show any profit at all at the end of the first five years of farming on a new piece of land. How much more difficult it must be for an inexperienced man or a man with limited training and capital to make sufficient profit to pay the Government £40 or £50 every half year. Again, we should reduce the price of land very considerably; the land I have mentioned should be reduced by 75 per cent. It was reduced by a few shillings an acre. The land generally held by settlers was bought in the boom period. So the settlers are burdened with the mistakes made by the Land Department. I don&#x2019;t say we ought to make a reduction all round, but a close enquiry should be made into the circumstances of each settler and into the nature of the soil he is expected to pay for. I have heard of a case where an official was sent to value a farm, and he simply drove up to the farm house, had a cup of coffee, chatted over the matter, and drove away without looking at the place. We want a detailed inspection of the land. Again, it is entirely wrong to charge the settlers with interest, I have shown how the price of land is doubled by adding interest. In Natal, prior to Union, we had several successful land settlement schemes. The land was sold by auction at the upset price of ten shillings an acre, and most of the purchasers paid from twelve shillings to fifteen shillings an acre. They had twenty years in which to pay for the land, and no interest was charged them unless they fell into arrears with their payments. Not only in Zululand, but throughout the whole of Natal, land settlement from 1895 down to the date of Union was, on the whole, successful. We can never expect our settlers to succeed if we charge them this very heavy interest. When land has been revalued, it is wrong to debit the settler with arrear payments, because that makes the position of a settler no better. In the case I have referred to, the poor man expected to get relief, but found he only got relief to the extent of the miserable sum of £36. I do not think the Government can defend <span class="col_149-150" refersTo="page_0144"/>for a moment the usurious charges made for interest.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>£2,399 was the correct amount of the valuation of the land.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_watt">

<from>†Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS WATT</person>:</from>

<p>The purchase price was £1,743. The rent was £290 18s. 1d., and interest £22. These are the figures, and the total is £2,056, or, in other words, a reduction of £86.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>After the arrears were added again?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_watt">

<from>†Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS WATT</person>:</from>

<p>Yes. It is quite right to charge him with the advance, but wrong to charge him with the arrears. If that was wrong, as I hold it was, it was doubly wrong to charge him interest on the arrears. How can a poor settler pay interest on the arrears if he cannot pay the arrears themselves? The Minister must admit that the burden he has put upon these men is greater than they can bear. He may say that many of them have paid neither rent nor instalments. That is true in some instances. They have no money with which to pay. They have put all they had into the land, and have gone on living in a meagre way. The position was so serious that some of them abandoned their farms and left. The piling of these burdens on the settlers is a bad policy. It is going to cost money to write off large sums, but this country has already written off large sums to keep men on the land. By the courtesy of the Auditor-General, I have some figures which I shall read. During the thirteen years preceding 31st March, 1926, the Irrigation Department has written off £206,000. In connection with the repatriation of burghers, the globular sum of £2,225,000 has been written off since 1913. The Land Department itself has written off since Union to the 31st of December last year the large sum of £529,000. The Secretary of Land, in his evidence before the Select Committee on Public Accounts, last year told the committee there would have to be written off other sums, and he estimated a loss of a further sum of £400,000 before they were out of the wood, if we are going to make land settlement a success, we must write off much more. The Government is bound to lose money, but if they do not come to the rescue in a substantial way, they will lose the men as well as the money. Ultimately, the Government will have to reduce the prices materially, because new settlers cannot afford to pay these prices. There are many holdings which have been abandoned. There are several in my own constituency standing vacant for some time, and nobody looked at them owing to the high prices, if we are to make land settlement a success, we must not look at the matter from the accountant&#x2019;s point of view, and we must not expect a pecuniary return for the money spent. The best asset any country can have is a numerous and contented farm population, especially here in South Africa, as we Europeans are outnumbered by the coloured population in the country. It is therefore necessary to strengthen the European element in the country districts. They have been leaving and going into the towns. We must encourage them to go back to the land in the interests of the country, and the country must face a loss if necessary. If we keep the people on the land, they will mutually repay ten-fold any expanse incurred in settling them. These men are not loafers, nor are they poor whites. They are hardworking men, and the Government must come to their assistance. During the recent tour of my constituency I met many settlers, some of whom I had not seen since they came back from active service, when they were young, eager, and anxious to get to work. When I saw them a few weeks ago, they were old, hopeless, worn men, worn out trying to make a living from a reluctant soil. Many of them have increased their responsibilities by marrying, and they told me that it wrung their hearts to think that they can only give their wives and families the barest necessities and the coarsest food, at which even the Kafirs turn up their noses. One man said to me&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">I have put £1,500 in the land, and I have worked like a galley slave. I did my best and hoped to see a return, but this debt the Government has saddled on me robs me of all hope, and I feel inclined to throw up the sponge and rid myself for ever of this horrible nightmare.</block>

<p>His wife was standing there with a baby in her arms, and she asked me with tears in her eyes whether the Government could not do something to help them. It was cases of this kind which decided me to bring the whole question before the House. I ask the Government to so amend the Land Laws in order to make it easier in the future for these settlers, and for those who may go on the land in future, to make their farming a success.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sephton">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SEPHTON</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>I agree with the first portion of the motion, but I want to extend it a little in the latter portion. I agree with the hon. member for Dundee (Sir Thomas Watt) that the Government should give every assistance possible to those settlers who cannot meet their obligations to the Government. I want to go further than the hon. member for Dundee, because we know there are many settlers in the country who have never paid their rent and, therefore, their failure is not due to the high price of the land. It has been due to the system under which the settlers have been settled. Therefore, I want to move an amendment to the motion of the hon. member for Dundee. The amendment I propose is in a slightly amended form to that which appears on the Order Paper&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To omit all the words after &#x201C;that&#x201D; in the fifth line and to substitute &#x201C;in view of the repeated failures which have occurred under the land settlement system this House is of opinion that the Government should appoint a Commission without delay to investigate and report upon the causes of such failure and to recommend measures designed <span class="col_151-152" refersTo="page_0145"/>to improve the system and secure better coordination of the work of the various Government Departments.&#x201D;</block>

<p>In moving this amendment I am not making an attack upon the Government. I am attacking the system. I should not do justice to the settlers whom I represent nor to the cause I am pleading if I attempt to make a party question of it. Neither this Government nor previous Governments are to blame for the present position. Our land settlement policy has grown up from crude conditions during the course of years. It is, therefore, ill designed to meet the modern economic conditions. It is a reflection of the past. I think we should now make an endeavour to build up land legislation in view of the future. This land settlement is really a national matter. We may say all we like about the necessity for fostering industries, for fostering the primal industry of mining and for creating wages boards and boards of industry; but if we do not establish our security on the land there is no necessity for our white population. For the success of the future and the success of any policy, whether political and economical, depends, in a large measure, upon success in agriculture. The present deplorable state of land settlement is not the fault of the Minister. Like the hon. member for Dundee I can pay a tribute to the solicitude of the Minister for the welfare of the settlers. I have approached him often in regard to settlers in my own constituency and he has done all in his power to help them. His power is conditioned, however, entirely by the Land Acts. He cannot go outside them and all the assistance he can render is conditioned by what is laid down there. The responsibility for the present state of things, then, lies upon every individual member of the House and it is to the House itself that I appeal for the appointment of a commission to investigate the position. Consider, in the first instance, our method of dealing with land settlement. We have four departments all having something to do with the purchase of land, all having something to do with putting settlers on the land; they are the Lands Department, the Labour Department, the Agricultural Department and the Irrigation Department. There is, as far as land settlement is concerned, an entire lack of co-ordination between the work of these departments. One department does not know what the other is doing. Sometimes, and when it does know, departmental dignity steps in the way of cooperation. The Labour Department is dealing with land settlement questions on its own without any consultation with the Lands Department, which has had experience ranging over a quarter of a century. The Lands Department is chiefly concerned in its administration with matters of survey, with matters of valuation, with the allotment of land, with the placing of the settler on the land, and giving him title. But it is not concerned in any way with the production of wealth from the soil, after the settler is there. The settler gets no assistance from the Government in the production of wealth from the soil. It is just here that our system breaks down. The settler, when he goes on to the land, is left to paddle his own canoe entirely. He is left to fight for every service which should be made available to him. He has, for instance, to petition, the Provincial Council to build a road to his settlement, in order to get his produce to the market, only to meet with the reply that the provincial authorities should not be called upon to construct roads through Government settlements. The Central Government appealed to, agree to construct a road, and is reprimanded by our Public Accounts Committee for spending money upon a provincial matter, consequently nothing is done and the settler is left to do the best he can. Later, he has to petition the postal authorities for every postal convenience that he needs, and he has to petition the Department of Justice, which is notoriously indifferent to settlers throughout the country, to obtain even the simple elements of protection, and he has to go to the Agricultural Department, cap in hand, to beg of them every little simple service which is available to the farmers of the country. He has to go to the Irrigation Department to beg them to put a bore hole down on his farm. The settler, as I say, is right up against it. He meets with restriction in many ways. He is restricted by the Veterinary Department from the very outset&#x2014;often from sheer caprice&#x2014;and the Railway Department pays him no consideration whatsoever, and charges him double rates for all goods carried on construction. Consider the foolish confusion, too, which exists in the financial arrangements. The settler can get a loan from the Lands Department for the building of a house, or for stock or implements, but if he wants to build a tank on his farm, he has to go to the Land Bank, and the Land Bank, before it grants a loan, goes to the Lands Department to get that loan underwritten. If he wants a bore put down on his farm and a windmill to pump water into the tank he must go to the Irrigation Department. Here is interminable confusion, even in matters of finance. And now we have the Labour Department, a department which seems to have its hand very firmly on the public purse, much more so than any other department, and which is able to give out money to whomsoever it wishes. We have created another wheel to our coach, a fifth wheel, in the Irrigation Commission. Surely, irrigation is a branch of land settlement, a subsidiary branch, and here we form an irrigation commission and, instead of putting it under the Minister of Lands, under whom it ought to be, we put it under the Minister of Agriculture. Previously, it was under the Minister of Justice. What is the result of all this confusion? The result is easily shown by the figures which come before the House periodically. The Lands Department does not produce much information in the way of annual reports. There was no report last year. I have a few figures extracted from the report of the year before, and I find that there were 11,525 debtors in 1923, and 11,213 in 1924, all of them unable to pay interest. That <span class="col_153-154" refersTo="page_0146"/>seems to me to be a most alarming picture of the condition of land settlement in this country when 11,213 are owing money to the Government which they are unable to pay. The Public Accounts Committee investigated this matter and they told the Minister of Lands that he must put on the screw, and they brought a motion into this House a couple of years ago to insist that the Minister of Lands should be firmer in the collection of arrears from land settlers. What was the consequence? The consequence was that the Minister of Lands started to put on the screw with the result that he has been told that probably 90 per cent, of the settlers in Natal will be unable to remain on their farms if they have to pay these arrears. We had from the Minister a few days ago the fact that 6,809 settlers are on the main land settlements, and of these 2,139 have met their instalments to the Government, so that to-day there are 69 per cent, of the total settlers on the land who are unable to meet their engagements to the Government. It would be very interesting to know how many of those 31 per cent, who are meeting their engagements to the Government have built their successes on the failures of their predecessors on the farms. I want to come to one particular illustration of the disaster which overwhelms our land settlement which has occurred recently in my own constituency. In doing so, I want to take my full share of the blame for what has happened. There exists in northern Zululand an area of ground of about 200,000 to 300,000 acres. It has been considered by all agriculturists who have seen it as the richest and most fertile portion of the Union. Seen in very favourable conditions, there is nothing anywhere to equal it. This area is traversed by perennial rivers capable of irrigating probably the whole area. Unfortunately, no rainfall records were kept of this area. Everybody who saw this area before settlement believed, as I believed, and still believe, that it is a very rich tract of land indeed. For a very long time there was a public demand and I also led that public demand, that this land should be thrown open for occupation, but the Government of the day, some three or four years ago was very cautious in the matter. After a good deal of urging, it cut the land into suitable areas, but before proceeding to grant allotments, it placed three settlers on the land to carry out experiments in cane growing. These experiments had been commenced and were continuing when a further pressure was brought upon the Government. Then came the cotton boom. Everybody began to talk cotton; articles appeared in all the papers of the Union, painting in glowing pictures the wealth to be obtained from cotton. Interested people were constantly being interviewed on the possibilities of cotton growing. The Prime Minister, during the last election period, went round the country telling the people that the poor whites on this land in Zululand could make £1,500 a year from cotton growing. The House and the country must accept the fullest responsibility for what occurred. I have here a Government publication called &#x201C;Farming Opportunities in South Africa,&#x201D; issued under the authority of the Publicity Department of the South African Railways and Harbours. It is also supported by the Agricultural Department. It was published in 1922. This book was to be found in the principal hotels and clubs in London, and it was to be found in the steamships coming out to South Africa. It has been called &#x201C;the settlers&#x2019; Bible.&#x201D; It was pointed out to me that if we turned to page 279 we find it is given there that the rainfall of the Umkuzi district averages 35.1 to 50 inches a year. That is the official information. We know from bitter experience that the rainfall during the last two years at Umkusi has been something like <i>12</i> to 14 inches. In this book cotton is pointed to as having a glorious future in South Africa and as having passed the experimental stage and was then in the stage where settlers growing cotton can rely on a very fine return. The return is given as £350 for every 50 acres as the lowest yield. A favourable yield in favourable places is given as £2,000 for 52 acres, and the most favourable place was shown to be in the so-called &#x201C;cotton belt of Zululand.&#x201D; On this glowing account and on these representations a number of men came to this country. They came with an abundance of capital; they were men of education and character. A number of them had held high commands in the army in the late war and they were a body of which any country might be proud. The greatest majority of them, of course, were South Africans. Here they were, some 150 or so of these new pioneers, many of them with a capital of about £2,030 to £4,000, starting out on the virgin veld full of enthusiasm to win this reward pictured to them in a Government publication. The position today is that 75 per cent, of these settlers at Umkusi have left the land; they have left their farms. The capital they had has all gone. I am not exaggerating when I say that some of them have been on the verge of starvation. The first year they had a flood which destroyed their crop, and the last two years they have been suffering under a very heavy drought. They were in this unfortunate position, more unfortunate than in other parts, that they could not fall back on cattle, for though the country I am speaking of is excellent grazing country, it is also a Nazana area&#x2014;so the salvation of live stock was impossible to them. What I want the House to realise is that these men have between them spent somewhere between a quarter and half a million of money in developing Government land&#x2014;our own land. They have lived for three to four years in a malarious climate with their wives and children, and to-day they are reduced to the position of &#x201C;poor whites.&#x201D; It is a piteous condition to which these people have been brought. Further south there is an opportunity; the rainfall has been better, but I see no hope of their carrying on under present conditions at Umkusi. It may be said that nothing the Government could have done would have prevented this occurrence. Certainly <span class="col_155-156" refersTo="page_0147"/>they could not have prevented the drought and the flood, and the Government may be held not to blame for what has happened, but this is just where the lack of coordination between the departments begins to manifest itself. As soon as these people realized that they were up against it they immediately began to petition the Government for someone to come down and tell them what they could grow, for it was patent to everybody that without crops of some kind there could be no existence. But the Department of Agriculture gave them no assistance. Last year I petitioned the Minister of Agriculture to establish an experimental station in that area. I was informed that a station was being established in the Transvaal and therefore it was impossible to establish another in Zululand. The Minister said he would allow experimental plots to be established in Zululand. The settlers have been waiting month after month for these plots to be established but nothing has been done. The Minister will remember I went on the deputation to see him at Pretoria some months ago, and when the deputation interviewed the Department of Agriculture the Department promised that an expert would be sent down to Zululand immediately to establish an experimental plot. The settlers waited month sifter month, but nothing happened. No one went there until a month ago, and then an official was sent there without any power, having no money, and not knowing what was to be done. None of these settlers want to leave their farms; they all want to remain there, and if only they had the opportunity to remain they would be perfectly willing to put in their hardest work to try and win out in the future. They have appealed to the Provincial Council to be allowed to build roads, and the Provincial Council has turned them down. They appealed to the Forestry Department to be allowed to plant trees, and the Forestry Department told them the country is not suitable for growing trees. They cannot get cattle on their farms. What then are they to do? What help can the Government give them? There are a number of poor settlers in an infinitely worse plight than even the men of whom I have spoken. They had very little when they went there. They had mostly loans from the Government to carry on, and they are reduced to the position that they have nothing whatsoever to eat and they are going out into the veld and shooting the few bucks remaining and asking the storekeepers to give them a little meal in exchange for the skins. They cannot even obtain the seed mealies necessary to maintain existence next season. The other settlers have some market value. They can no doubt obtain work, but these people will only swell the ranks of unemployment. I want to contrast this with what was done on similar land in North Africa. In the Sudan there is another 300,000 acres of similar land to that at Umkusi which has recently been settled. The Sudanese Government entered into a contract with a private company known as the Sudan Plantations, Ltd., to irrigate the whole of that area for cotton growing. The Government built the main canal and the plantations company constructed the minor canals and put the settlers on the land and assisted them with advice. The result is they produced last year £3,000,000 worth of cotton off that area. I mention that as an illustration of what is possible by different methods. In the south we place settlers on the land with half a million of capital and lose it, together with the settlers. In the north they proceed in a different method and build up a wealth-producing capacity for the future. The land of which I am speaking, as the Minister will admit, is extraordinarily fertile. It is the richest land probably in the Union. It is traversed by perennial rivers, the waters of which are running to the sea.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>There is fever.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>There is probably fever, but where wealth is produced you do not find men hanging back because of fever. I have myself lived in one of the worst malarial areas of the Union, and you do not find men shirking land settlement because these areas are malarial. I think we have reached a stage when we really ought to take stock of our present land settlement policy, and ask ourselves whether we are proceeding on wise lines or not. I am certain of this, that if we are merely going on the present lines of drawing rent from the land and leaving the settlers there, without the aid of science and organization, the history of land settlement for the last fifty years will repeat itself in the next fifty.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. members for Dundee (Sir Thomas Watt) and Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) have criticised on three points. In the first place the hon. member for Dundee said that our land settlement laws were very bad, and he stated expressly that we should try to improve the Acts on the lines of other countries. I am very glad that the hon. members are now pleading for this improvement, but one asks oneself why they did not make the same proposals while they were still in power. Is it because they did not then expect that improvements would be made and that they have more confidence in the present Minister? I think that confidence is justified as I will show by figures, but their point was that our Acts, even after the improvements made by the present Minister of Lands, are worse than those of other countries, more particularly of the other Dominions. I have here the legislature in force in other Dominions, and I just want to compare it with our present legislation. Let me first call to mind that our present Minister of Lands has extended the period of re-payment to forty years, and reduced the interest payable to 4 per cent. In New South Wales we find that while our interest is 4 per cent, it is there 5½ per cent, and the time for repayment is only 31 years, while it is 40 years with us. Are conditions there better than with us? In the State of Victoria the period for repayment is 31 years and the interest 4½ per cent. In <span class="col_157-158" refersTo="page_0148"/>the State of Queensland the figures for interest and repayment are 6.6 to our 5.1. These are all instances showing that our position is more favourable and I do not think hon. members can give instances of better conditions in other Dominions. Then the hon. member for Dundee said that the Government should not insist on the settlers paying. The two members who spoke said that they did not wish to discuss land settlement from a party point of view. This is praiseworthy, and I agree with them, because land settlement is a national matter and not a political one. I therefore much regret that S.A.P. people outside Parliament are clearly not of the same opinion. What, e.g., did the leader of the Opposition, the hon. member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts) say quite recently at Louis Trichardt? I quote from the translated report in the Rand Daily Mail. He then said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">I have heard that there is a tendency to strictly administer laws, especially the Land Settlement Act, and I regret to hear it. I have also learned that a number of people quite recently lost their ground because they did not strictly comply with their obligations. I do not think the Government is doing its duty if it in the present circumstances requires the provisions of the law to be strictly complied with.</block>

<p>And he says further&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">It is the duty of the Government not to squeeze settlers.</block>

<p>But what did the leader of the Opposition and his Government do when they were in power? The figures are in the Blue Book. The hon. member for Dundee said &#x201C;write off, constantly write off more.&#x201D; What did the S.A.P. Government do? The present Minister of Lands has in two years written down capital by £230,000.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Much more.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>I am quoting from the Blue Book. It is now undoubtedly much more. The former Government from 1920 to 1923 did not write off a penny. Does it not appear then that the attitude of the hon. members is nothing more than an attempt to make political capital?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>Do you assist the settlers?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>I assist them in the way of truth and justice. There are many settlers in my constituency and I shall just mention some things about them to show what they think, but I do not want our settlers to be assisted in an underhand manner. I consider it unfair to come here and say &#x201C;write off, and write off more,&#x201D; when proof is given that the present Minister of Lands has in two years written off at least £230,000 and the previous Government did not write off a single penny in three years, and when the present Government has reduced the interest from 5 to 4 per cent, and the time for repayment has been extended from 20 to 40 years. The hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) has just quoted from a book which he strongly disapproved of. He did not say that this Government was responsible for the contents of the book, but left the impression that it all happened under the present Government. Did the member look at the date of the book? The book is entitled &#x201C;Farming Opportunities in South Africa.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>I said so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>Then I apologise. It escaped my attention. I know the hon. member is honest, but the fact is that the present misery among these people is not due to the present Government, but to the previous one, and therefore the complaint should not be made against the present but against the previous Government. These members now want the Government to appoint a commission to investigate matters. It appears from the speech of the hon. member for Dundee that he is not even so conversant with matters in his own neighbourhood. The hon. member may simply take it that the Department of Lands knows better than he does. The Department has at least five commissions available for enquiry into the conditions. There are two land boards in the Transvaal, one in the Free State, one in Natal and one or two in the Cape Province. If the Government were to appoint another commission some member of the Opposition would come and represent that the Government was wasting too much money on commissions. Is that not party politics? The fact of hon. members introducing these proposals has proved that they have confidence in the Minister of Lands, and I think it should be large enough to leave the further conduct of affairs in his hands as well. I want to quote a few more figures from the financial bible of South Africa, the report of the Auditor-General. I quote from page 348 of the Dutch version&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In 1924 there was a sum of £398,699 outstanding of money due by settlers but unpaid. And now on the 31st March, 1926, nearly double that was outstanding, viz., £603,000.</block>

<p>And now hon. members come and say we must treat the settlers more fairly and show still more sympathy. I again recall the attitude of the previous Government in comparison with the present one. We know that there are many-set tiers who do their utmost to meet their obligations. They work and save to meet their obligations to the State and the taxpayers, because if they do not pay the taxpayers have to come into the breach. Is it commonsense that while a large number of the settlers are doing their best to meet their obligations hon. members should say that we should not take such severe action? Will they not be giving a handle to the settlers, of whom there are fortunately only a few, who are keen on evading their obligations? Will it not give a handle to the man who instead of paying his debts buys silk stockings for his wife and a motor car for himself? I think that as responsible people we should show the greatest sympathy and co-operation towards the settler, <span class="col_159-160" refersTo="page_0149"/>but it must be made clear to them that it is their duty to the State and their fellow taxpayers to meet their obligations. I fear that the attitude of the hon. members for Dundee and Zululand, however well-intentioned, will not meet with the success that they expect, but will really have a bad effect. One individual, one settler, may be encouraged and others discouraged. When a neighbour who is trying to do his best sees that his companions live a jolly life, spend money and do not pay their debts to the State, he will also say, &#x201C;why should I pay any more?&#x201D; He will commence to do the same as the bad settler. The two hon. members emphasized that they were not contemplating Party advantage, but I have quoted from the speech of the hon. leader of the Opposition to show that the attitude outside the House is different. The feeling of the settlers is quite different to the feeling of the two hon. members who have spoken. I know the settlers of Mamagalieskraal personally, people who are quite satisfied to be saved from poverty by the good legislation which this Government has passed. I have here a letter from the settlers on Vyfhoek near Potchefstroom. There are about 80 of them. I should like to quote the resolution which they passed exactly two months ago on the 8th December, 1926&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">As this meeting of settlers has carefully noted the sympathetic and helpful attitude which the Hon. Piet Grobler, Minister of Lands, has taken up towards the settlers of our country (therefore not only those at Vyfhoek) in general, and especially at Vyfhoek, we hereby express our hearty thanks to the Minister for what he has done and give him our full confidence as Minister of Lands.</block>

<p>In spite of these facts hon. members opposite say that they have not actually confidence in the Minister and his Department, because they ask for the appointment of a commission. They have not the confidence in the policy of the Government, because they ask for more money to be written off. I doubt whether the motion and the amendment are sensible, and desirable ones to be brought before the House. For the reasons that I have given I think it is a pity that the motion and amendment were introduced, and I personally shall vote against them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#richards">

<from>†Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">RICHARDS</person>:</from>

<p>I think it is a pity that so worthy a motion as this one cannot be introduced into this House without having to listen to a speech of such a character as that which has just fallen from the last speaker. That is the best reply I can give to him. His remarks are entirely uncalled for, and are out of place in this discussion, and do not help to solve the difficulties we are endeavouring to overcome. I want to confine myself to that part of the motion which is an appeal to the Government for mercy. In appealing to the Minister, we are appealing to one whose sympathies, we feel, are with those who are in grave distress. We could not possibly have a man in that office with more sympathy, and I am glad of an opportunity of saying that. I have always found him courteous and anxious to help settlers in difficulties. I would also like to record that that is the spirit which permeates the whole of his office. We find it in dealing with his officials as well as with himself. That being so, we appeal with confidence to him for still further consideration for these people, and in doing so I feel it is necessary that we should satisfy him that conditions are such that he must extend his sympathy to a greater extent than he has done yet. Speaking generally regarding settlement schemes in South Africa, I am not one who feels that this policy cannot be carried out successfully. It is undoubtedly a fact that a large number of settlement schemes have failed, and failed miserably. But, speaking generally, there were reasons which foredoomed them to failure before even a plough or a spade has been put into the ground. One of the first considerations in a settlement scheme is that it should be a Government one, and it should not be left to private enterprise or to companies. The Government experts should select the ground, and should satisfy themselves that it will produce the particular crop for which there is a good market available; having done that, we are only at the beginning of our responsibilities. We cannot take people who are more or less ignorant of local conditions and expect them to make good unless we nurse them from the moment they arrive on the ground until they succeed. In successful schemes, there is always an expert who runs a farm or block in the locality, from whom the settlers can always get advice and assistance. In one of my first speeches in this House, I warned the Government not to be too anxious to entice people to this country to grow cotton. Cotton has been the undoing of many settlers. I have been growing cotton for four years, with considerable experience and plenty of labour, and so far I have not been able to make a profitable proposition of it. So that it is unreasonable to expect a settler who is a stranger to come into the country and grow cotton profitably. Another crop they should be warned about is tobacco. Tobacco requires expert growing and handling, and is liable to disease. But when it comes to sheep farming or citrus growing in suitable localities, it is altogether different. You can look throughout South Africa, and you find that 90 per cent. of the settlers who have been placed on sheep farms in good districts are succeeding to-day. Now as regards citrus, I do not know whether the Minister has travelled through Natal very much, or whether he has gone into one district in my constituency where there is a group of settlers making good growing oranges. They are now in their fourth and fifth years, and they are producing excellent exportable fruit. Their social conditions are enjoyable, the life is a good one, the climate is right, and the soil is excellent. They have made a success of that settlement without the assistance of one shilling of Government money. The only assistance they have asked for is railway facilities, and, apart from an inadequate road motor service, they have so far asked in</p>

<block name="quote">Remaining clauses and title put and agreed to.</block>

<p><span class="col_161-162" refersTo="page_0150"/>being one of the most successful settlements in South Africa, but they must have a railway. They are 19 miles from the railhead at present, and their output will be so great in the next two or three years that it will be too much for the road transport to handle. It would be a thousand pities if these men are allowed to fail for the lack of necessary transport, and if they do so fail the responsibility will be with the Government. Now I come to another settlement in my own constituency, the Blauwkrantz and Chieveley settlement, with which the Minister is conversant. It is not peopled by overseas men. They are all practical South Africans with a knowledge of local conditions. These men have had five years of drought, and have not reaped a crop worth talking about for that period. That in itself is a sufficient hardship. No blame is to be attached to anybody. They have appealed to the Minister, and the Minister has had the land revalued, and he has also altered the boundaries on some of the farms in order to make them a better proposition. Notwithstanding all that, the men cannot make a living unless they get a certain amount of rain, and this hitherto has not been forthcoming. Add to their distress the fact that they have had east coast fever, which was followed by an outbreak of anthrax which placed them in quarantine, and you will realize these people are in a parlous condition. This year, however, they are having a better season, the most promising year since they were placed in that area, and there is just a prospect of their reaping good crops. Just when they are anticipating these crops, there comes this demand for arrears. This is the first year with any possibility of making good, and they ask that the funds which they get from their crops should not be taken from them in payment of arrears. They say&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Let us first put ourselves back in the position we were in when we took the land over originally.</block>

<p>That is not an unreasonable thing to ask. All these settlers had capital when they started on the land, and I think their request is a reasonable one. Given a good year this year, and possibly a good one next year, I think there should be no demand made against them until 1928. Of course, if in the meantime they become sufficiently prosperous to be able to pay off the arrears, they are willing to give an undertaking to the Minister to that effect. I have placed the position before the Minister, and he is well acquainted with the facts, and consideration of this nature afforded now will make for the success of the settlement. I will confirm what has been said by previous speakers that the state of affairs which exists on this settlement is practically general throughout South Africa. It would be a blot on the country if we turned a deaf ear to these people and if we did not preserve them from the disaster which they are now facing; a good man kept on the land is of far greater value than a cash balance in the Land Bank.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. A. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>When I saw the motion and amendment on the Order Paper, I did not in the least think that anyone would rise in the House and try to make political capital out of it. I was therefore astonished to hear the hon. member for Pretoria (North) (Mr. Oost) doing so. He goes so far as to acknowledge that the two hon. members who spoke before him stated that they did not want to make political capital. In my opinion, the hon. member did nothing else but to make dirty political capital out of the matter, in the way he went on. He tried to defend the Minister of Lands, but that is not necessary. We know the Minister well, and that he is well disposed towards the settlers, and that is the reason that the hon. members felt free to introduce their motion. It is the hon. member for Pretoria (North) who made use of it to throw mud at the former Government and its leader. I regard this not only as unsuitable, but also as unworthy. The hon. member wants to know why the previous Government did not write off the debts, but things have so changed since the new Government came into power, that it has become necessary to do so. We are glad that the new Government has done it, and the way in which the Minister did it. The hon. member for Pretoria (North) has, however, spoken in an undesirable manner, and tried to make dirty political capital out of it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member must alter his language. He has twice used the word &#x201C;dirty.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. A. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I thought that it was applicable, but I shall leave it there. The hon. member tried to make political capital out of it and to throw mud. It is more than a man can do to sit still when you hear such a speech. The hon. member has made his reputation as far as I am concerned. I can understand now how such a person can travel at the country&#x2019;s expense and put money in his pocket, and without any shame defend the expense.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member has used a phrase against the hon. member for Pretoria (North) which he must withdraw.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. A. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>Which phrase do you mean?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Will the hon. member repeat what he said?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. A. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I said that I could now understand the hon. member travelling in Europe at public expense and putting money in his pocket, and then getting up in the House to defend the expenditure.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I was under the impression that the hon. member had represented that the hon. member for Pretoria (North) had done nothing in return.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. A. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>No. I leave the matter there. I felt that something ought to be said. There is another matter I want to bring to the notice of the Minister, and that is the case of persons who have obtained money from the Land Bank for jackal-proof fencing. The Minister knows that many of them are obliged to fence because they have received <span class="col_163-164" refersTo="page_0151"/>notice from their neighbours. They undertook the obligation, and before they could get any benefit the terrible drought came, and they will find it difficult to pay the instalments punctually.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conroy">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CONROY</person>:</from>

<p>Are they settlers?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. A. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>What difference does that make?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conroy">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CONROY</person>:</from>

<p>The motion deals with settlers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. A. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>It is a matter which I should like to bring to the notice of the Minister, because many people will fail and have difficulty to pay the money in time. I want to ask whether the Government cannot consider giving time for payment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rood">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROOD</person>:</from>

<p>Where must we put the blame for the failure of many settlers in South Africa? There must be something wrong if so many people fail on the countryside. This failure does not, of course, mean that only the settlers are affected. There are many of the small landowners who fail through circumstances beyond their control. They are in default in paying interest to the Land Bank as well as in the case of small landowners to the commercial banks, etc. The matter is, therefore, of great importance. There are people on the land who are to-day landowners, but in five years become settlers on Crown land, because, as landowners, they have failed, and the actual cause of their failure is a matter which must be enquired into by this House, even if a commission is possibly not necessary. We must consider what improvements can be made to enable these people to succeed where they are now failing. Doubtless the cause of the failure of many settlers can be attributed to the elements and the abnormal droughts in South Africa. In the Transvaal and in some parts of the Free State we have terrible hailstorms and frosts unheard of in tropical and sub-tropical parts. Let me instance that in Barberton&#x2014;I think the Minister of Lands will agree when I say that that area causes the Department of Lands less trouble than any other part of the Union&#x2014;a sub-tropical area the settlers have now been completely knocked out. Last winter they had an unusual frost there, and now an unprecedented drought. It is not the fault of these people that there has been a failure. The man cannot help his not being in a position to meet his obligations to the Government, to the Land Bank and to the commercial banks. Another cause of failure is, I think, the local marketing. The small settlers can do nothing in the existing circumstances. He cannot export overseas, but depends entirely on the Home market, and this is in such a state that he cannot make a living. I have asked myself whether the Department of Agriculture cannot get into touch with the provincial administration, who, in turn, has jurisdiction over market masters, to come to a better state of affairs. Conditions in the towns regarding market agents and market masters, and the way in which they are permitted to deal with the small man are really a public scandal, and I want to suggest to the Minister of Agriculture to convene a conference of farming market masters, and possibly mayors, to draw up a system whereby the system of handling the produce of settlers and others shall be improved upon. Another cause probably is the labour system. Cases arise where a settler has suddenly to pay entirely unexpected wages to his workmen, and as regards the raising of cotton, etc., this leads to a complete failure. Then there are individual cases (certainly not the majority) where settlers coming from beyond the Union immediately proceed to live in an expensive way when they come here, and that in certain cases is the cause of failure. Another cause is the too high valuation of the ground by the Department of Lands, or land boards. An originally too-high valuation undermines many a small settler, and the crop of cotton, e.g., is consequently out of proportion to the valuation of the land. The Department of Lands should certainly take account of ordinary business valuations in the calculation of the ground value. Is it not possible to create a system of insurance against destruction by the elements? In that way the small man will be enabled to keep going even if he cannot reap where he has sown. I have tried to show who should bear the blame, the State or the tillers of the ground. It is so often said that a man is lazy and that the farmer should take off his coat. I have just tried to show that the settler and the small landowner have to battle with things over which they have no control, and that that is the cause of failure in many cases.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>A discussion on land settlement, if carried on as most of the speakers have done this afternoon, can, of course, only do good. We must consider it from a national point of view; it is a national question, and as long as we keep party politics out of it there is every chance of our reaching that success which every member of this House has at heart. I warned the House last year in discussing this matter; I said we should be careful not to bring party politics into it, and I wish to repeat that here again. Not that I think that this or that hon. member has been guilty of that, but only because I want to issue this warning. It is a difficult problem as it is, and if you bring politics into it you might as well give it up as hopeless. Before going into the general question, I wish to remove a misunderstanding. I may be the cause of it. The hon. member for Dundee (Sir Thomas Watt) stated in the House a few days ago that, in reply to a question, I stated that I was not pressing these people for arrears. He then read letters from my department some months back. What happened was that, about a week or two before Parliament opened, I received letters from different parts of the country drawing attention to there being a severe drought and people being hard pressed&#x2014; in fact, some could hardly make a living&#x2014;and I was asked whether I could not consider not pressing for payment. There were articles and telegrams in the newspapers to the same effect. I sent a wire to my department instructing all land inspectors to send in, without delay, exhaustive <span class="col_165-166" refersTo="page_0152"/>reports of their respective areas and the conditions prevailing there, and in the meantime I gave instructions that the department ought not to press for payment. So as far as the first part of the motion is concerned, I have already done that. I have received these reports, and there are some parts of the country which are no doubt in a very bad way. Take Zululand. I have a report from the inspector there. The vest of Natal is very good indeed. At Umkuzi it is reported that the settlers are in a serious position owing to the prevailing drought. Umfolosi is fairly dry. At Vryheid the settlers are in a good position. At Paulpietersburg the mealie crop is very good, and the settlers are in a satisfactory position. At Utrecht and Dundee the position is not so good. In the north west and central area the position is very good, and an abnormally good harvest is expected. In the Southwest the position is good. At the south coast the position is promising. As far as the central coast is concerned it is dry, but the condition is not very serious. At Indwe the position was not so good, but the superintendent wired me that, if rain fell within a week after sending in his report, they could expect a good mealie crop. Rain has fallen and, therefore, the crop is saved. In the Free State the conditions are more or less normal. In the Transvaal conditions are good at Bethal and Heidelberg and other districts, and not so good in Standerton. Conditions are good in the western area, but very bad in Zoutpansberg, Pietersburg and Rustenburg. In Potchefstroom the conditions are not so good either. Long before I sent out these wires I gave an extension of time for the payment of all those who applied for it if the other conditions of settlement were fulfilled. My department is blamed, but we have the law to administer, and we have the explicit injunction of Parliament. When the Act of 1925 was passed it was pointed out, both here and in another place, that now that the settlers have got so many facilities, the Minister should not allow arrears to accumulate and get back into the old difficulty. The Public Accounts Committee reported that the Department of Lands is sometimes unnecessarily lax in getting payment from settlers when they were able to pay. This report was accepted by the House, and my department has no option. We have to administer the law and see what we can get in. On the other hand I want to say that, as regards the large majority of the settlers, the people are of good stamp, are trying to pay and are doing their best to meet their obligations. Rut there are those who have made the evasion of their indebtedness to the State a fine art, and you cannot get payment out of them unless you force them. Their example is infectious to others. One may work hard and deprives himself and his family of many of the little necessities and luxuries of life, and pays; his neighbour does not, and the former says &#x201C;Why should I pay when my neighbour does not and gets off scot free?&#x201D; One has to be careful. I found a man who said he could not pay and the reason was because I found he had just bought a motor-car. Every case will have to be treated on its own merits. I do not think that I could be accused of undue harshness&#x2014; if I were accused of undue leniency that would be a better ground than undue harshness. The hon. member for Dundee (Sir Thomas Watt) quoted the case of a certain settler, but I want to give the figures again, because his figures were not accurate. In July, 1919, a farm was allotted to this man, the purchase price of which was £2,078. I had the farm re-valued, and the revaluation was done by two members of the Land Board and two valuers of the Land Bank. It was really done under my predecessor. No objection could be taken to the personnel. They brought it down to £1,678. But then he was in arrear, and we could not help that. According to the Act he was £290 18s. in arrear, and £250 was advanced to him the interest on which advance was £50, or altogether £623 7s. 5d. That brought up his land to £2,301 odd; twenty-eight acres were allotted to him, which brought it up to £2,366. Although this land was allotted in 1919, the price of the land could have nothing to do with his payments because in 7½ years he paid only £20 15s. Surely, if his failure was due to the payments on the land one could understand that; but it is shown that that is not the reason. I don&#x2019;t think he bought a motor-car. Some of these settlers will not pay. Land settlement is not a philanthropic undertaking. The taxpayer spends a certain amount of money on land settlement, and we should try to get that money back. The mover says no interest should be charged to settlers&#x2014;does he propose that we should not ask settlers to pay interest?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>What would the rest of the farming population say to that &#x2014;those who have to buy their own farms and pay six or seven per cent, interest? We might consider dispensing with payment of interest in the case of Crown land, which we do not have to purchase. The man who buys land inspects it and he knows whether it is good or not. He pays four per cent. interest while the State pays five per cent. I do not think in such a case that we could forego the interest, and the general taxpayer would not allow it. I will give some figures which I am afraid will shock the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger). On June 30, 1925, the settlers were in arreas to the amount of £583,000. and since then we have capitalised £273 000 leaving £310,000 not capitalised, could not understand why settlers do not make use of the liberal provision in the Act by which they can capitalise their arrears. It is expected that for the current year the arrears will be approximately £530,000, that is, £310,000 old arrears and £220.000 new arrears. Apart from meeting the settlers by extending the period of repayment to 40 years and reducing the interest to four per cent., we have written off a large amount. Since I took over, the amount of £355,000 has been written off, <span class="col_167-168" refersTo="page_0153"/>and this does not include the revaluation of Crown land which we do not pay for. The amount written off for Crown lands is £133 000 which has to be added to the £355,000. These figures do not include the Zululand revaluation of which £50,000 has been approved, and the board is still going into revaluations. The total amount written off since Union is £529,331. and with the further revaluations will be nearer £700,000.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>Was there not an accumulation of arrears before Union?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>I don&#x2019;t think so. We are told that land settlement in our country is not a success, implying that in other countries land settlement is more successful than it is in South Africa, But last week I received a report showing that New Zealand has written off £2,488,000, and South Australia £1,625,000, on account of agricultural settlements. This shows that the same conditions prevail all over the world. We should not talk in a strain to discourage our settlers, and say that Government land settlement is a failure, because that is not really the case. All pioneers of new countries have to struggle, and I was reading the other day in Professor Cory&#x2019;s book of what happened to the 1820 Settlers. In the first two years they had rust, and the third year a flood, but in Zululand there was a flood and two dry years. I know that in my own district, when the back parts of Rustenbuig were settled, the people had a very hard struggle, but ultimately they made a success of it. If people are not prepared to work hard and live frugally and do their best, they are not likely to be successful as farmers. I do not say that the settlers in Zululand did not do that. They were unfortunate. For three years they had no crops. Consequently, what could be expected?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>You must admit that we misrepresented the facts to them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot quite catch what the hon. member said. Conditions all the world over are very much the same. Only the other day I came across an article in a newspaper showing the difficulties under which settlers on the land have to work in the United States. We know that farming is a very precarious industry. One year yon may have a bumper crop such as we had in Zululand just before the land was given out tor cotton, and then you get two or three had years. The hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) has given the House the history of the Zululand settlements, and I do not think it necessary to say anything more on that subject. My predecessor in office established three probationary farms in order to see whether cane would pay. I think that was a right policy to adopt, and a policy which had been very carefully thought out to prevent failure. But what happened? Before it was proved whether this was a cane country, there was such a pressure of opinion from the public and the newspapers, that he was compelled to give out the land. That was due to the cotton boom. People thought they were going to get rich very quickly, and there was an unseemly scramble for these farms. I find that over 500 people applied for 107 farms. Unfortunately, things did not turn out as had been expected. I do not think the Government of that time or the present Government could be blamed for it. I find that my department was very careful when the allotments were made to warn people as to the nature of the country. In the notices which were published warnings were given as to malaria, &#x2019;ngana and east coast fever. These notices were sent out a month before to every person who applied for an allotment, warning him as to the conditions in Zululand.</p>

</speech>

<p>On the motion of the Minister of Lands, debate adjourned; to be resumed on 11th February.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1927-02-08T17:57:00">5.57.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

