---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol8 - FRIDAY 28 JANUARY 1927'
layout: debate
year: 1927
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 28th JANUARY, 1927.</heading>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT.</heading>

<p>Pursuant to Proclamation of his Excellency the Governor-General, dated the 11th November, 1926, summoning Parliament to meet on this day for the dispatch of business, members met in the Assembly Chamber and Mr. Speaker took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1927-01-28T11:35:00">11.35 a.m.</recordedTime></p>

<p>The CLERK read the Proclamation.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacancy">

<heading>VACANCY.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that during the recess a vacancy occurred in the representation in this House of the electoral division of Bethlehem owing to the death on 25th October, 1926, of Mr. J. H. Brand Wessels.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_members">

<heading>NEW MEMBERS.</heading>

<p>The CLERK read letters from the Secretary to the Prime Minister, dated 23rd June, 1926, and 24th January, 1927, respectively, reporting the election of:&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Pieter Johannes Terreblanche for the electoral division of Kroonstad in the room of Albertus Johannes Werth, Esq., resigned.</li>

<li>(2) Dr. David Gideon Conradie, for the electoral division of Bethlehem, in the room of Johannes Hendricus Brand Wessels, Esq., deceased.</li></ol>

<p>Mr. Terreblanche, introduced by Dr. Steyn and Mr. Conroy, made and subscribed to the oath, and took his seat.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING.</heading>

<p>The CLERK read a letter from the Assistant Secretary to the Prime Minister, dated 3rd December, 1926, stating that his Excellency the Governor-General had signified his intention of opening Parliament at noon to-day with the usual ceremony.</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER and members thereupon proceeded to the Senate House to attend the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and on their return,</p>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair and read prayers.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#roll_of_members">

<heading>ROLL OF MEMBERS.</heading>

<p>The CLERK read the list of members, and those present answered to their names.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#printing_committee">

<heading>PRINTING COMMITTEE.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER appointed the Prime Minister, Gen. Smuts and Mr. Sampson a Committee to assist Mr. Speaker in regard to the printing of the House.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#committee_on_standing_rules_and_orders">

<heading>COMMITTEE ON STANDING RULES AND ORDERS.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER appointed the following members to constitute, with Mr. Speaker, the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders, viz.: The Prime Minister, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of Defence, Gen. Smuts, Mr. Krige, Sir Thomas Smartt, Mr. de Waal, Dr. de Jager, Mr. Sampson and Mr. Close.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening_speech">

<heading>OPENING SPEECH.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER reported that the House had this day attended the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and that his Excellency the Governor-General was pleased to deliver an opening speech to both Houses of Parliament, of which, for greater accuracy, he had received a copy, as follows:&#x2014;</p>

<p>Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Senate:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the Horse of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">Since Parliament last met an Imperial Conference has been held in London, which was attended by the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance as representing the Union. <span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_0071"/>Questions of the highest importance were discussed, including that of inter-imperial relations and the international position of the different States comprised within the British Commonwealth, and certain decisions were arrived at. The results achieved at the Conference are a source of much gratification to my Ministers, which they believe is shared by the people of South Africa. Papers relating to this Conference will be laid before you.</block>

<block name="quote">The best relations continue to exist with our neighbours. On his way from England my Prime Minister and his colleague visited Lisbon, at the express invitation of the Government of Portugal, and the result of this visit has been to increase the good feeling which exists between the two countries. It is anticipated that a Delegation from Portugal will in the near future visit the Union for the purpose of resuming negotiations in connection with a new Mozambique Treaty.</block>

<block name="quote">A Conference between representatives of my Government and the Government of India on the position of Indians in the Union was recently held in Cape Town, as a result of which a provisional Agreement was arrived at, which it is hoped will lead to a satisfactory and amicable solution of the question.</block>

<block name="quote">It is encouraging to note that the improved methods of agriculture adopted by farmers have minimised the effects of the drought unfortunately prevalent in certain parts of the country. One of the ways in which my Government is assisting in this direction is by strengthening the agricultural extension services of the Department of Agriculture which are now playing an important part in farming life in the Union.</block>

<block name="quote">Special attention is being directed to the eradication of East Coast Fever, which has menaced the cattle industry of the country for the past quarter of a century. At the same time other diseases and pests hampering agricultural development are being systematically dealt with.</block>

<block name="quote">The co-operative movement is being fostered in every possible way with good results.</block>

<block name="quote">In view of the abnormal development of the alluvial diamond diggings and of unforeseen conditions arising therefrom, my Ministers propose to submit to you a Bill to consolidate and amend the existing Precious Stones Laws.</block>

<block name="quote">Progress in the country&#x2019;s industrial activities continues and is reflected not only by the increase in volume and value of production, but also by the upward tendency in the number of those employed.</block>

<block name="quote">The question of the development of the Union&#x2019;s great natural resources of iron ores and the establishment of an iron and steel industry which will make South Africa self-dependent in this essential commodity has engaged the attention of my Government. The history of the efforts made in the past in this direction has convinced my Ministers that direct Government assistance and participation are necessary to ensure the establishment of steel works on an adequate scale. A Bill embodying my Ministers&#x2019; proposals will be introduced in due course.</block>

<block name="quote">Satisfactory progress has been made during the year with the construction of the new lines of railway which have been authorized from time to time, and considerable expansion has taken place in connection with the Administration&#x2019;s policy of Road Motor Transport, resulting in steadily increasing development of the agricultural and general resources of the country.</block>

<block name="quote">The maintenance of industrial peace during recent years has greatly contributed towards the sound economic position which the Union happily enjoys at the present moment.</block>

<block name="quote">Continued success has attended the policy of widening the sphere of employment for civilized labour and the schemes for the rehabilitation of rural unemployed by means of training and the establishment of small holdings, are producing satisfactory results.</block>

<block name="quote">The prospects for the increased absorption of the youth of the country in suitable employment are very promising. Attention is being paid to the training of South African youths in industry in order that the supply of skilled labour may continue to be adequate to the expanding needs of the country.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">Additional Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the present financial year and Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the ensuing financial year will be laid before you.</block>

<p>Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Senate:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">In commending these matters to your consideration, I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours.</block>

<block name="quote">In His Majesty&#x2019;s name, I now declare this the Fourth Session of the Fifth Parliament of the Union of South Africa to be duly opened.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#select_committee_on_pensions">

<heading>SELECT COMMITTEE ON PENSIONS.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER reported that upon application he had authorized the Clerk of the House during the recess to place at the disposal of the Pensions Petition Commission all the petitions, reports and papers upon which the Select Committee on Pensions of last session had been unable to complete its investigations.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#condolence">

<heading>CONDOLENCE.</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House profoundly regrets the loss South Africa has sustained by the death of the Right Hon. John Xavier Merriman on the 2nd August, 1926, and resolves to place on record its esteem for that gifted statesman, its gratitude for his unceasing efforts to maintain the loftiest traditions of parliamentary <span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_0072"/>government, and its acknowledgment of his disinterested and courageous devotion to the country of his adoption during an unbroken period of more than half a century in Parliament. This House further resolves that an expression of its sympathy be conveyed to his relatives.</block>

<p>I ask that that esteem and appreciation which this House has always entertained towards this great South African statesman during his lifetime shall <i>be</i> again recorded by this House. It is true that for several years prior to his death he ceased to be a member of this House. I think I am voicing the feelings of everybody in this House when I say that his great services to the country, the great influence which he always exercised in this House, the feeling of respect and friendship which all members of this House have constantly felt, in spite of his being no longer a member of Parliament, have really contributed to make him a member of the House, even though strictly and officially he ceased to be so. It can be truly said of him that, his efforts to maintain the loftiest traditions of parliamentary government have been unceasing, and I know of no man whose example and influence have contributed more to a high tone in debate, and to a sound and healthy parliamentary feeling in this House. His devotion to South Africa and to the people of this country has been unfailing, and in championing from time to time the cause of the weak and defenceless, I do not know of any other man who has shown such courage in the face of difficulties and prejudices. I can only say he has been a great South African, and it is with a feeling of deep appreciation of what he has been to the country, and what Iris memory will continue to be to South Africa, that I move this motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>On behalf of the members on this side of the House, I second the motion and wish to associate myself wholeheartedly with the generous sentiments expressed by the Prime Minister. It is very difficult for us to realise what his loss has been to the country. Mr. Merriman was for many years one of the most •outstanding figures in this Parliament. Latterly he became one of the elder statesmen of South Africa. He passed from the fighting arena of South African politics, and became an elder statesman, a wise adviser of this House, and of the country. There was not a member of this House whose speeches were listened to with so great attention and reverence as those which fell from Mr. Merriman. It is difficult for us to appreciate the change which has come over South Africa. He was, probably, the last link with a great past, a last link with the great statesmen who built up South Africa. We are called upon to honour the traditions which he built up. Those traditions are of the highest character. It would be difficult for us to do better than follow the example of Mr. Merriman. He championed the weak, and stood for the highest and noblest things in our public life. He was always free of animosity, and free from small feelings, and set us all an example which should be one of the traditions of this country. He spanned an enormous period. He began public life at the time when we were a minor Crown colony. He himself thought that we were fit to be better than a Crown colony, and he lived to see us an independent nation. He played an outstanding part for fifty years. Best of all his services to us were those at the time of Union. I do not think justice has been done to him in that connection. His extreme desire for Union, his zeal for Union, made that one of the great causes which he fought to bring about for South Africa. But for his active participation, his driving force as Prime Minister of the Cape in the National Convention and outside of it, I am doubtful whether we would have carried the day which probably was the greatest day in the history of South Africa. Standing here to-day, I think it is our duty to record the great past, and to pay our tribute of respect to one of the great heroic figures of our country. Although he was not a born South African, he was so identified with South Africa that we look upon him as one of our great sons. We are pleased that in his passing from us there is not a blot on his escutcheon.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>For many years while Mr. Merriman was in Parliament, since the first days of the Union Parliament, there was one occasion in the year, one of those happy occasions when all parties could join in bearing him tribute, on the occasion of his birthday. It was my duty on those occasions, on behalf of my friends and myself, to associate ourselves heartily in this tribute to Mr. Merriman of the great esteem and infinite respect in which he was held in every part of the House. To us, who only came into Parliament at Union, I think Mr. Merriman will probably stand with us as a sort of example of how a man could use the rapier or the bludgeon in debate, how he could hit severely, but always without his wounds leaving any rancour. I will not detain the House any longer, but I wish, on behalf of my friends and myself, to be associated very thoroughly and sincerely in the expressions which have been used by the Prime Minister and the right hon. the leader of the Opposition.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not wish to introduce a provincial note, but still I feel that the late Mr. Merriman became a statesman in the old Cape Colony, and, as a Cape Colonist, I wish to say a few words in honour of his memory. If there was one of his characteristics that I admired it was his amazingly great love of our parliamentary institutions. He had a great ideal of Parliament and of parliamentary institutions. When I occupied your position, Mr. Speaker, he often stated, in private conversation&#x2014;and perhaps, before his demise, had similar conversations with you&#x2014;that he believed in Parliament as the foundation of the people, and that is one of his characteristics which we can retain in the history of our people. Although he was born in England, here is another point which arouses admiration, viz., the wonderful confidence which he enjoyed in the country parts, particularly in the Cape Province, but also <span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_0073"/>in the whole of South Africa, which was for the most part due to his great prudence with reference to our State finances. It is wonderful how the memory of Mr. Merriman is still honoured to-day in our country areas. Our farmers had confidence in their English friend, their fellow-Afrikander, and in this respect also he exhibited a characteristic which we can develop&#x2014;namely, that of mutual respect even when the other man is born outside South Africa. This is not the time to make a long speech, but as Mr. Merriman was so well known, particularly in the Cape Province, I just wished to say these few words, and hope that we shall always honour his memory and think of it with affection.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to, members rising.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its regret at the loss sustained by it owing to the death, on the 25th October, 1926, of Mr. Johannes Hendricus Brand Wessels, member for the electoral division of Bethlehem, and, in placing on record its recognition and appreciation of the services rendered by him during the period of his membership of this House, resolves that an expression of its sympathy in their bereavement be conveyed to his family and relatives.</block>

<p>While in the case of our old friend, Mr. Merriman, we had to do with a man who had served the country for more than fifty years as a member of the House, we have, in the case of our departed friend, J. H. Brand Wessels, lost a comparatively young person, in the vigour of his life, out of our midst. It can be said of him that he was a thorough farmer&#x2019;s son from the Free State, and a thorough son of South Africa, one who shared with his people in all the events during his lifetime, and one who always received praise for what he did. He was a member of this House since 1914, and I think that all who knew him will acknowledge that he was a person who never, as a member of this House, shirked work. There is hardly any standing select committee on which he did not serve, and hardly any important question in which he did not take a considerable part. He was incontrovertibly a man from whom much was still expected. As a member of the House he had often to fight and to talk in the House, but I think I am saying nothing but the truth when I say that Jan Brand has departed without having left the feeling with any one that he did anything of a hateful kind. He was undoubtedly a loyal party man, and loyally took part in every battle of his party, but always with the conviction that the fight was in the true interests of the country. That is what is expected of every one of us.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>*Gen.<person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to second the motion, and I associate myself with the words of the Prime Minister about our deceased friend. The death of Jan Brand Wessels was a great surprise to all of us, and a tremendous blow. He was one of the younger and useful members of the House, and I agree that he was a clean fighter, not only in the House, but also out of it. In the years of the Boer War, in which he took part from the beginning to the end, he showed that he was a man, and he also showed this in after years. The passing of our friend in the strength of his life is a great loss to the House and to the country. I wish to express my sympathy with the family and relations, and support the motion heartily.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>As an old comrade of J. H. Brand Wessels, and as a schoolmate in Bloemfontein, I may say that my experience of our late friend always was that he was a man on whom you could call in time of danger and when his services were necessary. I found this during our school days and later during the war. He was a man who hit hard in the House, and often he possibly felt that he was too sharp, but when one subsequently got into conversation with him in the lobbies you felt that he was a large-hearted man. With these few words, I wish to add my regret at his passing.</p>

</speech>

<p>Motion put and agreed to, members rising.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1927-01-28T16:50:00">4.50 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

