---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol8 - TUESDAY 1 FEBRUARY 1927'
layout: debate
year: 1927
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>TUESDAY, 1st FEBRUARY, 1927.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1927-02-01T14:17:00">2.17 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative></prayers>

<p><span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_0076"/>Dr. D. G. Conradie, introduced by Mr. Conroy and Mr. M. L. Malan, made and subscribed to the oath, and took his seat.</p>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railway Accidents.</heading>

<question by="#van_zyl" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Maj. G. B. VAN ZYL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether he will lay upon the Table a return showing&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) the number of accidents on the railways during the last year;</li>

<li>(b) the nature of the accidents:</li>

<li>(c) the damage caused to property;</li>

<li>(d) the number of persons injured;</li>

<li>(c) the number of lives lost;</li>

<li>(f) the cost to the Administration&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(1) in damages paid as compensation,</li>

<li>(2) in damage to rolling stock and the permanent way,</li>

<li>(3) in loss of traffic;</li></ol></li>

<li>(g) the cause of the several accidents;</li>

<li>(h) the results of the several enquiries held; and</li>

<li>(i) the actions taken by the Administration to guard against similar occurrences in the future?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#van_zyl">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The hon. member presumably refers to the more serious accidents in which passenger trains were involved and not to accidents resulting from trespass, attempted suicide, jumping on and off trains, etc.</p>

<p>A statement giving certain information is being prepared and will be laid on the Table of the House at the earliest possible date.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Split Rails.</heading>

<question by="#van_zyl" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Maj. G. B. VAN ZYL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours.</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he has received any report on the split rails on the Natal system;</li>

<li>(2) whether he will inform the House of the result of the enquiry held; and</li>

<li>(3) whether he will lay the report of the investigators upon the Table?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#van_zyl">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Interim reports have been received, but the matter is still the subject of enquiry.</p>

<p>It is my intention to make a full statement on the matter as soon as I am in a position to do so.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Board of Trade, Functions of.</heading>

<question by="#jagger" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. JAGGER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether any administrative functions in regard to the Trade Commissioners, the Department of Industries, or otherwise, have been assigned to the Board of Trade, and, if so, what functions; if not, whether it is intended to assign any such functions to the Board, and, if so, what functions; and</li>

<li>(2) whether the Government has received any reports from the Board since the rising of Parliament in 1926, and, if so, what reports, and whether the Government proposes to lay these reports upon the Table of the House in accordance with section 4 of Act No. 28 of 1923, and, if so, when?</li>

</ol></question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#jagger">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The hon. member for Cape Town (Central) is referred to Government Notice No. 2132 in the Government <i>Gazette,</i> 4th December, 1925, which reads:<br/>

It is notified for general information that, subject to the discretion of the Honourable the Minister of Mines and Industries, the Board of Trade and Industries will in future&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(a) exercise the functions formerly entrusted to the Industries Division of the Department of Mines and Industries;</li>

<li>(b) act as the co-ordinating medium between the public and the trade commissioners for the Union in matters relating to overseas trade.</li></ol></li>

<li>(2) Yes, the Government has received ten reports from the Board, to wit:</li></ol>

<block name="quote">Report No. 68. Dumping of rubber heels for footwear, U.S.A.</block>

<block name="quote">Report No. 68a. Dumping of rubber heels for footwear, Canada.</block>

<block name="quote">Report No. 69. Free admission of raw materials, List No. 2.</block>

<block name="quote">Report No. 70. Dumping of cement from Denmark, Italy and Canada.</block>

<block name="quote">Report No. 71. New sugar agreement and suspended duty.</block>

<block name="quote">Report No. 72. The condensed milk industry.</block>

<block name="quote">Report No. 73. Business practices and public regulation&#x2014;an enquiry into unfair competition, restraint of trade and combination and monopolistic practices.</block>

<block name="quote">Report No. 74. Dumping of wheelbarrows from the United States of America and Canada.</block>

<block name="quote">Report No. 75. Free admission of chequered steel plates and covered wooden heels.</block>

<block name="quote">Report No. 76. Free admission of materials for the hat industry.</block>

<p>In accordance with section 4 of the Act No. 28 of 1923, these reports will be laid on the Table within one month from the 28th January, when Parliament commenced. As some of the reports are still in the course of translation, no definite date can be set when any or all of them will be laid on the Table prior to the expiration of one month.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#jagger" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Mr. JAGGER:</from>

<p>Why don&#x2019;t you lay those reports on the Table at once which you have got? Why keep them back?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#jagger">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>We are complying with the statute.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_0077"/>Drought and Quarantine at Pietersburg.</heading>

<question by="#tom_naudé" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. J. F. TOM NAUDÉ</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture whether, in view of the serious state of affairs in Northern Transvaal as a result of the drought, he is prepared to suspend the quarantine regulations in connection with the movement of cattle to and from the town of Pietersburg, seeing that since January, 1926, there have been no cases of East Coast fever?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#tom_naudé">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I regret that I am not prepared to remove the quarantine restrictions upon the town of Pietersburg until the expiry of the period of quarantine, viz., fifteen months from the last case of East Coast fever, provided no further cases occur in the meanwhile. While regretting that the relief asked for cannot be granted particularly in view of the arduous conditions prevailing owing to the drought, I would point out that the town is not entirely cut off, seeing cattle in yoke are allowed to enter the township and station from clean areas, provided they are not outspanned within the town or commonage area or upon buffer farms.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Leasehold Stands, Conversion of.</heading>

<question by="#sampson" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. SAMPSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries whether the Government contemplates introducing legislation this session to enable holders of leasehold stands in private townships in the Transvaal to convert their stands to freehold at reasonable cost?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#sampson">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>In the great majority of private leasehold townships in the Transvaal conversion to freehold in terms of Act 34 of 1908 as amended by Act No. 30 of 1909 is now proceeding. The Government does not therefore contemplate the introduction of further legislation this session.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Post Office Notices and Prices of Produce.</heading>

<question by="#thomas_watt" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Sir THOMAS WATT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs from whom does his Department receive information regarding the current market prices of produce, etc., exhibited at country post offices, and what means is taken to verify the figures before publishing them?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#thomas_watt">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>From the market masters, by telegraph or telephone. Care is taken to distribute correctly the information received, but the report of the market master must be relied upon.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Mines: Accident Enquiries and Mine Workers Union.</heading>

<question by="#thomas_watt" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Sir THOMAS WATT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries whether he intends to introduce legislation this session to entitle an official of a recognised Mine Workers Union, in the event of a serious mining accident, to make an inspection <i>in loco,</i> and to be present at any enquiry under the Mines Act with power to call, examine and cross-examine witnesses?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#thomas_watt">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>All enquiries into mining accidents are public and any one concerned has the right to appoint representatives, either legal or trades union, to attend such enquiries&#x2014;and such representatives do make inspections <i>in loco</i> with the inspector holding the enquiry. Examination and cross-examination is allowed but it is customary for questions to be put through the presiding official. In the past extensive use has been made of these rights, and, as all facilities are already given, the introduction of legislation is not necessary.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Land Settlement: Amounts Expended.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands what amounts were expended during the calendar year 1926 in the purchase of land for settlers under the contributory purchase scheme of the Land Settlement Act in (a) Cape Province, (b) Transvaal, (c) Orange Free State, and (d) Natal?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(a) Cape, £89,280.</li>

<li>(b) Transvaal, £261,218.</li>

<li>(c) Orange Free State, £162,413.</li>

<li>(d) Natal, £26,764.</li></ol>

<p>I may add, for the information of the hon. member, that for the same period the figures hereunder show the ratio between the number of applications received and the number of applications approved in respect of each province.</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>No. of applications received.</p></td>

<td><p>No. of applications approved.</p></td>

<td><p>Percentage approved</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(a) Cape</p></td>

<td><p>468</p></td>

<td><p>Ill</p></td>

<td><p>23.72</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(b) Transvaal</p></td>

<td><p>957</p></td>

<td><p>218</p></td>

<td><p>22.78</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(c) Orange Free</p></td>

<td><p>State 376</p></td>

<td><p>99</p></td>

<td><p>26.33</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(d) Natal</p></td>

<td><p>71</p></td>

<td><p>21</p></td>

<td><p>29.58</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Arising out of that question will the Minister say whether he rejected an application from an overseas settler who wished to buy land under the contributory purchase system and, if so, what was the reason?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>It is quite possible, but of course, I cannot say, because, first of all, the applications, as the hon. member knows, come before a Land Board, and I act entirely on their recommendation. It is quite possible that an overseas applicant may have been rejected, just as applicants from within the country are also rejected. I cannot say.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>IX.</num>

<p>Standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Immigrants: Net Gains in 1926.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior what is the nett gain in immigrants during the year 1926, from (a) the British Isles, (b) other British Dominions, (c) Holland, (d) France, (e) Germany, (f) Austria, (g) Norway, (h) Sweden, (i) Denmark, (j) Italy, (k) United States of America, (l) Poland, (m) Russia, Lithuania and other countries of eastern and southern Europe?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from><span class="col_17-18" refersTo="page_0078"/>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>The statistics collected in regard to immigrants are based on nationality and not on countries of departure.</p>

<p>The figures for the year 1926 are as follows:&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>British Isles and other British Dominions</p></td>

<td><p>583</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Holland</p></td>

<td><p>102</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>France</p></td>

<td><p>3</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Germany</p></td>

<td><p>277</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Austria</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Norway</p></td>

<td><p>187</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Sweden</p></td>

<td><p>12</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Denmark</p></td>

<td><p>6</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Italy</p></td>

<td><p>45</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>United States of America</p></td>

<td><p>38</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Poland</p></td>

<td><p>166</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Russia, Lithuania, and other countries of eastern and southern Europe.</p></td>

<td><p>1318</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Arising out of the answer, may I ask if the figures which have been given represent the net gain in immigrants from each of the countries mentioned, in terms of the question?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#byron">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>No, that is the total number of immigrants from these different countries during the past year.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>The question asks&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">What is the net gain in immigrants during the year 1926</block>

<p>from the countries mentioned. You have not answered the question.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#byron">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>The net gain we have interpreted as meaning the number of immigrants coming to the Union and settling here permanently from these different countries.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>What about the departures?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#hon_member" to="#byron">

<from>An HON. MEMBER:</from>

<p>Departures are not immigrants.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Arising out of that question, what number of Europeans hitherto domiciled in South Africa have left the Union in 1926, expressing their intention not to return?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>The number of European persons relinquishing domicile during the year 1926 was as follows: Males, 1,993; Females, 1,805; total, 3,798.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Can the Minister give reasons for the relinquishing of domicile of so many permanent residents?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#byron">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>It is very difficult to answer questions like this on the spur of the moment. If the hon. gentleman would put it on paper, I will be glad to give the reply.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Will the Minister inform me to what nationality chiefly the people departing from South Africa belong?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#anderson">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I can only give the same reply. If the hon. member will give me proper notice I will be very glad to reply. I have not got these statistics here.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Mines: Future of, Costs, and Low-grade Ore.</heading>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to the following statements contained in the report on the Far East Rand by the Government Mining Engineer [U.G. 49&#x2014;&#x2019;25]&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(a) that for the continuation of the scale of operations now obtaining on the Witwatersrand it is necessary that new producers should be created (page 15);</li>

<li>(b) that it is not safe to rely on the eventuality of new discoveries being made (page 15);</li>

<li>(c) that the available data would show the following reduction in the tonnage from existing mines: After five years (i.e., in 1930) 23 per cent, reduction, after ten years (i.e., in 1935) 48 per cent, reduction, after fifteen years (i.e., in 1940 ) 82 per cent, reduction (page 15);</li>

<li>(d) that the decrease (owing to the strike) in the output of gold for the year 1922 of eleven million pounds sterling, most of which would have been distributed in South Africa in the form of wages and stores and have circulated in ever-widening circles far beyond the mining community, was the main cause of the severe depression which was felt in South Africa for at least a couple of years thereafter (page 16);</li>

<li>(e) that as forecasted in (c) above the present gold output will be curtailed by half in 1935 and by over four-fifths in 1940, which means a reduction of nearly twenty and thirty-three million of pounds per annum on these respective dates; and</li>

<li>(f) that such a reduction, even though we may have other and expanding sources of wealth, must have serious effects (page 16);</li></ol></li>

<li>(2) whether the Government is prepared to provide against the immense losses thus forecasted&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(a) to wage earners and other employees of the gold industry,</li>

<li>(b) to farmers and farm produce distributors,</li>

<li>(c) to shopkeepers and dealers in stores of all sorts,</li>

<li>(d) to the Consolidated Revenue Fund,</li>

<li>(e) to railway receipts, by adopting the recommendations of the Government Mining Engineer, i.e., to encourage the opening up of new mines, or <span class="col_19-20" refersTo="page_0079"/>the equivalent enabling existing companies to prolong their lives or carry on their operations on a larger scale (page 16<i>)</i>;and/or</li></ol></li>

<li>(3) whether the Government is prepared to investigate methods by which working costs per ton mined and treated may be reduced, in order that the large quantity of low grade ore known to exist on and near the Rand may be profitably worked, as indicated in the Report of the Departmental Commission on the Mineral Resources of the Union (1925)?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I have read the report referred to by the hon. member.</li>

<li>(2) I have given this important matter very careful consideration. The Government has already shown its appreciation of the importance of extending the lives of existing mines as is evidenced by the large number of undermining leases which have been granted under the Transvaal Mining Leases and Mineral Law Amendment Act, 1918, to existing companies based on reports of the Mining Leases Board which have been laid on the Table of the House.</li>

<li>(3) With regard to the third part of the question it would appear to be primarily the duty of the mining companies themselves to investigate the methods whereby working costs may be reduced. I have these matters, however, constantly in mind and the hon. member will see that the Government has already been able to take steps in regard to many of the recommendations of the report on the development of the mineral resources of the Union published in the Journal of Industries for April, 1925, notably in regard to the Reserved Minerals Act, the special investigation of base metal production and marketing, and the offices of the Trade Commissioners in London and New York, the purchase of Government supplies, the encouragement of oversea firms in establishing local industries, in the increased activities in the economic sphere of the geological survey; and the special surveys of the iron and coal resources of the country.</li></ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: S. L. Harris, Embezzlement by.</heading>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Mr. BLACKWELL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the amount embezzled by S. L. Harris, a trustee of estates, and how much of this was recovered;</li>

<li>(2) what was the sentence imposed upon him and how long did he serve;</li>

<li>(3) what restitution of, stolen moneys, if any, was made by him or on his behalf;</li>

<li>(4) what were the representations made to the Minister to secure his release, why was this release granted, and upon what conditions;</li>

<li>(5) whether it is a fact that upon release Harris, accompanied by his wife and a maid, went to England, first class, on a mail steamer; and</li>

<li>(6) whether the Minister will lay all the papers upon the Table?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I will deal with the matter when I reply to a similar question next Tuesday.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Drought and Moratorium</heading>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>Mr. I. P. van HEERDEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware of the critical condition in which most of the farmers of the up-country districts are at present;</li>

<li>(2) whether the Government will forthwith take steps (a) to proclaim a moratorium; (b) to financially help the farmers to procure fodder at reasonable prices, or (c) to assist in any other way without delay?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#van_heerden">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I am acquainted with the drought conditions which have unfortunately prevailed over a large portion of the Union, but which fortunately have not been general throughout its area.</li>

<li>(2)

<ol>

<li>(a) The Government has no intention of taking steps with a view to proclaiming a moratorium as in its opinion circumstances do not warrant so drastic a step.</li>

<li>(b) The special attention of the Land Bank is being directed to the districts affected, with a view to taking action under the Agricultural Credit Act, under which loans can be granted for the purchase of stock.</li></ol></li></ol>

<p>It should be added also that in 34 drought-stricken districts in the Cape Province facilities are granted for the removal of stock to grazing by rail at reduced rates, promissory notes being accepted, which are repayable on the return of the stock to the station whence they came.</p>

<ol>

<li>(c) It is understood that in cases where circumstances warrant it, aid in the form of rations for the relief of distress is being granted by magistrates on behalf of the provincial authorities; further, on account of drought, the district of Prince Albert has been proclaimed by the Administrator of the Cape as a special area for relief purposes.</li></ol>

<p>I wish to point out that relief of distress is granted by the provincial authorities where such is considered necessary. This is one of the functions of the provincial administrations, and as far as the Cape Province is concerned, the necessary power is given under Ordinance No. 4 of 1919.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Wool in Coal Trucks.</heading>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>Mr. I. P. van HEERDEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware how exceptionally bad it is for the sheep farmer to have his wool carried in coal trucks;</li>

<li>(2) whether he is aware of the reply given by the Railway Administration when complaints about the above practice were made, and whether he agrees with that answer; and</li>

<li><span class="col_21-22" refersTo="page_0080"/>(3) whether he will give instructions that in future wool must not be carried in coal trucks?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#van_heerden">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The Administration is aware of the harmful effect to wool if brought into contact with coal dust, and while, as the hon. member will appreciate, it is not possible to set aside trucks specifically for such items of traffic as wool and coal, the greatest care is exercised by the Administration to prevent the contamination of wool or other merchandise entrusted to the Administration&#x2019;s care for conveyance by rail.</li>

<li>(2) Presumably the hon. member refers to my letter, dated 10th July, 1926, to the Secretary, Chamber of Commerce, Graaff-Reinet, to the effect that the Administration cannot undertake to prohibit the loading of wool in trucks which have conveyed coal, for the reason that this would mean in a great number of instances that trucks would have to be hauled away from a station at which they are required and could be utilised, while others would have to be brought from other centres for the purpose of loading wool.</li>

<li>(3) The hon. member may rest assured that all steps possible are taken by the Administration to guard against the loading of wool and other merchandise in trucks which have not been cleaned, and the instructions issued to the staff in this connection are very definite. The instructions provide for trucks being thoroughly swept out before wool or general merchandise is loaded into them, while those to be loaded at unattended sidings must be swept out before leaving the supplying station. I think it only reasonable to expect that where a truck containing coal is off-loaded at an unattended siding and is required for loading wool at the same point, the sender of the wool should, in his own interest, arrange for the cleaning of the truck as far as possible.</li></ol>

<p>Having regard to the considerable tonnage of wool and mohair conveyed by the Administration, amounting last financial year to 135,636 tons, the number of complaints in regard to wool being contaminated while in the Administration&#x2019;s custody is very few.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Drought: Loss of Stock.</heading>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture whether he will, as soon as possible, lay upon the Table statistics showing the number of stock lost through the drought during the past year?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#van_heerden">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I regret I am not in a position to supply the information asked for by the hon. member. Statistics as to losses from drought are collected by the Census Department in the annual agricultural census, and the figures for the year September, 1925, to August, 1926, are the latest collected, and these will not be available, I am informed, until approximately September next.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Land Settlements: Their Condition.</heading>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the condition of the several settlements in the Union, and how much money has been spent for that purpose during the last five years;</li>

<li>(2) how many of the settlers on the various settlements are fulfilling their obligations;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government intends in future to help settlers only on the one-tenth system; and</li>

<li>(4) how many applications for the purchase of ground (a) have been granted, (b) have been refused, and (c) have not been decided upon?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#van_heerden">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) It is difficult to convey by way of question and reply a good idea of the conditions of settlers throughout the Union. I had hoped that as a result of the capitalization of arrears and the consolidation of advances, settlers would in future be able to meet their financial obligations. This hope was unfortunately falsified in a large number of cases owing to the adverse farming conditions, especially drought, which obtained in many parts of the Union during the present season. Many settlers in drought areas are certainly in a difficult financial position. The Department is watching the course of events closely, and meanwhile no undue pressure is brought to bear on settlers whose difficulties are due to adverse farming conditions. The amount expended on Land Settlement during the period 1st April, 1921, to 31st March, 1926, is £1,689,020; this includes advances and expenditure on the two probationary settlements at Hartebeestpoort and Olifants River.</li>

<li>(2) It would take some considerable time to give an exact reply to this question, as the settlers have not only financial obligations, but also obligations in respect of occupations, etc. There are 6,809 settlers under the main settlement laws (exclusive of farms held under mortgage bonds), and of these 2,139 are fulfilling their financial obligations. Owing to the drought I have, on the recommendation of the board, granted exemption from occupation in many cases for periods of not more than one year, and I have also granted extension of time for the payment of instalments.</li>

<li>(3) Except in so far as may be necessary as the result of recommendations by the Irrigation Commission, affecting irrigation areas, it is not the intention of the Government to purchase blocks of land and sub-divide them into settlement holdings, as was extensively done some years ago. Settlement operations under the block purchase scheme proved to be too expensive, and for various reasons were not as successful as was anticipated. The main settlement operations will be confined to purchases under the contributory purchase scheme, i.e., Section, XI. of the Land Settlement Act, 1912. Crown <span class="col_23-24" refersTo="page_0081"/>lands suitable for settlement will, of course, be disposed of under the Land Settlement Act as hitherto.</li>

<li>(4) The figures for the period since 1st April, 1924. are as follows:&#x2014;</li></ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p>(a)</p></td>

<td><p>No. of applications received</p></td>

<td><p>4,428</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(b)</p></td>

<td><p>No. of applications approved</p></td>

<td><p>1,047</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(c)</p></td>

<td><p>No. of applications refused (mainly owing to exhaustion of funds)</p></td>

<td><p>1,356</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(d)</p></td>

<td><p>No. of applications abandoned</p></td>

<td><p>1,857</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(e)</p></td>

<td><p>No. of applications awaiting consideration</p></td>

<td><p>203</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>The totals under (b), (c), (d) and (e) exceed the number under (a) owing to 35 applications made before 1st April, 1924, being dealt with after that date.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Posts: Dutiable Goods in Letters.</heading>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Col. D. REITZ</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs whether, in view of the fact that the import of registered letters containing dutiable goods is forbidden, and in view of the fact that the British Government will not allow diamond goods to be sent by parcels post in consequence of which jewellers in the Union are seriously handicapped, the Minister will alter the existing regulation?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>I have got the matter in hand, and hope the result will be satisfactory to all concerned. Meanwhile, the prohibition of importation by letter is not being harshly enforced.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Arising out of the question, I have a letter from a prominent jeweller in which he says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Our goods are being held up for weeks;</block>

<p>and the reply from the Postmaster-General is that the matter is getting attention. There is nothing tangible so far because this unfortunate firm&#x2019;s goods are held up.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>The hon. member knows from experience that one cannot jump to conclusions. I am inquiring into the matter myself to see what the hang of it is, and as soon as I come to a conclusion I will communicate with the hon. gentleman.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Colour Bar Clause in Public Works Contracts.</heading>

<question by="#krige" to="#minister_of_public_works">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. KRIGE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Works:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the report in the press is correct&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(a) that the Minister has inserted in the contract form issued by the Department of Public Works a colour bar clause;</li>

<li>(b) that the clause lays down that the contractor shall employ none but white workmen on skilled labour;</li>

<li>(c) that the engineer&#x2019;s decision as to what constitutes skilled labour shall be final and binding; and</li></ol></li>

<li>(2) if correct, on what legal authority the Minister has adopted this course of action?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_works" to="#krige">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS:</from>

<p>(1) (<i>a</i>) The report is incorrect that I caused to be inserted in the contract form issued by the Public Works Department a colour bar clause. The following clause has been a condition of Public Works Department contracts in the Transvaal, Natal and Orange Free State Provinces since Union; it was taken over from pre-Union Transvaal conditions, and was framed somewhere about 1902. The clause reads&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Further, the contractor shall employ none but white workmen on skilled labour. The engineer&#x2019;s decision as to what constitutes skilled labour shall be final and binding.</block>

<p>This clause does not appear in contracts in the Cape Province. I had my attention drawn to the clause as it affects the Transvaal, Natal and Orange Free State by the trades unions, and the matter has for some time been under consideration, and a communication is awaited the present time from the Natal Executive Committee on a concrete case which has arisen there.</p>

<p>(1) (b) and (c) and (2) of the question is covered by the answer given above.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#jagger" to="#minister_of_public_works">

<from>Mr. JAGGER:</from>

<p>Arising out of the answer, that does not apply to the Cape Province?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_works" to="#jagger">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS:</from>

<p>No, it has never been applied to the Cape Province.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_public_works">

<from>Mr. GILSON:</from>

<p>We have always understood that civilized labour included coloured labour.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_works" to="#gilson">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS:</from>

<p>I submit that question does not rise out of this one. If he desires information, I shall be happy to give it to him if he puts the question in the proper form.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_public_works">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Have the Trade Union executive, to whom he has applied, given authority to alter the position?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_works" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS:</from>

<p>My hon. friend seems to have mixed up the Trade Union executive with the South African Party Hoofd Committee.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_public_works">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Have they given you authority?</p>

</question>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_public_works">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS:</from>

<p>Is that a facetious answer or a serious one?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Iron and Steel Industry.</heading>

<question by="#jagger" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XIX.</num>

<from>Mr. JAGGER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether there has been any public enquiry into the subject of an iron and steel industry in South Africa, and, if so, when and by whom, and whether opportunities have been given to South Africans interested in the subject to give evidence;</li>

<li><span class="col_25-26" refersTo="page_0082"/>(2) whether the companies now engaged in the production of iron and steel in South Africa have been consulted; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government proposes to lay any papers on the Table or publish any reports in this connection, and, if so, when?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#jagger">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No.</li>

<li>(2) No.</li>

<li>(3) No. A Bill dealing with iron and steel will be introduced as foreshadowed in the Governor-General&#x2019;s speech.</li></ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Colour Bar Clause in Public Works Contracts.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_public_works">

<num>XX.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Works:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) From what date did the following clause of the conditions laid down for Government contracts by the Public Works Department come into force:&#x201C; The contractor shall employ none but white workmen on skilled labour; the engineer&#x2019;s decision as to what constitutes skilled labour shall be final&#x201D;; and</li>

<li>(2) who is to be regarded as having been responsible for the introduction of the clause in question?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_works" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS:</from>

<p>I beg to refer the hon. member to my reply to question No. XVIII (Mr. Krige).</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Arsenicum Pentoxide, Duty on.</heading>

<question by="#vosloo" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XXI.</num>

<from>Mr. VOSLOO</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware (a) that arsenicum pentoxide was formerly imported free of customs duty; (b) that without any warning a customs duty of 20 per cent, was imposed and that merchants had ordered large quantities quoting a price to their customers on the basis of free importation; and</li>

<li>(2) whether, in view of its importance in connection with the eradication of prickly pear, he will forthwith take steps to have the customs duty abolished?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#vosloo">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No.</li>

<li>(2) The question of placing arsenicum pentoxide on the free list will receive consideration when the customs tariff comes up for revision during the present session of Parliament.</li></ol>

</answer>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>*Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN:</from>

<p>I want to point out to the Minister that large quantities arrive, but that they are held up on account of non-payment of customs duty.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#van_heerden">

<from>*The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The position is simply that I have not the right under the customs tariffs to put arsenicum pentoxide on the free list. That can only be done after a revision of the tariff.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>*Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN:</from>

<p>You do not know what is the state of affairs.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#van_heerden">

<from>*The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>At the time the tariff was made arsenicum pentoxide was not used for the eradication of prickly pear. Consequently provision was not made for its free importation as, e.g., in the case of lead pentoxide.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>*Mr. G. C. VAN HEERDEN:</from>

<p>I should like to ask the Minister whether a decision cannot be given retroactive force if the duty is removed during this session.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Rex <i>vs.</i> Kadalie.</heading>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<num>XXII.</num>

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Native Affairs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether, in view of the recent judgment in the Supreme Court, Natal, in the case of Rex. <i>vs.</i> Kadalie, the Government intends to amend the regulation which the Court held was defectively worded, so as to prevent the entry into Natal of Kadalie and any other undesirable native agitators; and</li>

<li>(2) whether, if Law No. 48 of 1884 (Natal), under which the regulation was framed, does not enable such a regulation to be framed, the Government, in view of the urgency of the matter, intends to introduce legislation granting the necessary powers to do so?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_native_affairs" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS:</from>

<p>(1) and (2) The matter is being considered.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#parliamentary_catering">

<heading>PARLIAMENTARY CATERING.</heading>

<p>Message received from the Senate stating that the Senate had appointed a Committee of three members to join with a Committee of the House of Assembly as a Joint Sessional Committee for the purpose of the superintendence and management of Parliamentary catering.</p>

<p>Message referred to Committee on Standing Rules and Orders for consideration and report.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#european_women&#x2019;s_franchise">

<heading>EUROPEAN WOMEN&#x2019;S FRANCHISE.</heading>

<speech by="#mullineux">

<from>The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MULLINEUX</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">For leave to introduce a Bill to provide for the extension of the franchise to include European women in the election of members of the House of Assembly and Provincial Councils.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#reyburn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REYBURN</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To omit &#x201C; European.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I regret to have to move in this matter again after what took place last year. I do not want it to be felt that this is merely a formal notice of motion. The hon. member has really asked for leave to introduce a new colour bar into the Union. We do not want to see a Bill just to extend the franchise to European women. It means, in other words, that a new colour bar <span class="col_27-28" refersTo="page_0083"/>would be introduced if the franchise was to be kept from all non-European women. There is no other country where the question of extending the franchise to women has been sought to be settled by excluding women only because of their particular race or colour. I know of no case where they have begun by doing such an act of injustice. The position, in a nutshell, is this. There are many of us, including myself, who have consistently voted to extend the franchise to women. I am still in favour of it. It can only be done in two ways: By giving it to women on the same terms as to men or by giving it on a similar qualification basis to all women. You have no right to give it only to women of one colour or race. I cannot therefore vote for such a motion, and I move the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<p>Question put: That the word &#x201C; European,&#x201D; proposed to be omitted, stand part of the motion; and Mr. Alexander called for a division.</p>

<p>Upon which the House divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;76.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Collins, W. R.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conroy, E, A.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Hertzog, J. B. M.</p>

<p>Reyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Madeley, W. B.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naudé, A. S.</p>

<p>Naudé, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I van W.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Rods, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Steyn, C. F.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: de Jager, A. L.; Pienaar, B. J.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;26.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Malan, C. W.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Oppenheimer, E.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Tellers: Alexander, M.; van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Question accordingly affirmed and the amendment proposed by Mr. Alexander negatived.</p>

<p>Original motion then put and Mr. Roux called for a division.</p>

<p>Upon which the House divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;39.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Collins, W. R.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Madeley, W. B.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Naudé, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Steyn, C. F.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: de Jager, A. L.; Pienaar, B. J.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;63</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Cilliers. A. A.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Hertzog, J. B. M.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naudé, A. S.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Oppenheimer, E.</p>

<p><span class="col_29-30" refersTo="page_0084"/>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I van W.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Boos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Alexander, M.; Vermooten, O. S. Motion accordingly negatived.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#imprint_bill">

<heading>IMPRINT BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to Mr. Sampson to introduce the Imprint Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time.</p>

<speech by="#sampson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SAMPSON</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be read a second time on 4th February.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#mullineux">

<from>The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MULLINEUX</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to suggest that the hon. member should give us an opportunity of seeing this Bill before we are asked to take the second reading stage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>It was in the &#x201C; Gazette &#x201D; on the 18th.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>We want to see the Bill as it is now before the House. We have seen Bills before which have been published in the &#x201C; Gazette,&#x201D; and they are very different as a rule.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sampson">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SAMPSON</person>:</from>

<p>Hon. members know quite well that the opportunities of private members of getting a day for their Bills are not so numerous as those of Ministers. This Bill has been published in the &#x201C; Gazette,&#x201D; and most members are aware of its contents. Provided there is no other business down for that day, I hope the hon. member will waive his objection.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I think it is quite a reasonable suggestion that the second reading should be held over for a few days.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sampson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SAMPSON</person>:</from>

<p>To meet hon. members&#x2019; wishes, I will amend my motion to read&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be read a second time on</block>

<p>18th February.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mullineux">

<from>The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MULLINEUX</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#british_nationality_in_the_union_and_naturalization_and_status_of_aliens_act_1926_amendment_bill">

<heading>BRITISH NATIONALITY IN THE UNION AND NATURALIZATION AND STATUS OF ALIENS ACT, 1926, AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to Mr. Alexander to introduce the British Nationality in the Union and Naturalization and Status of Aliens Act, 1526, Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 11th February.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#divorce_laws_amendment_bill">

<heading>DIVORCE LAWS AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to Mr. van Hees to introduce the Divorce Laws Amendment Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time.</p>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be read a second time on 4th</block>

<p>February.</p>

<p>May I explain that the Bill is exactly the same as it was when before the House last time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#visser">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VISSER</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I feel it is time that we had an opportunity of seeing these Bills. We have several important Government Bills down for to-morrow and now we have Bills set down for Friday, which we have not had before us yet. It is all very well to say these Bills have been gazetted. Last year several Bills brought into the House were very different from those published in the &#x201C; Gazette.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I hope my hon. friend is going to reconsider. Here is an important Bill dealing with divorce laws and he wants to put it through on Friday.</p>

<p>Motion put,</p>

<p>Upon which the House divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;51.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Hertzog, J. B. M.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naudé, A. S.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I van W.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Pienaar, B. J.; Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;26.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p><span class="col_31-32" refersTo="page_0085"/>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Tellers: Nel, O. R.; Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#veterinary_bill">

<heading>VETERINARY BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to Mr. van Hees to introduce the Veterinary Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time.</p>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be read a second time on Friday, the 18th February.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>This is a consolidating measure and it is rather a large Bill. It is undoubtedly interfering with the earnings and living of many people, and in fairness to up-country people my hon. friend should put the second reading of this Bill back.</p>

</speech>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#architects_and_quantity_surveyors_(private)_bill">

<heading>ARCHITECTS AND QUANTITY SURVEYORS (PRIVATE) BILL.</heading>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That, in accordance with the resolution of the House of Assembly of the 20th May, 1926, the proceedings on the Architects and Quantity Surveyors (Private) Bill be resumed at the stage at which they were suspended last session.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<p>Motion put and agreed to; second reading on 18th February.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1927-02-01T15:38:00">3.38 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

