---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol8 - FRIDAY 11 FEBRUARY 1927'
layout: debate
year: 1927
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 11th FEBRUARY, 1927.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1927-02-11T14:13:00">2.13 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#standing_rules_and_orders_committee">

<heading>STANDING RULES AND ORDERS COMMITTEE.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER, announced that the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders had appointed Mr. Speaker to be a member of the Select Committee on Internal Arrangements and of the Select Committee on the Library of Parliament.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Cattle Dipping Regulations.</heading>

<question by="#naudé" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Mr. A. S. NAUDÉ</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture whether he intends, if possible, to modify the cattle dipping regulations in the Piet Retief district by allowing longer intervals between the several dippings?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#naudé">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>No, not as long as the district remains infected with East Coast fever.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Mine Accident at Dannhauser, Bravery at.</heading>

<question by="#strachan" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. STRACHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been directed to the heroic services of the men who volunteered for the work of rescue following the explosion which occurred at the Durban Navigation Colliery, Dannhauser, Natal, on Friday, 8th October, 1926;</li>

<li>(2) whether the technical advisers of the Mines Department have reported favourably thereon; and, if so,</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government intends to recognize the bravery of the members of the Rescue Brigade, either by recommending them for the King Edward Medal or awarding a similar South African decoration?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#strachan">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I have read with very great care the official report of the enquiry held by the magistrate and Inspector of mines into the recent disaster at the Durban Navigation Colliery, Dannhauser, Natal, which occurred on the 8th October last, including the final paragraph in which the report makes a short reference to the rescue work after the explosion. The report states:&#x2014; &#x201C;Volunteers came from every mine in the district. It would be invidious to mention any particular individual, but the behaviour of all the rescue teams was magnificent in the face of grave peril. The manner in which the various teams were organized and set to work reflects great credit on the General Manager (Mr. Sneddon), the Manager of No. 2 pit (Mr. J. C. Ferguson) and the Superintendent of the Rescue Station (Mr. Hogg). The heroic death of Mine Captain Shirlaw while leading one of the rescue teams is one of the saddest features of this deplorable tragedy.&#x201D;</li>

<li>(2) The technical officers of the Department have reported that while recognizing the splendid manner in which the members of the rescue brigades and others carried out their hazardous work and the courage displayed by them they do not consider, under the conditions prevailing at the time in the mine, the occasion warrants special recognition or decoration for the rescue brigades or others who carried out their recognized duty.</li>

<li><span class="col_235-236" refersTo="page_0187"/>(3) Under these circumstances the Government cannot recommend any of those concerned for the King Edward Medal, and there is no suitable South African decoration. I may say, however, that the Government is very conscious of the high qualities displayed by all, and I should like to mention in this House the names of those who displayed courage and perseverance under exceptionally trying cricumstances in a manner worthy of the best traditions of the coal mining industry. The names are as follows:&#x2014;T. Gray. A. Gray, N. Mengel, D. Jenkins, J. Reid, J. McKenzie, A. Chilton, W. N. Ramsay, G. Sinclair, G. Phillips, J. Connolly, C. Davidson. A. Nelson, G. Wilson, A. Caister, J. Jones, P. J. Dynes, W. R, Main, T. Sanders, W. G. Makins, W. Stone, R. Johnston, J. Devoy, R. Iverach.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Scab: Eradication of.</heading>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he will inform the House what the state of affairs in the Union is with regard to scab among goats and sheep, respectively;</li>

<li>(2) whether he intends to take drastic steps to finally get rid of that disease; and</li>

<li>(3) whether he will seriously consider the necessity of authorizing compulsory dipping in order to combat the serious pests of keds and paralysing ticks</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#van_heerden">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The position in regard to scab in sheep is, I consider, very favourable and considerable progress has been made which was greatly assisted by the general simultaneous dipping carried out towards the end of 1925. At the end of June last not only had the number of flocks quarantined fallen to 5,677 from 10,466 the previous year, or nearly 50 per cent., but the percentage of infection had dropped from 3.65 to 1.63. The large majority of farmers assisted the Department greatly in dealing with the disease, and without their aid it would have been impossible to have accomplished such progress. It may be added that as a result of the progress made it was possible during the last financial year to effect savings on Scab Administration to the extent of £21,000 by reduction and rearrangement of the staff. I am confident that the further progress anticipated will enable still further reductions to be made. Full particulars of the position will be found in the annual report of the Department for 1926-&#x2019;27. Scab in goats in unfortunately somewhat prevalent in certain areas and is receiving special attention. The drought conditions which have unfortunately prevailed however have tended to accentuate this disease and the poverty which prevails among the animals stands in the way of adopting more vigorous measures for eradication. The improvement of conditions will, however, render possible a vigorous policy of eradication which will be applied should the condition of the disease still necessitate it.</li>

<li>(2) It is my intention to continue on the lines pursued up to the present, which have rendered satisfactory results.</li>

<li>(3) Dipping for pests of the nature mentioned is so obviously in the interests of the farmers themselves that it is a matter upon which they should need no compulsion, but should co-operate in carrying out dipping in such manner as to best ensure the eradication of these pests. The matter is, I may say, receiving my earnest consideration.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Drought and Irrigation.</heading>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture what the irrigation policy of the Government is to be for the future, and whether preference will be given to the construction of dams at approved and surveyed sites in the drought-stricken districts?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#van_heerden">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I would refer the hon. member to Act No. 33, 1926, in which he will observe that one of the functions of the Irrigation Commission is to enquire into, report upon and recommend the construction of such irrigation works. The Irrigation Commission is engaged in investigating existing irrigation schemes in order to place them on a sound footing, and will investigate and report upon other proposed schemes and recommend those which should receive priority.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#deane" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>†Mr. DEANE:</from>

<p>Arising out of that answer, in view of the Government not spending any money on irrigation projects in dry areas, will the Minister assure us that he will give special attention to those dry areas?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#deane">

<from>†The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>As I have pointed out, the Irrigation Commission is there to make recommendations, and I told them specially to go into all the matters and report on them.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#van_heerden" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*Mr. I. P. VAN HEERDEN:</from>

<p>In view of their large activities, will they by any chance during the following year visit those places?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#van_heerden">

<from>*The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I cannot give you that assurance, but the committee will do its best.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Boring Plant Lying Idle.</heading>

<question by="#rockey" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. ROCKEY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is a fact that at the Irrigation Depot, Pretoria, boring machines and men have been lying idle for some time and will lie idle for another two months because their vote is exhausted;</li>

<li>(2) whether it is a fact that farmers who are willing to pay in advance cannot secure the services of these drills even in cases of vital necessity; and</li>

<li>(3) whether, in view of the fact that drilling water holes is of paramount importance to the whole Union and is the sole source of agricultural development, it is not possible to make some arrangement with the Treasury whereby farmers who are willing to pay in advance may secure the <span class="col_237-238" refersTo="page_0188"/>instant use of the boring plant now lying idle in Pretoria?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#rockey">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) There are a number of boring machines which were in commission for a long period, and have now been brought in to Pretoria to be overhauled thoroughly, in order that every effort may be made to keep the full complement of drills at work. There are 62 in the field as against the usual annual average of 49, and it is hoped to put others in commission shortly.</li>

<li>(2) Boring services are undertaken as far as possible in priority of application, except to a single service required in a remote area, when the applicant has to wait until other boring services are being undertaken within a reasonable distance. In cases of immediate and vital necessity, there are numbers of private boring contractors prepared to do the work.</li>

<li>(3) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Arising out of the answer, perhaps the Minister could inform the House how many drills are idle. If 52 drills are in the field, how many are at the Minister&#x2019;s disposal when they are repaired?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I cannot tell the hon. member&#x2014;I will enquire into the matter.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#arnott" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>Brig.-Gen. ARNOTT:</from>

<p>Who is responsible for under-estimating the cost of working the drills? They have now been in operation for some years.</p>

</question>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS:</from>

<p>The hon. member has asked who is responsible for under-estimating the cost of working the drills.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#nicholls">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>If the hon. member puts his question on the paper in the ordinary way, he will get his reply.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS:</from>

<p>Are we to assume that the Minister does not know the affairs of his department?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Level Crossings and Bridges.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether, in view of the very dangerous level crossing over the railway at Hilton Road and the great amount of traffic crossing each other by road and rail at this point, the Government will make provision in the near future for the construction of an overhead bridge?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>This matter has received most careful consideration on several occasions, but it is regretted the Administration is unable to see its way to make provision in the Estimates for the construction of an overhead bridge at Milton Road at the present time.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Tenant Farmers at Doornkop Estates.</heading>

<question by="#arnott" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Brig.-Gen. ARNOTT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether a survey of the Doornkop Estates, Stanger District, Natal, has been made in connection with the settlement thereon of tenant farmers; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) by whom and at what cost to (a) the Government, (b) the Doornkop Estates Co., Ltd.?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#arnott">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes. The original survey was completed before the Department of Labour was concerned. A detailed survey for sub-division purposes was made by Messrs. Wall and Warner;</li>

<li>(2)

<ol>

<li>(a) nil.</li>

<li>(b) nil.</li></ol></li></ol>

<p>The survey fees of £327 12s. are advanced by the Department and are, together with other costs, repayable by the tenant farmers.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>†Maj. RICHARDS:</from>

<p>Arising out of the reply the Minister has just given us, who is that Mr. Warner?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Mr. Warner is a member of the Natal Land Board, and he recommended the Doornkop Estates.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading></heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour whether the Minister will lay upon the Table all papers concerning the arrangement entered into between the Government and the Doornkop Estates, Limited, including correspondence, agreements and reports relative to (a) the placing of tenant farmers on the said Estates; (b) the Government&#x2019;s rights and obligations over the said property and the sugar-mill to be erected thereon; and (c) the suitability of the property for tenant farmers, and the progress made in 1926 in the planting of cane on the property?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>(a), (b) and (c). The hon. member is referred to my reply to question No. IX standing over from 28th January. Up to date ninety-nine tenant farmers have been placed at Doornkop; 2,000 acres have been cleared and ploughed, and over 600 acres planted to sugar cane, and it is fully expected that by the end of next month the agreed area will be fully planted.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Might I ask the Minister where this cane is going to be crushed. It is no good planting cane unless you have a mill &#x2014;perhaps the Minister does not know that.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>A very intelligent question, I must say. You cannot crush cane without a mill. The company are under an obligation to have the mill working by May next year.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Might I ask what they are going to do with the cane in the meanwhile?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Perhaps the hon. member does not know that it takes two years before you cut the cane down. When the cane is ready the mill will be ready. My hon. friend need not be alarmed about it.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>That mill will never be ready.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_239-240" refersTo="page_0189"/>Phosphates as Fertilizers.</heading>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture whether, in view of&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) the natural deficiency of phosphates in South African soils,</li>

<li>(b) the fact that all phosphate rock used in the manufacture of super-phosphate in the Union is at present imported from oversea,</li>

<li>(c) the deplorably low yield of grain per acre in South Africa&#x2014;the lowest in the world in the case of mealies,</li>

<li>(d) the fact that about 30 per cent. of the breadstuffs consumed in the Union annually are imported,</li>

</ol>

<p>the Government will cause an investigation to be made by the Geological Survey Department, together with the Department of Agriculture, into the phosphatic occurrences known to exist within the Union, with a view to their classification in order to ascertain whether some of them can be employed in the manufacture of superphosphate and other fertilizers for direct application at an economic cost to sour and other soils?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>The deposits examined up to the present are not rich enough to be worked, but the Government are giving their earnest attention to other possible sources with a view to assisting the superphosphate industry as well as the steel industry where phosphate ore is necessary in order to produce the by-product, basic slag, which will be of great benefit to the farmer.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>†Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Arising out of the answer, will the Minister tell us what parts of the country have been examined so far?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I could not tell the hon. member every one. There is one at Malmesbury where samples were taken, and one at Saldanha Bay.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>†Maj. RICHARDS:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware that there are large deposits in Weenen, and that steps have been taken to prospect that part of the country?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I could not tell the hon. member.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Grain Elevator at Franklin.</heading>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. GILSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether, in view of the large amount of grain, both wheat and maize, grown in East Griqualand and the large proportions of the grain trade in the Transkeian Territories, the Government will take into consideration the early construction of a grain elevator in these districts, preferably at Franklin?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#gilson">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The claims of the East Griqualand and Transkeian Territories for an elevator to serve these districts will be given careful consideration in conjunction with those if other grain-producing areas in the event of the Administration deciding to make provision for additional country elevators.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Dr. Visser and Argentine Sleepers.</heading>

<question by="#van_zyl" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Maj. G. B. VAN ZYL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is a fact that an expert in the choice of sleepers, an employee of the Administration, was actually in, or about to proceed to, the Argentine, at or about the time Dr. Visser, the hon. member for Vrededorp, visited that country armed with a contract to sell sleepers to the Administration;</li>

<li>(2) whether the Administration previously made any enquiries as to the cost and or supply of sleepers in the Argentine;</li>

<li>(3) what were the results of such enquiries;</li>

<li>(4) whether the contract with Dr. Visser specified the supply of about 1,000,000 sleepers annually;</li>

<li>(5) what were the qualifications of Dr. Visser apart from his medical experience, to carry through so large and important a commercial transaction;</li>

<li>(6) whether Dr. Visser&#x2019;s estimate of a profit to himself through this contract of approximately £5,000 per annum is correct or nearly so;</li>

<li>(7) whether it is a fact that a letter was written to Dr. Visser by the Administration, prior to his departure for the Argentine, to the effect that he was to represent the Administration there in the purchase of sleepers and/or other matters;</li>

<li>(8) whether, if any such communication was made, the Minister will lay a copy thereof upon the Table;</li>

<li>(9) when was the Administration first approached by or on behalf of Dr. Visser in regard to his visit to the Argentine and/or the sale of sleepers;</li>

<li>(10) when did negotiations commence and by whom were they conducted;</li>

<li>(11) whether any opinion was asked for from or given by the Government law advisers or any other legal authority as to the propriety of as to whether or no it was legal for the Administration to enter into a contract of this nature with a member of Parliament who occupied the responsible position of Chairman of the Select Committee on Railways and Harbours; and</li>

<li>(12) whether, if any such opinion was given, the Minister will lay it upon the Table?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#van_zyl">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) An engineering officer of the Administration, who was in British Guiana inspecting sleepers purchased by the Administration, proceeded from there to the Argentine, his arrival in the latter country being at about the same time as that of Dr. Visser, the hon. member for Vrededorp.</li>

<li>(2) Yes. For years past the Administration has endeavoured to obtain Colorado Quebracho <span class="col_241-242" refersTo="page_0190"/>sleepers both by means of public tender invited through the Press and by negotiation with probable suppliers.</li>

<li>(3) No tenders were received and negotiations with probable suppliers led to no result.</li>

<li>(4) Yes; see copy of the Agreement laid upon the Table.</li>

<li>(5) As Dr. Visser was visiting the Argentine, the opportunity was availed of to endeavour to secure trade reciprocity between the two countries. The hon. member will observe from a perusal of the contract that it was an important part of the arrangement that coal from South Africa should be exported to the Argentine.</li>

<li>(6) I have no information regarding Dr. Visser&#x2019;s estimate of probable profit.</li>

<li>(7) and (8) I am not aware of any communication having been addressed by the Administration in the terms referred. Prior to Dr. Visser&#x2019;s departure for the Argentine I understand he was furnished by my colleague, the hon. the Minister for Mines and Industries, with a letter of introduction to the Argentine Authorities. <br/>I should add that Dr. Visser was furnished with a Memorandum in March, 1926, to the effect that consideration would be given to any offers he wished to submit for the sale of sleepers to the Administration, as the Administration is always open to consider such offers. I will lay upon the Table a copy of this Memorandum at the earliest possible date.</li>

<li>(9) As stated in (7) and (8), he approached the question of the purchase of sleepers in March, 1926, but as far as I am aware no visit to the Argentine was then contemplated.</li>

<li>(10) June 15th, 1926. The negotiations were conducted by officers of the Administration and the Railway Board.</li>

<li>(11) Yes; the Government Attorney, Pretoria, was asked whether there was any legal objection to Dr. Visser as a Member of Parliament entering into such an agreement with the Administration.</li>

<li>(12) The opinion of the Government Attorney, Pretoria, reads as follows:&#x2014;</li></ol>

<block name="quote">So far as this office is aware there is no provision in the South Africa Act prohibiting Dt. Visser from entering into the contract in question whatever his right may be to vote in Parliament on any question relating thereto. However, it is for Dr. Visser himself to ascertain how he would be affected thereby.</block>

</answer>

<question by="#duncan" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. DUNCAN:</from>

<p>A splendid arrangement.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#duncan">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I should certainly think so.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>Arising out of the question, will the Minister give an undertaking on behalf of the Government seriously to contemplate altering the South Africa Act so as to prevent members of Parliament from contracting with the Government?</p>

</question>

<question by="#deane" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Mr. DEANE:</from>

<p>Arising out of the answer, is the Minister prepared to give any other hon. member similar terms as were given to the hon. member?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#deane">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>As to the first question, the reply is in the negative; and as far as the second question is concerned, the Government is prepared to enter into contracts with members if they are on the same advantageous terms as this one.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>Has the Minister considered sub-section 5 of the question which asks what were the qualifications, of Dr. Visser, apart from his medical experience, to carry through so large and important a transaction, and whether any opinion was asked for from, or given by, the Government law advisers, and whether the Government attorney was informed that last year Dr. Visser was chairman of the Select Committee on Railways and is likely to be chairman again this year, and that this Committee is likely to sit in judgment on the contract?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#close">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I have indicated clearly that Dr. Visser did not represent the Government when he went to the Argentine. Therefore the question of his qualifications is one in which the Government is not interested. With regard to the second point, the Government Attorney was given all the information available, and he gave the opinion which I have read.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>That is not an answer to my question whether the Government Attorney was informed that last year Dr. Visser was the Chairman of the Railway Committee and is likely to be so again this year, and as such he would have to sit in judgment on any contract of this kind.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#close">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>It was common knowledge that, the hon. member was chairman of the Railway Committee last year. In regard to the second point, I did not then know who was going to be elected chairman of the Committee this year.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Will the Minister inform the House if Dr. Visser put his great technical and practical experience at the disposal of the railway expert who was sent to the Argentine? And whether the Minister considered that the railway sleeper expert was incompetent to form an opinion on the subject, without being backed up by the expert technical knowledge of Dr. Visser.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The officer was sent from British Guiana where he was inspecting sleepers to the Argentine to satisfy himself that the sleepers which would be supplied to us would be satisfactory. Surely the interests of the Administration were properly protected by sending a competent officer.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>May I ask the Prime Minister if Dr. Visser was an unofficial member of the Imperial Conference?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#byron">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>That is a question which in due <span class="col_243-244" refersTo="page_0191"/>time the hon. member can address to the Prime Minister.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>I was addressing the question to the Prime Minister. I wish the Minister would pay more attention to his duties. I wish to ask the Minister of Railways if Dr. Visser&#x2019;s contract was submitted to the Tender Board and received their approval.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#byron">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>It was not submitted to the Tender Board because it was not necessary. The whole matter was discussed by the competent officials, as hon. members would know if they would only listen to the replies. The senior officers of the Department who are members of the Tender Board were consulted.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Mr. NEL:</from>

<p>Did Dr. Visser enter into a contract with the Natal coal owners?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#nel">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>That is a question about which the Government has no information.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>Was anybody else given an opportunity of tendering for these sleepers, and were sureties given by Dr. Visser for the performance of his contract?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#nathan">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>We are very desirous of getting these sleepers from the Argentine, and we have asked publicly for tenders on previous occasions, but have not received any satisfactory tenders. If the hon. member wishes to tender we are quite prepared to consider his offer.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware that in every other British Dominion the entering into of a contract between the Government and a member of Parliament renders the latter&#x2019;s election void, and is he aware that similar penalties existed in the Transvaal, the Free State and Natal prior to Union?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The contract was submitted to the Government Attorney, and I took his advice on the point.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>In the case of every municipality no town councillor is allowed to contract with his own council. Will the Minister submit to his colleagues the advisability of altering the constitution of the Union so as to prevent instances of this sort occurring in the future?</p>

</question>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware that a Select Committee of the Union Senate recommended that a Bill be introduced to render void the seat of any member of Parliament entering into a contract with the Government?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#anderson">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I submit that that question is totally irrelevant.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>Was the contract a specific one for a definite number of sleepers per annum, has the contract been carried out, and if not, will Dr. Visser be sued for failure to carry out the contract?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#close">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I have given full information to the House.</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#close">

<from>Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The Minister has already indicated that he is not prepared to answer any further questions on the subject, and that ends the matter.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#speaker">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>I submit for your ruling, Mr. Speaker, that I have asked a question first as to the terms of the tender, and what action the Government has taken outside the contract. The hon. the Minister has replied only on the terms of the contract.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#close">

<from>†Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The answers to supplementary questions are merely a matter of courtesy, and if any Minister refuses to reply to any question he is entitled to do so. Hon. members are not entitled to insist upon any question being answered.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#speaker">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>I understand the Minister has refused to answer a question, but that does not prevent me exercising my privilege to put another question which he may be prepared to answer.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>†Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I understand the Minister has given all the information he is prepared to give.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>The Minister made a statement in connection with the Tender Board. I understand the contract would be in the region of £300,000 a year. Therefore, if Dr. Visser was prepared to carry out that contract would the Minister have given his sanction for a contract of that size without the sanction of the Tender Board to which all tenders of £10,000 and over must be submitted.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I think I have given all the information necessary to the House</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Wink Exports to England.</heading>

<question by="#stals" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Dr. STALS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether a report in the local press of the 9th February, 1927, about the restrictions on the importation of wine into England has been brought to his notice;</li>

<li>(2) whether he is prepared to give the House further particulars about the restrictions referred to;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government will, in the event of the said restrictions seriously affecting the export wine trade of South Africa, make representations to the proper authorities?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#stals">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) I have received no official information and, therefore, know no more than what appeared in the press on the 8th, 9th and 10th instant, namely, that the wine importations <span class="col_245-246" refersTo="page_0192"/>into England up to 1st May next are being restricted to 5 per cent. above the importation during the same period last year.</li>

<li>(3) From the press I further gather that our High Commissioner has already made representations to the proper authorities, and that the limitation will shortly be so amended that the quantity of dominion wine of over 30 per cent. proof which will be allowed, will be placed at 50 per cent. above the importation for the same period last year.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Arising out of that answer is it not possible the restriction of wine has been brought about as a reprisal to the policy of this country in abolishing the British preference?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I have no reason to think that for a moment.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>But shouldn&#x2019;t the figure be 50 per cent. and not 5 per cent.?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>Yes, it is 50 per cent.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XIII.</num>

<p>Standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Bank Officials from Overseas.</heading>

<question by="#hattingh" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>The Rev. Mr. HATTINGH</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is correct that during the last six months officials from other countries have been imported by the South African Reserve Bank;</li>

<li>(2) whether it is a fact that about 90 per cent. of the staff of the Reserve Bank are unilingual; and</li>

<li>(3) whether in case the Minister has not the above information by reason of the bank being a private institution, he will instruct the Government representatives on the board to attempt to bring about the desired change in the interest of South African youths and young women, if the position is as is presumed in paragraphs (1) and (2)?</li>

</ol></question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#hattingh">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) During the whole period of the bank&#x2019;s existence one official, with special qualifications, has been imported.</li>

<li>(2) I have no information.</li>

<li>(3) The Governor informs me that the policy of the bank is, and always has been, to recruit its staff in South Africa and to employ a sufficient number of bilingual persons to meet requirements.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Tenant Farmers in Rustenburg.</heading>

<question by="#pretorius" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Lt.-Col. N. J. PRETORIUS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether there is any truth in the report that the tenant farmers on the Uitvalgrond settlement, in the Rustenburg district, have been notified to leave the settlement at once, and whether the farming implements distributed among them have been taken back; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether he will state the reasons why they are being dealt with so severely; and</li>

<li>(3) whether he does not consider that such treatment will mean the ruin of the tenant farmers concerned?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#pretorius">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Nine tenant farmers were discharged from the Uitval Tenant Farmer Extension Scheme. Two returned to their homes at their own request; three were placed on the Losperfontein Training Farm, and four were sent to railway construction work. The farming implements distributed amongst them were taken back, and will be issued to their successors.</li>

<li>(2) The men concerned had proved themselves quite unable to farm on their own responsibility.</li>

<li>(3) No, as work more suitable to their capacity was offered to them. Tenant farmers are only dismissed summarily in the event of gross misconduct, and are otherwise given the greatest possible consideration.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Kalahari Reconnaissance.</heading>

<question by="#de_jager" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Dr. DE JAGER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he has received the Report of the Kalahari Reconnaissance and has had the same published; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he will lay the same upon the Table?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#de_jager">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) A copy of the report was posted to all the hon. members of this House and to all hon. Senators.</li>

</ol></answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Flag Commission.</heading>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What are the names of the existing members of the Flag Commission, their addresses, professions and qualifications for their very important duties;</li>

<li>(2) what are the terms of reference of the Commission and/or the terms of the letter of appointment addressed to each member; and</li>

<li>(3) what members of the Commission served South Africa in the field or otherwise during the late great war, and what was the nature of such services in each case?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) (a) Prof. Dr. W. Blommaert, Professor of History at the University of Stellenbosch and a leading authority on heraldry; (b) Prof. Sir Geo. Cory, historian, Cape Town; (c) Monsignor Dr. F. C. Kolbe, Cape Town, well-known throughout South Africa, and a prominent figure in art and literary circles; (d) Mr. Stratford Caldecott, artist, Cape Town; (e) Mr. Edward Roworth, artist. Durban; (f) Dr. Manfred Nathan, K.C., advocate, chosen on account of his special knowledge of constitutional law; (g) Advocate H. A. Fagan, barrister, and <span class="col_247-248" refersTo="page_0193"/>formerly professor of law; (h) Mr. Gustav Preller, editor and historian, Pretoria; (i) Mrs. E. G. Jansen, Pietermaritzburg; Mrs. H. D. van Broekhuizen, Pretoria; Mrs. F. J. Fahey, Durban; Mrs. Ad. Percy Fisher, Bloemfontein, and Mrs. Dr. J. S. v. d. Lingen, Cape Town, to represent the women in the four provinces; (j) Mr. Dan de Villiers, Ficksburg, farmer, member of the Executive Committee of the Provincial Council, O.F.S.; (k) Prof. J. J. Smith, Professor of Afrikaans, Stellenbosch; (1) Mr. Arend Brink, diamond expert, Kenilworth; (m) Mr. J. Curran, Johannesburg, well-known as the workers&#x2019; representative of the Union of South Africa at the Labour Conference under the auspices of the League of Nations at Geneva; (n) Mr. W. Lategan, attorney, Bustenburg, chosen on account of his special interest and study of the subject; (o) Mr. L. Marquard, teacher, Grey College School, Bloemfontein, chairman of the National Union of South African Students, and representing the University and College students; (p) Mr. Agar Hamilton, lecturer at the Transvaal University College, Pretoria, chosen on account of his special knowledge of heraldry. Practically all the above-mentioned have intimated their intention to attend the meeting of the commission, which has been convened for the 22nd February. Should any about whose ability to attend some doubt exists, be unable to take part in the work of the commission, some names may still be added if necessary so as to equalize as far as possible the number of Dutch-and English-speaking members.</li>

<li>(2) Copies of the letter of appointment, including the terms of reference, will be laid on the Table to-day.</li>

<li>(3) As this was not a subject of enquiry when the appointments were made, I am not in a position to give the information.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Arising out of the answer, do I understand that Mr. Maurice Webb, who was one of the original members appointed on the commission, has resigned from it?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>Yes, he has.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>How many more have resigned?</p>

</question>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†Mr. GILSON:</from>

<p>Is Dr. Blommaert, who is a leading authority on heraldry, a South African subject, naturalized or otherwise?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#gilson">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>He is a South African subject, and he has been many years in South Africa. He has identified himself much more with the South African spirit than many who are born in Birmingham or Yorkshire and who have been living a longer time in South Africa than he has been. Let me just say further that Dr. Blommaert served on the committee which was appointed last year and which carried on the negotiations to try and come to an agreement, and he served on that committee with the full approval of the Leader of the Opposition.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#deane" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†Mr. DEANE:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister for what reason have such responsible and representative men as Mr. Graham Mackeurtan, Mr. Edward Saunders and Archdeacon Hodson declined to be associated with the commission?</p>

</question>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Can the Minister tell us who is representative of the province of Natal on this commission?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I have given the information to the House.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#hon_member" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>An HON. MEMBER:</from>

<p>Why not answer the question?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#hon_member">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>I do not answer questions twice.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>The Minister has mentioned certain persons as representing the women and students of South Africa. Will the Minister inform the House and the country what steps he took in regard to the appointment of these persons representing the women and students of South Africa, and whether the women of South Africa have had a voice in nominating these representatives?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#close">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>It seems to me that hon. members opposite are very strong in asking questions and when they have got the information they are very weak in debate. Let me just say that this information has been given and hon. members will have a full opportunity of discussing the whole matter in this House. It is unnecessary in the circumstances to reply to that particular question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Arising out of the question of the hon. member for Griqualand (Mr. Gilson), can the Minister tell the House whether Professor Blommaert is a naturalized British subject and whether he is an elector of the Union?</p>

</question>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Maj. RICHARDS:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister, in view of the preponderating sentiment of the people of Natal, whether he ventures to maintain that the selections from Natal are in any way representative of the people of that province?</p>

</question>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>The Minister, if I understood him correctly, in reply to a question put to him from this side, said that the gentleman who had been appointed chairman of that commission was, he considered, more capable of giving an opinion than many people who might be born in Birmingham or Yorkshire. As the Minister considers that there may be some further resignations and he may have to appoint some other members, am I to understand from him that anybody born in Birmingham or Yorkshire will be disqualified from serving on that commission?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Flag Commission and Sir W. Campbell.</heading>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. GILSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the correspondence between Sir William Campbell and the Government on the flag question, handed to the press for publication on the 9th February by <span class="col_249-250" refersTo="page_0194"/>the Minister of the Interior, is a complete record of all letters and telegrams which passed between the above gentleman and members of the Government; and, if not,</li>

<li>(2) what letters or telegrams have been withheld from publication, and what are the reasons for their exclusion?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#gilson">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) With the exception of a few telegrams of a merely formal character explaining delay, etc., and with the exception of one letter merely confirming a previously sent telegram the published correspondence is complete record of all letters and telegrams which have passed between myself as the responsible Minister and Sir William Campbell or which have been referred to me for disposal by other Ministers.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†Mr. GILSON:</from>

<p>Has the Minister read the letter from Sir William Campbell in which he says that his justification in differing from Dr. Malan is based on the interview that he had with the Acting Prime Minister on the previous Saturday, and the attached letter that he had received from him (the Minister)?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#gilson">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>If the hon. member will have a little patience I will reply to that question on No. 22.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Will the Minister inform the House that he will place that letter on the Table?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>†The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>If the hon. member will look at No. 22, he will see that I will reply to that question. Let me say that the letter to which reference has been made was never in my hands, and that only for the purpose of replying to No. 22 did I secure the letter, and I will lay that letter on the Table of the House, but it is not included in any correspondence which had passed between myself and Sir William Campbell or which had been referred to me.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XIX.</num>

<p>Standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: German Engines, Orders for.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XX.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether it is a fact that in or about 1921 his Majesty&#x2019;s Government of Great Britain made free gifts to his Majesty&#x2019;s Government of the Union of South Africa of (a) railway material worth £500,000, (b) aircraft, artillery, stores, and endowment lands and buildings valued at £5,623,192, and (c) two minesweepers and one survey sloop valued at £106,000, and handed over to the Union Government three merchant vessels for which no payment has been made; and, if so, what justification is there for placing orders for railway engines with the German contractors Hanomagh, Fried Krupp, Henchell and Sohn, and J. A. Maffei, when the saving between the German tenders and those from good British manufacturers on the price of 57 engines is only £24,532?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>In regard to the first portion, I would refer the hon. member to the replies given in the House on the 4th May and 11th May, 1926, to questions by the hon. member for South Peninsula. The figures given in the hon. member&#x2019;s present question are not quite correct.</p>

<p>The transfer of the assets which the hon. member has in mind was the result of negotiations between the Imperial Government and the Union Government and the arrangements whereby the transfer took place were, I understand, entered into in a spirit of friendship and mutual co-operation, and also out of gratitude for South Africa&#x2019;s help in the great war, and not in a spirit of barter for favours to come.</p>

<p>I do not know whether the hon. member wishes to infer that the Administration is not sympathetically inclined towards offers from British firms for its requirements<i>;</i>; if so, on behalf of my colleagues on the Railway Board and myself, upon whom the responsibility for taking the decision in the case of the engines rests, I wish to state emphatically that this is not the case.</p>

<p>The hon. member is, of course, aware of the provisions of the South Africa Act.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Does the Minister consider this a right way of carrying out the policy of closer co-operation within the Empire, of which the Prime Minister told us on his return from the Imperial Conference?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>†Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I wish to point out to the hon. member that he must not ask the Minister to express an opinion.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister whether it is not correct, as stated in my question, that the value of aircraft, stores and other material was £5,623,000?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I would refer again to the reply given last year to the question put by the hon. member for South Peninsula (Sir Drummond Chaplin).</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Can the Minister deny that the value of the aircraft, stores and artillery mentioned was £5,623,000, a free gift which he looks in the mouth?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Dipping Supervisors in Natal.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXI.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture why are vacancies for dipping supervisors in Natal filled by appointments from other provinces, whilst so many men in Natal are both competent and willing to accept such appointments?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>As the four provinces were united under one Union in 1910, I consider the question as superfluous. I may, however, add that where considerations such as knowledge of native languages or peculiar local circumstances require <span class="col_251-252" refersTo="page_0195"/>it, preference is given to suitable local candidates, but as a general rule selections are made from among such persons as have applied to the Department for employment and who are considered to be qualified for the duties.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#deane" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>†Mr. DEANE:</from>

<p>Arising out of the answer, may I ask the Minister whether these inspectors are qualified in the official languages of the Union, English and Afrikaans?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#deane">

<from>†The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>Yes, as far as possible.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#deane" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>†Mr. DEANE:</from>

<p>I can prove it otherwise.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Flag Commission and Sir W. Campbell.</heading>

<question by="#stuttaford" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXII.</num>

<from>Mr. STUTTAFORD</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior whether he will lay upon the Table the letter to Sir William Campbell from the Acting Prime Minister referred to in Sir William Campbell&#x2019;s letter of the 8th December, 1926?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#stuttaford">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>Yes. I shall lay it on the Table now.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Faulty American Engines.</heading>

<question by="#stuttaford" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXIII.</num>

<from>Mr. STUTTAFORD</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether, of a recent consignment of 15 or 16 American engines, 12 have developed serious faults and are now undergoing repairs; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) what is the estimated cost of the repairs per engine?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#stuttaford">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Out of 23 engines purchased from the American Loco. Corporation and recently placed in service, 18 have developed a fault, viz, cracked bridge casting. A number of these engines has been stopped for repairs, while others are being worked under supervision.</li>

<li>(2) It is not possible at this stage to furnish an estimate of the cost of repairs. Ten per cent. of the value of the contract is held by the Administration to cover the cost of repairs or the replacement of faulty castings.</li></ol>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Mr. GILSON:</from>

<p>Arising out of that answer, does the Minister think that rather larger cracks are not likely to develop in these German engines which have been bought?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Defence: Lt.-Col. Judd and Use of Afrikaans.</heading>

<question by="#van_der_merwe" to="#minister_of_defence">

<num>XXIV.</num>

<from>Dr. VAN DER MERWE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is true that Lt.-Col. Judd, of the S.A. Permanent Garrison Artillery, has given definite instructions that no Afrikaans should be used in the Garrison under his command; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) what action the Minister intends taking to prevent this injustice to Afrikaans-speaking men?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#van_der_merwe">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No. The hon. member is evidently referring to an order given by the officer in question that only English was to be used in orders on the telephone during gun practice. This is essential, as the phonetic similarity of words conveying different meanings in English and Afrikaans leads to serious mistakes in ranging, particularly in the use of the numerals 2 and 3. Such a mistake actually occurred at gun practice on the 9th instant.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Dr. Visser and Argentine Sleepers!</heading>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXV.</num>

<from>Col. D. REITZ</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he will explain to the House the circumstances under which he entered into a Government contract on the 9th July, 1926, under which he undertook to purchase from Dr. Visser, M.L.A. for Vrededorp, three millions of railway sleepers at 6s. 8½d. each;</li>

<li>(2) why the Government purchased Argentine sleepers from Dr. Visser, a medical practitioner of Johannesburg, instead of from the owners direct;</li>

<li>(3) what was the relationship between Dr. Visser and the owner or owners of the sleepers;</li>

<li>(4) why the said contract provided that Dr. Visser was to purchase and transmit cargoes of coal to the Argentine;<i>;</i></li>

<li>(5) from whom and under what conditions was Dr. Visser to procure the coal?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) As already explained, the object of the arrangement was to foster trade relationships between the Argentine and South Africa by taking sleepers and exchanging Argentine requirements, i.e., coal, dried fruit, wines, etc., as well as any other trade capable of development between the two countries.</li>

<li>(2) I would refer the hon. member to the reply given to-day to question No. XI by the hon. member for Cape Town (Harbour).</li>

<li>(3) The Administration has no information regarding the arrangements between Dr. Visser and probable suppliers.</li>

<li>(4) The policy of the Government and the Administration is to encourage the development of South African industry and trade.</li>

<li>(5) The coal would have been obtained from collieries in the Union. The Administration is not aware of the prices or conditions contemplated between Dr. Visser and the owners of the coal</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Arising out of that reply, surely the Minister must know something more about this than he has told us.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#reitz">

<from><span class="col_253-254" refersTo="page_0196"/>Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member must confine himself to asking a question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#speaker">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>I am asking the Minister whether in fact he knows nothing more about this question than he has already told the House, because it was embodied in the contract that the cargoes of coal must be purchased from the hon. member for Vrededorp (Dr. Visser).</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#reitz">

<from>Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member must not make a speech.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>I want to ask the Minister if he has been perfectly frank with us</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I have given the House full information.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Well. I would like to ask the Minister, if this practice had taken place under S.A.P. regime, it would not have been characterized as a piece of rightdown graft.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#hon_members" to="#reitz">

<from>HON. MEMBERS:</from>

<p>Order !</p>

</answer>

<question by="#henderson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. HENDERSON:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister if a Mr. R. A. Statham was in any way associated with the hon. member for Vrededorp (Dr. Visser), and, if so, in what way?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#henderson">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>He had no association with the Government in regard to these contracts in any way.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#deane" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Mr. DEANE:</from>

<p>Arising out of the Minister&#x2019;s reply. I would like to ask why were tenders for sleepers not called from Australia, seeing that Australia is a sister dominion, and the money should be kept within the empire?</p>

</question>

<question by="#visser" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Dr. VISSER:</from>

<p>To remove any misunderstanding, I want to ask the Minister if he will be kind enough to answer this question. At what cost to the Government has this journey of mine to the Argentine been or my journey to Holland, where I went to try and get European settlers for the benefit of South Africa?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#visser">

<from>†The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>In reply, I want again to stress the point that the visit of the hon. member for Vrededorp to the Argentine or any other part of the world, Holland included, has been undertaken without cost to the State, and on behalf of the Government I want to express our appreciation of the efforts which the hon. member has made.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>†Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Will the Minister tell us what the moral and intellectual damage to South Africa has been owing to the hon. member&#x2019;s visits?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Land Settlement at Doornkop.</heading>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>XXVI.</num>

<from>Col. D. REITZ</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands whether the Labour Department is acting in co-operation with the Lands Department in connection with the land settlement scheme on the Doornkop Estates, or whether the settlement is being administered by the Minister of Labour only?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>The administration of the Doornkop scheme is entirely in the hands of the Department of Labour.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Arising out of that reply, may I ask the Minister if the Hartebeestpoort Social Uplift scheme is also under the Department of Labour?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#reitz">

<from>†The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>Yes, there are two settlements at Hartebeestpoort. On the right bank it is entirely under my control, and on the left bank it is entirely under the control of the Minister of Labour.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Do I understand that the Minister of Labour has a blank cheque to deal with this scheme, irrespective of the Minister of Lands at all? Is it run in two Water-tight compartments? Doornkop seems to be purely a land settlement scheme.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#reitz">

<from>Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>Order! The hon. member is too much inclined to make a speech when asking a question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>†Mr. STRUBEN:</from>

<p>Is there any co-ordination between your department and the Labour Department in the Hartebeestpoort and Doornkop settlements?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#struben">

<from>†The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>I have explained that Doornkop is not under my department. As far as the other is concerned, the scheme is really not land settlement, but the people are given employment and trained.</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#struben">

<from>†The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>May I amplify that? We get into our department all kinds of men, and we have to sort them out and train them.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>As the Minister has a good deal of practical experience of land settlement, does he not think it would be better in the interests of this country and of both the settlements if they were both under one department, the Land Department?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>But these are not settlements.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>What do you call Doornkop?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#hon_member" to="#reitz">

<from>An HON. MEMBER:</from>

<p>Unsettlement.</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#reitz">

<from>†The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>My scheme at Hartebeestpoort is where they are trained and eventually put out on settlements. My hon. friend is training his unemployed to see where they are best employable.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Was not Doornkop intended as land settlement?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>We will discuss it later on.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>They do not know anything about it. That is the explanation.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Members of Parliament on Commissions.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XXVII.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether, in order to distinguish members of this House who have, in addition <span class="col_255-256" refersTo="page_0197"/>to their Parliamentary pay, drawn a subsistence allowance of £3 3s. per diem for attendance on Commissions sitting at Cape Town during the 1924 and 1925 sessions, he will give the names of such members, so that their sitting on the Select Committee on Public Accounts may be challenged, if necessary, when paragraph 46 of the Auditor-General&#x2019;s Report (U.G. 40&#x2014;&#x2019;26) comes before such Committee for consideration;</li>

<li>(2) whether he will also give the name of the member who preferred no claim for such allowance, so that his sitting on the said Committee may not be challenged;</li>

<li>(3) whether his attention has been drawn to a statement reported to have been made at Durbanville by the hon. member for Liesbeek (Mr. Pearce), as to the origin of the said subsistence allowance of £3 3s. per day, to the effect &#x201C;that this had been adopted because a certain South African party member had charged £2 2s. for a breakfast. He (the speaker) had been on the Police Commission, and he received £93 4s. for four months&#x2019; work, from which he had to pay hotel and other expenses. . . Under the South African party regime he would have made £500 for the same work&#x201D;;</li>

<li>(4) whether these statements are true, and, if so, what is the name of the member who claimed £2 2s. for a breakfast, and under what rule or regulation the hon. member for Liesbeek would have been entitled to £500 under the South African party regime; and</li>

<li>(5) whether the attention of the Auditor-General has been drawn to the alleged charge of £2 2s. for a breakfast?</li></ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>In regard to 1 and 2, I will give the information, but in regard to 3, 4 and 5 I have not seen the statement and I would suggest that the hon. member should address his question to the hon. member himself.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>May we put the question to the hon. member concerned?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#anderson">

<from>†Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member is only entitled to put questions to the Minister. Does the hon. member wish to ask a question?</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#speaker">

<from>Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#anderson">

<from>†Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>Is the hon. member for Liesbeek (Mr. Pearce) prepared to reply?</p>

</answer>

<question by="#pearce" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. PEARCE:</from>

<p>If the hon. member will put it on Paper I will reply.</p>

</question>

<question by="#deane" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. DEANE:</from>

<p>It is on the Paper already.</p>

</question>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>†Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Arising out of the Minister&#x2019;s reply, does he not recognize that the question involves a matter of privilege? Hon. members will be unable to carry out their duties without this information being supplied.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I have not got all the records here, but the hon. member will find all the information he really desires with the exception of (2) in the paragraph of the Auditor-General&#x2019;s report. I do not want to speak without my book in regard to the actual information. In regard to the other part of the question I have already indicated it is quite open to the hon. member to put a question on the Paper giving notice to the hon. member concerned.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#hon_members" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>HON. MEMBERS:</from>

<p>He has gone.</p>

</question>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>May I draw the Minister&#x2019;s attention to the very serious charge involved in this. Part 4 of the question asks whether the statement is true. It does not matter whether the hon. member for Liésbeek made that statement or not, but the allegation is there, and surely it is the province of the Minister of Finance to give the information.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#anderson">

<from>†Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>If hon. members put questions of this nature they take the responsibility for the truth of them.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. CLOSE:</from>

<p>Yes, but it is the ordinary form to draw the Minister&#x2019;s attention to important allegations which are made. A question is put to the Minister so that the public may know whether the allegation is true or not. I ask whether the Minister of Finance will not enquire into the truth of the statement.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#close">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>In the question are the words&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">under the South African party regime he would have made £500 for the same work.</block>

<p>How can I know whether that is true or not? I do not know the case to which the hon. member is referring. It is impossible for me to say I could not get it from the records unless I had some more information.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>†Mr. STRUBEN:</from>

<p>Does the Minister approve of his followers practising propaganda of this nature?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Tenant Farmers: On Doornkop Estates.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF LABOUR replied to Question IX, by Mr. Marwick, standing over from 1st February.</p>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<p>Whether he will lay upon the Table all papers relating to the placing of European tenant-farmers on the Doornkop Estates, Stanger District Natal, including (a) the letter dated 25th February, 1926, from the Secretary for Labour to Mr. Nathan Rosenberg, and (b) copy of the agreement dated 28th April. 1926, between the Doornkop Estates, Limited, and the Commissioners of his Majesty&#x2019;s Treasury?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<p>A copy of the agreement between the Doornkop Estates, Ltd., and the Commissioners of his Majesty&#x2019;s Treasury has been laid on the Table to-day. This agreement explains the position fully, and includes a copy of the letter dated 25th February, 1926, from the Secretary <span class="col_257-258" refersTo="page_0198"/>for Labour to Mr. Nathan Rosenberg. The complete papers are very voluminous and would involve considerable time and expense in preparation to lay on the Table.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>East Coast Fever at Umvoti.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE replied to Question VIII, by Mr. Deane, standing over from 8th February.</p>

<question by="#deane" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the number of farms infected with East Coast fever in Umvoti Division in 1924 and 1926, respectively; and</li>

<li>(2) what was the number of dipping inspectors employed in Umvoti division in 1924 and 1926, respectively?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#deane">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<p>(1) East Coast fever infection in the Umvoti division is as follows&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1924.</p></td>

<td><p>1926.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>During the year</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>8</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Declared infected during year</p></td>

<td><p>5</p></td>

<td><p>7</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Declared clean during year</p></td>

<td><p>8</p></td>

<td><p>5</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Infected at end of year</p></td>

<td><p>7</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>(2) During 1924 there were nine dipping inspectors in the Umvoti division, and during 1926 two additional inspectors were appointed.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Coloured Servants.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF LABOUR replied to Question XXVII, by Mr. J. P. Louw, standing over from 8th February.</p>

<question by="#louw" to="#minister_of_labour">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<p>Whether he is prepared to lay upon the Table a copy of a letter from the Secretary for Labour to the Provincial Secretary, Cape Town, dated the 27th August, 1926, on the subject of the employment of coloured servants?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#louw">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<p>Yes.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#british_nationality_in_the_union_and_status_of_aliens_act_1926_amendment_bill">

<heading>BRITISH NATIONALITY IN THE UNION AND STATUS OF ALIENS ACT, 1926, AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>First Order read: Second reading, British Nationality in the Union and Status of Aliens Act, 1926, Amendment Bill.</p>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>It has been the practice from time immemorial that where a person applied for naturalization in this country the application had to be supported by a certificate from some impartial person that he was a man of good character, so that the Minister could satisfy himself that he had references of the applicant&#x2019;s good character. The matter was then investigated by the police and other authorities, and the Minister had to be satisfied as to the good character of the applicant. In 1910, when we passed our first Union statute dealing with this matter, similar provisions appeared, and it was laid down that the certificate had to be signed by a magistrate, a justice of the peace or field cornet. In the course of administration some difficulties arose with regard to the words&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">personally known,</block>

<p>but on representations made to the right hon. the member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts) when he was Minister of the Interior, the Government ruled that the applicant would be personally known to the person signing the certificate, if such person satisfied himself from enquiries that the applicant was of good character. In last year&#x2019;s statute, the old Union Act was repealed, and we made provision for reciprocity in regard to naturalization within the British Empire. The facilities were not curtailed, but we passed a provision that a man had to produce a certificate signed by a magistrate or a justice of the peace stating that the person so signing had satisfied himself from enquiries instituted by him that the applicant was of good character, so that we really intended to broaden the provisions. A J.P. was defined as a J.P. in any part of the Union. Parliament proposes, but legal interpretation disposes, and extraordinary results have followed from the legal interpretation of what we did last session. The legal advisers in interpreting the 1926 Act drew attention to the Act we passed in 1914 which is not referred to in last year&#x2019;s Act. The Act of 1914 made new provisions with regard to J.P.&#x2019;s, and Section 5 said that all existing J.P.&#x2019;s were to continue to perform the duties they were then performing, &#x201C;but shall not exercise powers, and shall not be required to perform duties imposed on Justices of the Peace by any law hereafter enacted.&#x201D; The legal advisers told the Government that, in view of the Act of 1914, these J.P.&#x2019;s were no longer eligible to sign these documents. I have a list of J.P.&#x2019;s here who have performed these duties in Cape Town, and I will read the names. [List read.] Except for special J.P.&#x2019;s there has been no appointment made here under the 1914 Act. So where we said J.P. and meant J.P. of the Union, by the interpretation of the Act it is held to mean that 99 per cent, of the J.P.&#x2019;s are excluded. The result has been public inconvenience, because if a man wants to get his application endorsed he has to go to the magistrate, who is a very busy man, and it is unfair to expect that the whole brunt should be placed on the shoulders of the magistrate. In the country districts there has not been so much difficulty, because the magistrate knows every inhabitant; but in the large centres of population such as Cape Town and Johannesburg there has been the very gravest difficulty and inconvenience. I will not say anything about this interpretation. There is a great deal to be said for it from a legal point of view as a sound interpretation, but again, there is a great deal to be said against it. The Act is new, but there are no new functions for J.P.&#x2019;s, who have been performing these functions for 25 years and more. I do not blame the Government in the matter, and when the law advisers made that interpretation they were bound to act upon it; and the only way to act now is to alter the existing law. I am not suggesting that anything new should be <span class="col_259-260" refersTo="page_0199"/>done with regard to J.P.&#x2019;s, but that they should be left with the powers they have had for so many years, and whose work is done without any cost.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I have great pleasure in supporting this measure. Hailing as I do from the north, I know that considerable inconvenience has arisen from this matter. I do not for one moment blame the Minister, who was in charge of the Bill last year, because this is merely a question of interpretation. Personally, I think the interpretation was right, but quite unintentionally J.P.&#x2019;s were deprived by the Act of last year from giving the certificates they had been giving. I do not think it is necessary to add much more to what the hon. member has just said. He has shown that 35 gentlemen in Cape Town were at one fell stroke deprived from giving the certificates. I am sure it must have occurred to the Minister, when representations had been made from all parts, that an injustice has been done, not to the J.P.&#x2019;s, but to the people who are desirous of obtaining a certificate. I think I may appeal with confidence to the Minister to accept this measure.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>After the very clear and concise statement made by the hon. member for Cape Town (Hanover Street) (Mr. Alexander), no explanation is required from me as to the precise state the legislation passed last session has brought this particular matter. It is clear a departure has occurred from the liberal construction placed by the former Government on the Act of 1910, which required that the J.P. or the magistrate concerned should personally know the applicant for naturalization. The departure from this was that it was laid down that, although an applicant might not be personally known to a J.P., he could satisfy himself by enquiries made whether the statutory requirements as to the fitness of the applicant had been satisfied. I do not think it could have been the intention of the House or certainly of hon. members on this side to depart from that previous policy, and I think the Minister will satisfy the House that it was not the intention of the Government. That being so has this alteration caused that inconvenience in the larger cities of the Union to which the hon. member for Cape Town (Hanover Street) has referred? That is an undoubted fact. The Minister has the testimony of two hon. members representing large towns a thousand miles apart, to which I should like to add my corroboration. It is not merely a matter of detail, but a matter of importance to those concerned. I endorse what has been said by the hon. member for Cape Town (Hanover Street), and I ask the Minister readily, as I believe he will do, to accept the principle underlying this Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>†*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR</person>:</from>

<p>I think it is unnecessary to take up much of the time of the House on this Bill, because I do not believe that there can be any difference of opinion in the House about it. I think the House will pass the Bill with acclamation, and I, as the Minister who was responsible for the Bill last year, am quite prepared to accept this amendment. The difficulty arose on account of there actually being two kinds of Justices of the Peace in the country, but when the Act was passed last year, this was not noticed. All members who spoke last year thought that there was only one kind of Justice of the Peace in the country, but in reality there were two. There were two kinds because before 1914 no distinction was made between Justices of the Peace acting in an administrative capacity and Justices of the Peace who do nothing else hut act as commissioners of oaths. The Government, however, found in 1914 that it was desirable to make a distinction between those who act officially and thus practically form a part of the machinery of State, and those who are merely commissioners of oaths and as such do not form part of such machinery, and do not assist in any administrative work of the State. Therefore, the Act as passed made a distinction between Justices of the Peace and commissioners of oaths. Any Government is always out to protect existing rights, and consequently at that time provision was made that those who before 1914 were merely commissioners of oaths but were called Justices of the Peace should retain the latter title. In that way, a number of persons in the country who are called Justices of the Peace, but who are merely commissioners of oaths, do not act in any administrative capacity. To that class of Justices who previously used to attest applications from persons for naturalization, no thought was given in the drafting and passing of the Bill last year. The question merely is whether they shall be included in the provision of the law which authorizes Justices of the Peace to sign applications for naturalization. For my part, I can tell the House that if anyone decides to settle here permanently, to become naturalized, and in that way to identify himself with the people, no obstacle ought to be placed in his way. Therefore, I have no objection to people who have once established themselves in this country and want to become citizens becoming naturalized as easily as possible, and therefore I have no objection to allowing the additional persons who previously had the power of attesting documents to perform the work required in the Bill. The question is only whether there would be additional danger in allowing persons who are unfitted on account of their character or otherwise to in such case attest the applications referred to. My answer is, No, simply because the Department of the Interior keeps a watchful eye, and a matter is not disposed of if an application is subscribed by a Justice of the Peace. In all cases where there is reason to believe that it is necessary the Department can&#x2014;and it often does so&#x2014;ask the police to make an enquiry and report on the particular case. I think that the additional facility can be granted to persons who want to adopt citizenship, and that there is no danger to the State of undesirable persons being in that way admitted to citizenship. Therefore, I have no objection to supporting the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from><span class="col_261-262" refersTo="page_0200"/>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I thank hon. members for the sympathetic support they have given to the Bill. I have also to thank Government for accepting it and for the kind references to those who have settled in this country and desire to become citizens of South Africa.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a second time; House to go into Committee now.</p>

<p>House in Committee:</p>

<p>Clauses and title put and agreed to.</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Bill reported without amendment, and read a third time.</p>

</speech></debateSection>

<debateSection name="#magistrates&#x2019;_courts_act_1917_amendment_bill">

<heading>MAGISTRATES&#x2019; COURTS ACT, 1917, AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Second Order read: Second reading, Magistrates&#x2019; Courts Act, 1917, Amendment Bill.</p>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>It was introduced originally in 1925 and after the second reading was sent to a Select Committee for the taking of evidence. The Committee reported and the Bill was re-introduced last year, but unfortunately it could not reach the second reading stage. It is a very simple measure, its object being to amend Section 28 of the Magistrates&#x2019; Courts Act of 1917. [No quorum.] The Bill was agreed to by the Select Committee and I have a letter from the Minister of Justice agreeing to the principle of the measure. I am sorry the Minister of Justice is not here to-day but I feel bound to proceed, and I cannot possibly agree to the adjournment of the debate. The idea of the Bill is to delete from paragraph (d) of subsection (1) of section 28 of the 1917 Act the words &#x201C;cause of action arose wholly&#x201D; and to substitute there for the words &#x201C;cause of action claim or debt arose or was wholly or in part contracted.&#x201D; The Bill is introduced at the request of the Newcastle Farmers&#x2019; Union. The effect of the measure is to increase slightly the jurisdiction of the magistrates&#x2019; courts. In future, if this Bill becomes law, a magistrate will be entitled to try a case whether the cause of action arose wholly or partly in his district. The Natal Act of 1896 contained a similar provision and the English County Courts Act also contains a similar provision. The Court of Appeal has held that if a contract is made in one district and is accepted in another the cause of action cannot be said wholly to arise in the first district. Some time ago the Smithfield Cold Storage Company through its agents sold a number of shares in the Free State. The agents misrepresented the position and one Miller brought an action in the Free State against the company. The court held that Miller and other farmers concerned would have to go to Maritzburg to sue because the cause of action had not wholly arisen in the Free State, as the acceptance of the shares was made at the head office of the company in Maritzburg. Members will realize, if the Bill which it is now sought to be passed, is accepted and passed by the House, it will facilitate and cheapen litigation. I would like to refer members to the evidence taken before the Select Committee. Mr. Lloyd, who was chief magistrate of Cape Town at the time, said that he entirely agreed with the Bill. He thought it was a necessary Bill and that to a certain extent it was going to cheapen litigation. He spoke from a wide experience, having had twenty-six years&#x2019; experience as a magistrate. The Select Committee had also the evidence of Mr. C. P. Robinson, who had a large experience in Natal, and he gave some very pertinent cases which had occurred only a few months before he gave his evidence to the Select Committee. He mentioned one case which had occurred in Durban where a farmer at Robertson had sold fruit to a man in Durban. The plaintiff had advertised in the papers that he had fruit to sell and the offer was accepted in Durban. The contract did not wholly arise in the Robertson district, and when a dispute arose the plaintiff found he had to sue the other man in Durban. Rather than do that he abandoned the case. I would like to mention that under section 35 of the Magistrate&#x2019;s Court Act if, in any way, the effect of this Bill would cause hardship in any particular case, the magistrate has the discretion, with the consent of the parties, to change the venue. Or on an application by either party that the trial may result in undue expense or inconvenience, the magistrate may order the transfer of the case to another court. The principle involved is a very simple one, and the Select Committee have already accepted the principle and reported in favour of the Bill. All the evidence was in favour of the principle and I do not think it is necessary to take up the time of the House any longer. I therefore move.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>I think the House will understand the position with the Minister of Justice not being here. If his intentions were, as the hon. member says, to accept the Bill, and he had communicated to one of us, I should have been delighted to facilitate the passage of it. It is impossible, in his absence, to accept the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Why not accept the second reading?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>No, I cannot do that. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the debate be adjourned.</block>

<p>I have not had time to consult my colleagues, but I will use my influence to see that you will have an opportunity of bringing this Bill forward. I cannot do more, and I am sure the House will see that it is inconvenient.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>In view of the promise of the hon. Minister I am prepared to accept the adjournment, the condition being that I shall get a special day.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from><span class="col_263-264" refersTo="page_0201"/>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>I said I was prepared to use my influence.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#tom_naudé">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. F. TOM NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>I was a member of the Select Committee which dealt with this matter, and I can assure the Minister of Defence&#x2014;I did not see the Minister of Justice&#x2014; that all were agreed that the amendment now proposed by the hon. member for Newcastle (Mr. Nel) was desirable. The members of the Select Committee have no objection to the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>One appreciates the position of the hon. Minister in the absence of the Minister of Justice, but one is entitled to make one or two observations on that. The first observation is that the matter was on the Order Paper for the day. The House has no right to complain if the Minister of Justice has to go away on urgent public duties, but the least he could have done was to intimate his wishes on the matter to one of his colleagues, so that the House might be told. The hon. member for Newcastle (Mr. Nel) has been singularly unfortunate with regard to this Bill. There is no opposition here this afternoon, and the legal members of the House are agreed that it is a change in the right direction. Seeing the Minister of Justice did not intimate his disapproval and that one of his followers has told us that he had no objection and that the mover has told us that he has a letter from the Minister approving the Bill, there is no reason why we should not take the second reading now.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>I have a letter from the Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Then I ask the Minister to withdraw that motion for the adjournment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>If the hon. member has a letter from the Minister approving of the Bill and agreeing to the Bill, I have no objection to the second reading being taken now.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>Two years ago I wrote to the Minister and pointed out to him the desirability of this change, and asked him if he would introduce a Bill to give effect to it. He wrote to me saying that he thought it was a, good change, but he did not think it was a Bill for the Government to bring in. I still have that letter at home and can produce it. His letter did not deal with the actual wording of the Bill but on the principle of the Bill, and he replied that he had no objection.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>On that assurance I withdraw my motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#swart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SWART</person>:</from>

<p>I was a member of the Select Committee and they were all unanimous on the Bill. I suggest the second reading be taken and allow the committee stage to stand over, that will allow the Minister of Justice an opportunity to be present.</p>

<p>Original motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a second time; House to go into Committee on 18th February.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#drought_and_settlers&#x2019;_instalments">

<heading>DROUGHT AND SETTLERS&#x2019; INSTALMENTS.</heading>

<p>Third Order read: Adjourned debate on motion for relief of settlers, to be resumed.</p>

<p>[Debate, adjourned on 8th February, resumed.]</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>When the debate was adjourned I was dealing with the point raised by the right hon. member for Dundee (Sir Thomas Watt), and I put a question to him as to whether he proposed that no interest should be charged to the settlers whether they were on Government land or land bought under sections 10 or 11 of the Act. The hon. member replied &#x201C;yes.&#x201D; I want to put it seriously to the hon. member, whether he thinks it is possible to get that suggestion through this or any other Parliament; that the Union should borrow money for which the State pays interest and then not to charge interest on it. It is impossible to think that any Parliament would agree to that. In the discussion we tried to do our best from a national point of view, not to go off on side issues. I warned the House last year and again this year, when I said we must be careful not to introduce politics into the settlement question, because that would make it hopeless. Such a proposal coming from such an important member must necessarily lead to politics. It must make people think that if the party of which the hon. gentleman is a leader got into power again it would carry out this policy. I warned the House not to bring anything in the debate that might be misconstrued and that might cause people to be misled. If this sort of thing gets abroad that this or that political party would do this or that for them, then we had better give up land settlement altogether, and the sooner the better. The hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) has told us something of the history of that part of the country. I want to amplify what he has said a little here and there and point out that the position is not altogether as gloomy and as dark as he has painted it. After all, it is only a portion of Zululand and not the whole of Zululand which is in such a bad condition. The hon. member critizised a departmental publication in which it was stated that the average rainfall was 35 inches per annum. I have figures before me which have been issued by the meteorological department which show that in different localities over a period of years the average rainfall has been about 35 inches. I would warn the House and hon. members that we should not cry stinking fish. Zululand is part of the Union and we must be careful not to exaggerate the position in any way. As far as farming operations are concerned, my view is that, making exceptions for certain parts where ngana is prevalent and other parts where East Coast fever occurs, you could not have a better country for cattle. Judging from what I have seen in my own district, I should say that Zululand is excellent for cotton. It is true that one year they were troubled with floods, and then they had a drought and now the price of cotton is low. <span class="col_265-266" refersTo="page_0202"/>I admit that in my own district we cannot go in for cotton at 6d. per lb., but if the price improves again it is probable that, with an ordinary year, they will be able to grow cotton as well in Zululand as in any part of the world. It is not a case of the country being no good. The settlers there have had unfortunate years, just as pioneers always have had in this country. We must not take this as an exceptional occurrence. I am not at all despondent in regard to the future of these settlements. I recognize that things have not turned out as well as we expected, but I think that there is still a chance that these people will be able to pull through. The idea of my predecessor was that three stations should be established in order to see whether the growing of sugar could be made a success or not, but public opinion was so strong that he was, as it were, swept off his feet and he then had to give out the land. He stipulated that the department would not supply these people with boreholes and the farms were advertized either as waterless or on the river. Advances were not mentioned at that time In order to meet the situation, I decided to depart from the position of my predecessor and agree to let these people have boreholes if they applied for them. I have had a telegram to-day saying that a fourth machine has been despatched to Zululand to bore for water for these people. As regards advances, hon. members know that, according to our Act, which is unfortunately worded, I can only make advances for certain specific objects and when recommended by the board. As far as improvements are concerned, I can only make advances for improvements to be made. If the improvements have already been carried out, I cannot grant any advances for such improvements. These people put their own money into these farms, from £1,000 to £2,000 each. When they came and explained their difficulties, I undertook to make advances to them to purchase dairy and other cattle. In the course of last year a sum of £11,000 was made available in order to help them through. I did everything that lay in my power to help them, and anything further I can do in order to assist them I shall do. I also told the board that the land, in my opinion, is very much over-valued and in due course their report will be presented to me on this matter. The Treasury and myself have already approved of a certain amount of write-off. Our policy is that if a man applies for a farm, barring where there is fever or anything of that sort, occupation is one of the conditions that must be complied with, but I have told the board that I will give twelve months&#x2019; exemption to anybody on these settlements. If the position does not improve sufficiently in that time, we may give them an extension. It has been suggested that a commission should be appointed to go into the whole question. If I thought a commission would do any good I would be the first to agree to it, but I cannot see what good can be done by an enquiry of that kind. The hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) complained that there had been no co-ordination between the departments. That is a mistake made in the past and I have tried to rectify it as far as possible. Whenever a large tract of ground is given out now, the first thing I do is to approach all the other departments and ask them to assist me as far as possible. Since last year, when I made representations, various improvements have been made, so that we try to do what we can. As the hon. member knows, the Minister of Agriculture has sent one of his experts down there to establish an experimental plot and see what can be done. I do not know what more can be done. I really do not see what good a commission could do. If I thought it would be the slightest good I would certainly accept it. Then there are the Land Boards. These men are practical farmers, and some have been years in the Department. Take a man like Mr. Mackenzie, the chairman of the board in Natal for a very long time. He is a practical farmer and so are the men associated with him. In the Transvaal, the Cape and the Free State it is the same. These men are constantly in touch with the settlers, and if they think of anything which would improve the position of the settlers, they let me know at once, and wherever practicable I follow their advice. They are more useful than a commission consisting of men not so acquainted with the work of the department and the past history of the settlements. I have told the House that I have given instructions that until I have received the reports, the settlers must not be pressed in the meantime for payment. I have had the reports, and these are the areas which should be treated very leniently: Mkuzi, Hluhluwe, Lydenburg, Middelburg Bushveld, Pietersburg, Zoutpansberg, Waterberg Bushveld, Rustenburg Bushveld, Marico Bushveld. Of course, even in these parts, there may be men who can pay, but these are the areas which require special consideration. The others are more or less normal, and some are very good. Take the case my hon. friend mentioned. I pointed out that the price of the land has nothing to do with his present difficulties. So far he has only paid £20 over a period of 7½ years.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#anderson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ANDERSON</person>:</from>

<p>He never intended to pay.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>No, I do not think he did.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_watt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS WATT</person>:</from>

<p>You ought not to say that; it is quite wrong.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>I am responsible to this House to get in the money which the settlers owe, and if we allow things to go on like that, and allow people who have no intention of paying to go free, then eventually in a year or two we may come to the position when the House may say, &#x201C;We are not going to spend any more money on settlements, because the thing is becoming hopeless and we cannot spend the taxpayers&#x2019; money like that.&#x201D; I presume from my knowledge of the late right hon. J. X. Merriman that he had a hand in it&#x2014;in 1879 or one of those <span class="col_267-268" refersTo="page_0203"/>years&#x2014;they stopped land settlement and sold the Government farms to the highest bidders. I am perfectly certain this is the reason. If we cannot get these people to comply with their obligations, we may come to the same state of affairs again. It is costing us a great deal of money. Therefore, my intention is that in a case like the one mentioned, I am going to tell him to pay, and if he does not pay I am going to cancel his lease. I want to make it clear to the House, because there was an idea that I was pressing these people, what the extent of these cancellations is. The number of surrenders and cancellations for the whole Union in the past year was about 160. Of those only 37 were cancelled on account of non-payment of arrears, so that hon. members will see I have not been too harsh at all; in fact, in many cases, where the Board passed a resolution that the contract should be cancelled, I still gave the man time. Of course, if eventually the lessee will not pay, there is no help for it. I cannot go on like that, but most of the cancellations took place because of other causes such as breach of contract and so on. I do not say our legislation is perfect&#x2014; far from it. From 1912 we have repeatedly altered the Act. I can see now that we will have to bring in another amending Act. We have learned from experience, and we can see where the thing is not working smoothly. I may bring in legislation next year which may make it easier. Where I can make things easier for the settlers without jeopardising the public interest, I will certainly do so. In the meantime I do not think I can do more than I have done, and that is generally to have a sympathetic attitude towards these men, and to tell them to try and meet their obligations where possible and to carry, out my duty where people will not do anything. We have had so many cases of two men living next to each other, and one meets his obligations, or part of them, and the other does not. Well that shows clearly that the other man was unfit, or does not want to do so. The hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) put a question to me as to section 11. The arrears of purchase price, that is, instalments that had to be repaid on purchase price, are £37,306, arrears of advances made to these people, £13,701, and on bonds £123, making a total of £51,130. As my hon. friend and the House know, after a certain period of time a lessee can get his transfer; the Government passes a bond on whatever he still owes, and he pays interest on the bond. The arrears are £36,360 interest, £3,136 advances, and £90 bonds; surrendered farms&#x2014;this is, money due as interest and instalments of farms surrendered or cancelled&#x2014;is £10,654, or altogether £101,470. We have capitalized £84,980.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>How many of these settlers are in replacement of new settlers?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry to say that as far as I have gone into the matter it seems that the majority of the people who start either as settlers on a Government farm or purchase under section 11 are failures, and a successor or a third man makes a success.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>Under section 10 or 11?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>†The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>Sections 10, 11 and 16. Speaking from memory over the period 1921-&#x2019;24 the applications under section 11 were 1,111, and from 1924-&#x2019;26, 4,808. Now that there is such a large increase under section 11 we may expect in the future the same mistakes to be made again, but not to such a large extent, and therefore I expect later on that the figures will not be so favourable as hitherto under section 11, and I must say that this is the safest form of land settlement because the lessee is responsible for the purchase of the land, makes the selection himself, and makes an agreement with the owner and pays a certain amount of his capital into it, so he has a stake from the very start. If my officers can find time, a very interesting thing would be from 1912 onwards to make a list of all the people who have been settled on the land under the three sections&#x2014;how many were successes and how many were failures. The 1820 people have given me figures as far as they were concerned, and I may say they are very favourable. Altogether they have put so far 623 settlers on the land, and only 38 have been failures. That was very good indeed, and one could not wish for better. I think it is exceptionally good. But naturally these people as a rule have so far had more capital than the rest of our settlers, and that may be one of the reasons for their success. If you go on the land with a small capital it is a hard struggle to get through. If you can look through the applications, make a selection, and not pay too much for the land, the chances of success are all the greater. We may not be so successful as far as the general settlers are concerned as the 1820 people were. I am glad this motion was tabled, because it has enabled me to explain the policy followed so far with regard to land settlement. If there was an impression that I have dealt harshly with settlers I may flatter myself, I think, that I have removed that suspicion&#x2014;if anything, we have been too lenient. I cannot follow any other policy in the future, and I will try to assist to get on to the land all those who want to settle on it, but the people I have no time for are those who do not want to work or are sluggards.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>†*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To omit all the words after &#x201C;That&#x201D; in the first line and to substitute &#x201C;in view of the inability of many farmers through drought and other causes to meet their obligations to the Government, this House is of opinion that the Land Boards of the four Provinces should be specially instructed to thoroughly enquire into the matter and to report as to the steps which should be taken to give such farmers the necessary assistance and relief.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I hope the hon. member for Dundee (Sir Thomas Watt) will accept my amendment. The <span class="col_269-270" refersTo="page_0204"/>only difference between his motion and my amendment is that he wants to have an independent enquiry made and has in view only persons who have bought ground from the Government, while my proposal also includes the large number of other people who are in the same unfortunate position. The hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) in his amendment asks for the appointment of a commission to investigate the matter. That commission may be never so impartial and representative, but it can never have the authority of the Land Boards in our country for instituting such an enquiry. I cannot support the proposal of the hon. member for Zululand. It is, in my opinion, not necessary to expend money on a special commission. I can, however, assure hon. members that I have warm sympathy with them. I want to avoid bringing party politics into this matter because they should not be introduced into a matter of this kind, but hon. members must not forget that it is not only the people who have bought land from the State who are in such a sad plight. Take the irrigation schemes. A reform association has been established which intends to go to the Government and ask that all capital costs (approximately £6,000,000) shall be written off, and that they shall only have to pay for the maintenance of furrows, etc. People are in a very unhappy position. Abnormal droughts have tried them and if rains fell then there was hardly any run-off. Take also the people who have obtained fencing loans. I do not know whether hon. members clearly understand the sad state of affairs throughout the country. The people who obtained fencing loans and are in arrear with their payments should also be considered because they are in great trouble. In my constituency there are many who have lost 90 per cent. of their sheep. Others again have obtained loans under the Agricultural Credits Act. Emergency loans have been granted for dipping tanks, etc. My motion includes all these people. I want, however, to say emphatically that if we permit the settlers to be pampered, as has been done during the past ten years, the position will be lamentable. A special case has been mentioned by the hon. member for Dundee (Sir Thomas Watt) for the particular consideration of the Government, and the Minister replied that the party had only paid £20 in seven years. Such persons should leave the land as soon as possible, and the person who is willing to work should be given a chance. Then we have the re-valuation. A man has bought ground, e.g., for £1,000, and not paid his interest for a number of years. The unfortunate man who succeeds him as purchaser of the ground with the heavy burden of accumulated and unpaid interest is in a hopeless position. I know of cases where people have been spoilt for twenty-six years, and they have got quite accustomed to such treatment from the Government. A few years ago the State established relief works to assist them, and the people would not build a road of six miles to their locality, but managed to obtain 6s. or 7s. a day for the eradication of weeds from their own ground. Such people should leave the land and other people be given an opportunity. All the other people are now excluded. There are thousands, who cannot get a loan, who have never borrowed from the Government, who have bonds on their land and cannot pay the interest. There is no way for them to get assistance from the Government. The Minister of Lands said that amounts are written off from time to time, and that this Government had written off £350,000. According to the figures I obtained in his office, the amounts are different, viz., £135,000 in 1925 and £272,000 in 1926, together far over £400,000. If land settlement does not answer let us return to the conditions referred to by the Minister when the Merriman Government stopped all settlement. Let us take care that people who are a failure get off the land, and that people who can make a success be placed on ground which can be made a success. If America can write off 27 million dollars in a year, and can also write off other public debt on settlement, South Africa also can write off certain sums.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">M. L. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment. I am strongly in favour of the hon. member for Dundee (Sir Thomas Watt), but we are convinced that the Minister of Lands and his department have hitherto done their duty. I do not think there is a single case where a person can say that anyone has lost his ground on account of governmental action. At the same time we must understand that the Land Settlement Acts were not passed for philanthropic purposes, and that the settlements must be run on business lines. There are many of the settlers who will never make a success of farming and whom it would be useless to help. I agree with the hon. member for Graaff-Reinet (Mr. I. P. van Heerden) in saying that a person who cannot make a success of farming should make room for another. I know from experience in my district and constituency that the Department of Lands and the land boards have made a mistake. Ground has, e.g., been bought which is not at all suitable for settlement&#x2014;fortunately, not under this Government, but during the previous regime. In the Heilbron district land, quite unsuited for farming, was bought, but practically all the settlers are still there, because they are the right class of man who tried to make a success of their farming. However, some of the worst ground has been bought and settlers put on it. During the severe drought recently experienced there have been settlers who have battled hard to win through, but who will find it difficult to fulfil their obligations. I hope the Minister will exercise his discretion and assist these people so that they shall not lose their ground. I am convinced that the Minister and the Department of Lands will assist the people who have already shown that they can make a success of farming. I agree with the hon. member for Graaff-Reinet that we cannot get a better body than the Land Board of the four provinces for making enquiries and, therefore, I can heartily support his amendment, and hope the House will pass it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deane">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEANE</person>:</from>

<p>I was saying this motion has the effect of showing the sympathy of the <span class="col_271-272" refersTo="page_0205"/>whole House with regard to the farmers and the settlers of Zululand who are in this predicament owing to dry seasons. I don&#x2019;t think we should apply the term drought to South Africa. It is not a correct term. It should only apply when the whole country is affected. It is applied in Australia. When I was in Queensland, a territory one-third larger in area than the whole of the Union of South Africa, they were just coming to the end of a three years&#x2019; drought, during which time they lost six million sheep. I met Sir John Kidman, who told me that he had lost 18,000 head of cattle. That did not trouble him so much as the question of whether they would get rain the following year. The hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) did not wish to imply that he meant the whole of Zululand was stricken. He simply conveyed that one particular spot was affected. We get that in all parts of the Union. In the Transvaal we have a similar position at Zoutpansberg. These settlers in Zululand are in a bad way. In parts like Melmoth, Amatikulu, Eshowe, and Umfolozi and other places, they are in a flourishing condition. These settlers at Mkuzi and Hluhluwe number 150, and 80 per cent. are South African born. They are endowed with the characteristic of most South African farmers, with grit and enterprize. They have risked their health and capital on the advice of Government experts. ... I hope the Minister will pay attention to me. I will wait until he has finished his private conversation. . . . These settlers at Susui and Ngoma are cotton-growers, and they were advised by a Government expert to go there and grow cotton. It is a country that is notoriously dry. What would be the condition of these settlers if a private company had opened up the land and advised them to go there as cotton-growers? They would have had a good case for damages. We must remember these men are the right class of men. The Minister has been eulogized in this debate by various members, and I know the Minister&#x2019;s hands are tied by the law. There are some things, however, the Minister can do. Things that he is in a position to do, especially when he has the backing of the whole House behind him. Every settler of the calibre of these men is an asset to the country, and unless something is done these men will drift to the position of &#x201C;poor whites.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>What can I do in addition to what I have already done?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deane">

<from>†Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEANE</person>:</from>

<p>In Zoutpansberg similar dry land has been allotted at 2s. a morgen, and they have been allowed to leave their land and seek employment. They were not compelled to remain in residence, as the Zululand settler. In Zululand the land was sold at £2 an acre, and these men have spent a quarter of a million of their capital there. Put them on the same plane as the men in Zoutspansberg and let them have the land at 2s. a morgen. Quite possibly Susui might be richer land, but the other is not. We know they have the tsetse fly, and settlers have lost their stock in large numbers. That is one point I hope the Minister will make a note of. Unless something is done with these men, we are going to lose them. We have been told by the hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) that some of these men are shooting game and selling the skins to the storekeepers in order to keep body and soul together. I can tell the hon. member what would happen in Western Australia if a case like this happened. The Government there spent £2,000 on every settler who gave indication of making good, and they regarded it as a good investment. In 1906, in the constituency of the hon. the Speaker&#x2014;Vryheid&#x2014;which, unlike Zululand, is a highland country where the principal occupation is sheep-farming and cattle, the farmers in the dry season of 1905 were in a similar condition to the men at Mkuzi and Hluhluwe, and the Minister of the day in the Natal Government helped them by advancing them stock, sheep and cattle, from 50 to 200 ewes, according to the area of the land. With very few exceptions the men fulfilled their obligations, and to-day, Mr. Speaker will bear me out, some of those men are the wealthy farmers of the Vryheid district. It just wanted that little help to save the situation. Let me appeal to the Minister to do the same for the men in Zululand. They are the right men who have had the pluck to go into the country where cattle will not live and malaria is rampant; they have tried and they have failed owing to no fault of theirs; they have proved themselves true pioneers, and should be looked after. From the debate which has taken place the Minister, I am sure, will realize that hon. members are desirous that these men should be helped. One does not want it to go forth from this House that South Africa is a bad country for settlement. I would like to give a few examples of successful settlement. In this very place, Zululand, I suppose from the Amatikulu to the Umfolozi, a distance of about 40 or 50 miles along the coast, I do not suppose you will find better land settlement in the whole world. I must point out that it was Crown land allotted on 99 years&#x2019; leasehold, with the right to convert. This was begun about 1908. At that time, which was in the palmy days of sugar-growing, there were many men who made their fortunes in that area. Let us leave the coast and go inland, and again I refer to Mr. Speaker&#x2019;s constituency. We have the settlement there at Scheeper&#x2019;s Nek. That was not Crown land, but land purchased by the Government. This land was sold to the settlers on easy terms for 25s. an acre. Through their industry in growing maize, wattle, etc., they have increased the value of that land until to-day it cannot be purchased for £4 per acre. Let us go further north, and we find in the Bergville district a settlement which, through maize-growing, etc., has been very successful. Coming further south, we find a settlement at Albert Falls where land was purchased and sold to the settlers at an average of £5 an acre. There again the settlement was successful. There is also another settlement, Muden, where as much as £175 per acre was paid. That ground was planted with citrus. <span class="col_273-274" refersTo="page_0206"/>Every one of these settlements which I have mentioned has never looked back from the word &#x201C;go,&#x201D; so that South Africa, so far as land settlement is concerned, can hold its own against any other part of the world. The hall-mark of all settlements is to see that the roads are laid out. That was done in every one of these cases. The success of land settlement is not governed by the price of land, but the question of suitability, and in no matter is caution and common-sense required to be exercised more than in this question of land settlement. We know that the Minister is doing his best, and I believe that in regard to Section 11 rapid strides are being made, but we are not going fast enough. We want to speed up much more. I am glad that the Minister has assured us that he will take these hard cases into consideration. My experience of South Africa is that we very rarely, in fact I cannot remember the time, when we have had in one district three seasons running of dry weather, and I am sure that in the coming year, according to the law of averages, Mkuzi and Hluplului will get their quota of rainfall, and if they get the help which is necessary and the Minister will bear in mind the instances which I have given to-day at Vryheid, we will have a very happy community and a great asset to the State.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#tom_naudé">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. F. TOM NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>I think it is unnecessary for me to bring the position in the northern Transvaal more clearly to the Minister&#x2019;s notice, because he already knows it. Yet I want to tell him that this is not the first year drought has prevailed in that area. I want especially to call his attention to the conditions of the people living in those parts on land granted by the State, although it was not in the first place purchased by the State. I want to ask him if he cannot meet that class of man. I feel that something should be done for them, otherwise they will be ruined. Many of them are already leaving their farms for the diggings and other places and something must be done to assist them. I was very sorry to hear that the Minister said that it is not possible to reduce the interest temporarily. I cannot see why, because last year we came to the assistance of settlers by the provision in section 11 of the Land Settlement Act that persons who buy ground from the State need not pay interest for the first year. Why cannot provision be made here as well, seeing the Minister and everyone is aware that the conditions are not due to any fault on the part of the people. Many of them have practically already lost their capital and it is necessary to write off the interest.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>The present Act does not permit it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#tom_naudé">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. F. TOM NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>Then it is necessary that such legislation should be introduced because the Minister must admit that it is necessary. Some of the farmers are already three years in arrear with their interest and if they should have a harvest they will not be in a position to pay the amount due and to get quits with the Department. They consequently lose courage. I consider that the farmers are able to make a great success of farming, but in many cases the ground has been valued absolutely too high. If in some of these parts ground was given to the people gratis, provided they occupied it, then they are already doing a great thing by living on the ground. I will give the Minister the credit that he has greatly assisted the farmers and had many farms re-valued; the valuation has perhaps not been brought down sufficiently, but it has given considerable satisfaction. There are further cases which should be gone into, where the man cannot meet his obligations and where conditions are so bad. The hon. member for Umvoti (Mr. Deane) has stated that there are people in Zululand who exterminate the game in order to sell the skins to keep body and soul together. In the northern Transvaal it is not so much game, but their cattle, which the people have to kill to prepare the skins and sell reims to make a living. As matters are so critical it is absolutely necessary for the people to receive sympathy and to have something done for them. Many of the reasons why they are in a bad way have not actually been named. Drought has been mentioned, locusts and natural difficulties, but there are other causes as well. The Department, e.g., has granted farms of from 3,000 to 4,000 morgen to people, and valued them at 8s. per morgen. A man getting land in this way can never hope to pay the interest. When they hear, however, that such pieces of land are granted they are anxious to obtain them and make application. They think that when once they have the ground they will have it, and they do not think of the future, and whether they can pay for it does not worry them. That is one of the reasons why some of these people get so much in arrear with their interest, and I hope it will not be done in future. The settlers must also be made to understand&#x2014;it is not the case to-day&#x2014;that the Department is their friend and that the inspectors who work there are their friends. They must not be under the impression that the Department exists to make and squeeze all it can out of them. There are also a number of small things which cause difficulties. I do not blame the inspectors and the Department for it, but I want to bring it to the notice of the Minister. A settler keeps cattle on his farm belonging to another man, because there are well-to-do people in the towns, e.g., who give a span of oxen to a settler for use. Now there is a regulation in this connection, and the inspector on his visit finds out that the regulation is not being complied with. Instead of finding out what the position is he reports this to the Department in Pretoria, who then sends a registered letter to the settler informing him that he has broken the contract. I know of a case where a man returned his only span of oxen because he thought the Department would not permit him to keep them. That is what worries the people. They ought to feel that the Department is there to help them and I know the Minister would give his approval in such <span class="col_275-276" refersTo="page_0207"/>a case. The inspector ought to tell the people that it is not against the law but merely that they should make an application. I only mention this because it is one of the settlers&#x2019; grievances.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>Express instructions in this direction have already been given</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#tom_naudé">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. F. TOM NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>I am glad that the Minister assures me of this because the inspectors report cases to the Department. When the letter arrives from headquarters the farmer sometimes has to go to an attorney to ask what the position is. It also occurs that one of the settlers has a man, one of his family, on the farm to assist him.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>The position is the same as in the previous case.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#tom_naudé">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. F. TOM NAUDÉ</person>:</from>

<p>Unfortunately the settler only finds it out when he receives a letter from Pretoria saying that he has a man on his ground, which is against the provisions of the agreement. Then there is the complaint that the settler has no right of letting pasturage. The farm is possibly a large one and he has not sufficient cattle. Why should he not let the pasturage? He surely pays the State for the land and it ought to be permitted. These are all matters which the people feel and which irritate them. It makes them think that the Department is not their friend. This feeling must be removed because they should feel exactly the opposite. I hope the Minister will reconsider the matter of writing down interest to see in how far he can meet the people, otherwise it will be impossible for them to pay the arrear amount.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>†Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>There are two very satisfactory features about this debate. The first is the general interest and sympathy expressed from all sides of the House with the position of farmers hard hit by the drought and other drawbacks of late; and secondly, it must be reassuring and must bring great hope and comfort to many of the settlers to find that the Minister is maintaining his sympathetic attitude towards them and their troubles. With regard to this motion, I must say I prefer the amendment of the hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) to that of the hon. member for Graaff-Reinet (Mr. I. P. van Heerden), but I hope that one or other of these amendments will be carried. The reason I prefer the amendment of the hon. member for Zululand is this. The hon. member for Graaff-Reinet wishes the investigation to take place under the auspices of the Land Boards of the two provinces. The task is too big for these two boards, and another disadvantage is that these boards would be to a certain extent sitting in judgment on many of their own actions, because on the advice, and in some cases the recommendations, of these boards, many of the settlers ventured to take up the ground and engage in farming which has not proved a success. The matter is too big; it is of national importance, and therefore I hope any inquiry will go into the question of conditions of settlement in the country generally. There has never been a time in history when land settlement has received greater attention throughout the world. One of the reasons, I think, is the great scarcity of houses and homes in the cities everywhere; it is universal Another reason has been the enormous number of ex-soldiers, demobilized after the war, who had to be provided for, and as industry could not absorb them to any large extent, people adopted the old remedy of putting them on the land. It was felt in the case of these hundreds of thousands of demobilized soldiers that something ought to be done, and it usually happens that when something must be done something unwise or even foolish is done without due consideration, and I think this has been the case with regard to many of these schemes of land settlement. I do not know that any of these schemes for returned soldiers, speaking generally, have been a great success. There have been notable exceptions. I believe the settlements in western Australia are rather more successful than in other parts of the world If so, some of the principles which have guided them towards success might well be investigated with advantage to South Africa. What I want to emphasize particularly here is the peculiar difficulties of South Africa with regard to land settlement. I do not think it is generally recognized, however much we may flatter ourselves, that South Africa is not and never can be a great agricultural country in the same sense that Canada or Australia or even New Zealand can be. The reason is that the geological conditions which exist, and which of course cannot be altered, do not favour the theory or the belief or the hope that South Africa will ever be a great agricultural country. We cannot point in this country to vast areas of uniformly good land such as you find in Canada, Australia or elsewhere. The distinguishing thing about South Africa is the patchy nature of the country; it is very patchy. While there are areas of the most fertile soil in the world in South Africa, they are very limited in extent, and they are scattered about in small portions. Our climate affects the position, too. Our rainfall is very uncertain, limited in areas very often, and cannot be depended upon. Take the Cape Peninsula. The climate of that is different from that of any other part of South Africa. While in Australia or in Canada a man may feel justified in taking up land because he has heard and has good evidence for believing that people have been farming successfully in that neighbourhood, it does not follow in South Africa that a farm divided by a boundary fence from another farm which has done well will be as valuable. We may learn a great deal from the remarkable success of the 1820 Memorial Association. I speak advisedly when I say that in the whole history of land settlement, there is no organization or scheme which has produced 94 per cent. of successes, or rather only 6 per cent. of failures. The methods by which this extraordinarily good success has been obtained demand investigation. To have a <span class="col_277-278" refersTo="page_0208"/>successful settler, I would put character first, and following that, aptitude for the life; then health, industry, and distinctly last, capital. Usually the reverse has taken place. I do not wish to be misunderstood&#x2014;capital is essential; but the other qualities I have mentioned are more essential. Capital can be found from outside sources; but I know of no means by which a man can be equipped with character if he is not already provided with it. I think that is largely&#x2014;although I am not in the secrets of the association&#x2014;why the 1820 Memorial Association has been so successful. First of all, there is a complete, comprehensive and rigid examination of all persons who wish to come out under their auspices. As far as an investigation can go into a man&#x2014;his character, aptitude, history, health and the like&#x2014;no man ex accepted unless, in the opinion of the committee that goes into these matters, he has those qualities and is likely to succeed. Since I have been in South Africa every drought has been described as the very worst that has happened. The seasons have not been particularly successful, and yet in spite of that we have the remarkable result of only 6 per cent. of failures, and most of these can be traced to definite causes. Hon. members have only to look up this evening&#x2019;s &#x201C;Argus,&#x201D; and they will see that the 38 failures and the reasons for the failures are set out. Although, as I say, South Africa will never be a great agricultural country, there is much room still for agricultural expansion. We have by no means reached the limit, and by observing the causes of failure in the past we ought to be on the way to ensure success in the future. Another very important point, with regard to the success of this organization, is that the settlers are discouraged and practically prevented from embarking their fortune too soon in any particular area. It is desirable that for one year, and preferably for two years, a settler should get acquainted with the conditions of South Africa and the particular type of farming he favours before he embarks his capital. Although this association deliberately abstains from acting as land sellers in any shape or form, and, therefore, cannot have any axe to grind with regard to the sale of land, there is nothing to prevent them from offering advice, warning and assistance to settlers in the selection of land. I am glad that the hon. member for Umvoti (Mr. Deane) has alluded to roads. The provision of transportation is going to be more and more important, and never more important than at present, and it is not getting the attention it should. Getting supplies to and produce off from the farm by reliable and economical means is of great importance. No dominion offers better facilities to settlers as a whole as does South Africa, and I am not sure that that is sufficiently recognized, and producing the results that it should. There must be something lacking. Very little has been done with regard to the analysis of soils. A farm may look very well before cultivation, and may turn out a disappointment, because the character of the soil has not been scientifically ascertained&#x2014;there must be a weak factor in the soil conditions which prevents success. The secret of successful land settlement may be put in a few words&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">a ready-made farm.</block>

<p>You put a settler on the ground to cultivate the soil and to turn earth, air and water into saleable products&#x2014;the settler is a manufacturer of food. What chance does he have, as a rule, to enter upon his proper duties? Hitherto he is often put on an area of ground which is called a farm, but which is not&#x2014;no more than an area of ground in a city is a factory. Who would dream of putting a shoemaker on to a vacant plot of ground and telling him to carry on his business of shoemaking? A farmer put on an area of ground has no facilities for carrying out his business until he has erected a homestead, sheds and fences, has secured a water supply, and his roads are in a reasonably good condition. In other words, a man who may know all about farming may not know much about building or water boring or fencing, but if a man who is a good agriculturist is placed on a farm properly equipped he is far advanced on his business of producing things from the soil.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>What would the cost be if the Government had to do that?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>†Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>It would vary with the size of the farm and the nature of the houses. It would, however, be a very good investment for the Government, for if the money were wisely spent the value of the security would be enhanced considerably. By the time a settler has put himself into the position of carrying out his real business as an agriculturist he may, under present circumstances, find that all his money is gone, and that he has nothing left with which to stock his farm. Again, a farmer may suffer from drought or excessive rainfall before he has had time to gain the necessary experience to enable him to face these drawbacks. It takes from three to five years for an experienced agriculturist to know his farm, and to know how to work it to the best advantage. He is probably unaware of the crops which he can grow most economically, and if he has devoted his energies, time and money to building and fencing he may find that even after five years he has not made very much progress as a producer from the soil. Arrangements should be made to enable a farmer to start at once to carry on his business of farming. Even if a man has got his ground without a very large cash payment he may find that the high cost of wages and implements have left him with very little money, and that, consequently, he is unable to stock his farm completely, or to carry on until receipts begin to come in. Two classes of farmers are in distress&#x2014;the old-established and the new settler. In the case of the former pecuniary facilities would, in most instances, tide them over their difficulties, and it should not be long before they are in a position to regain their former prosperity. There should not be any great objection to Government advancing or guaranteeing sufficient money to enable them to tide over the bad times. No reduction of the debt, <span class="col_279-280" refersTo="page_0209"/>however, should be demanded for from three to five or seven years according to the particular circumstances of each individual case. The security would be ample. In any case, Government should strive to put more people on to the land for, in that respect, our position is not at all a good one. Our population is deteriorating in physique to an alarming extent. The rush of people to the towns is going on faster and faster, and will continue until more prosperity comes to the farmers, when the natural instinct to get back to the land will once more assert itself. For the present people prefer to flock to the towns and take advantage of the better organization of other industries to enable them to keep their heads above water. We have either to renew our agricultural population or die. Unfortunately, our agricultural population is deteriorating very rapidly. A nation is recruited from people who have come from the soil, or whose forbears have come from the soil. We should do all in our power to increase the population on the land, and I hope the Minister, if he carries his sympathetic desires into practice, will see that it is not a matter of £.s.d., but will realize that we are threatened with national deterioration, leading eventually to disaster. It will be a wise investment, and the whole matter should be investigated thoroughly from start to finish. Circumstances suitable for one settlement may not be applicable to another. I hope the hon. member for Graaff-Reinet (Mr. I. P. van Heerden) will not think I am adverse to his motion, which is better than nothing, but I do not think the machinery he suggests is the one best adapted to deal with the problem. It was a very big subject, and we must, for our future guidance, be warned by the errors we have made in the past. We must try and seek their cause. While we have instances of success to guide us, we have many instances of failure, and they must guide us too. On settlers&#x2019; land we must, in future, carefully select the soil, and I hope the Department will push on with soil survey, not after settlement, but before. There are many already settled whose failure can be accounted for because of the neglect to do this. It is also important that settlers should be carefully selected. It is no use putting a class of people there whom, experience has taught us, cannot maintain themselves. They will only add in due course to the alarming proportion of poor whites and bring farming into discredit while we want to enhance the value of it. More must be done in selecting farms for the settlers. First select the soil and then the settler, and then select the farms. We have got a lot to learn about dealing with the size of farms. There is no country where the economic size of farms has received less consideration than in South Africa. The big area has filled the mental vision. It may be more economical to deal with an area less in size. The careful selection of the farm and the size of the farm are, therefore, two essentials for the success of the experiment. We have very generous terms for financing settlers. We have reached the stage in civilization when it is no longer possible for settlers to live on the land unless they have some of the amenities of life, in addition to roads and transportation. I think this debate will convey a good deal of comfort to people who deserve our assistance, not in words, but in deeds, and I hope the Minister&#x2019;s words will be eagerly read by those in distress, and they will find that this Parliament and the country is in earnest about it, alive to their difficulties, and will do all that is reasonably possible to put them on the way to success.</p>

<p>On the motion of Mr. le Roux, debate adjourned; to be resumed on 25th February.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1927-02-11T17:55:00">5.55 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection></debateSection>

