---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol9 - TUESDAY 10 MAY 1927'
layout: debate
year: 1927
month: MAY
month_slug: May
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>TUESDAY, 10th MAY, 1927.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1927-04-10T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Defence: Masseuse at Roberts Heights.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_defence">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether a masseuse was recently appointed at Roberts Heights Military Hospital; if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether the lady selected was a recently arrived alien;</li>

<li>(3) whether others with British war service and duly qualified were obtainable;</li>

<li>(4) whether the position was advertised; and</li>

<li>(5) who decided the appointment?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#hay">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE (for the Minister of Defence):</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes, on a daily basis pending the return to South Africa of a nurse in the S.A.M.N.S., who had proceeded overseas at her own expense to obtain additional qualifications which would qualify her to act as a masseuse or nurse as required.</li>

<li>(2) The lady in question was born in Sweden and arrived in South Africa, November 1925.</li>

<li>(3) No other suitable applicant.</li>

<li>(4) The position being a temporary one was not advertised in the press but all possible steps were taken to secure suitable candidates, the larger hospitals and South African Society of Masseuses being approached, and the lady in question was recommended by the latter.</li>

<li>(5) The appointment was made in terms of paragraph 6 of the regulations governing the S.A. military nursing service.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Justice: Convicts, Employment of.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the average number of convicts employed by De Beers Company and by the East Rand Proprietary Gold Mining Company, respectively, during 1926;</li>

<li>(2) what were the receipts for the period from the respective companies; and</li>

<li>(3) whether it is the intention of the Government to continue the practice?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#hay">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The average number of convicts employed by De Beers Company during the first half of the year 1926 was 1,015, during the last half of the year the average number was approximately 1,100. The East Rand Proprietary Gold Mining Company employed approximately 550 convicts daily.</li>

<li>(2) During the first half of the year when the De Beers Company paid the ordinary hiring rate of 1s. 6d. per unit the receipts from that company were £11,799; On the first of July the system was changed and from that date the De Beers Company undertook the entire financial responsibility for the upkeep of the prison and paid in addition 2d. per daily unit, and the receipts during the last half year were £1,444. The receipts from the East Rand Proprietary Gold Mining Company for the year were £9,311.</li>

<li>(3) Yes, unless of course more favourable terms can be obtained from some other employer of unskilled labour.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Banks: Counters for Non-Europeans.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether the Government will make it a condition with banks carrying its accounts that separate counters be provided for non-Europeans in the principal cities of the Union?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#hay">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>No. As the hon. member knows the Government accounts are now kept with the South African Reserve Bank which does not conduct a class of banking business which involves any pressure by the general public on its counters.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Public Service: Ex-Officials from 1899.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether he will give the names of those figuring in the five returns laid by him upon the Table on the 2nd May, 1927, who had ceased to be officials at the outbreak of the war in 1899, together with the dates when they so ceased?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>There are no such cases. One of the conditions under which an award could be made was that officials must have lost their employment on account of the annexation of the territories of the South African Republic.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Old Persons&#x2019; Subsistence Allowance.</heading>

<question by="#pretorius" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Lt.-Col. N. J. PRETORIUS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether he will state (a) <span class="col_3383-3384" refersTo="page_0352"/>the number of old persons who receive a monthly subsistence allowance in the magisterial district of Krugersdorp; (b) the number of persons who applied for such support during the past financial year and, if possible, the names of the successful candidates?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#pretorius">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(a) 108; (b) 178. I lay a list of the names of the successful applicants, with their addresses, on the Table.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Rates of Pay on Steamships.</heading>

<question by="#reyburn" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Mr. REYBURN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What are the rates of pay prevailing at present on the Government steamships; and</li>

<li>(2) whether it is his intention to put into effect, on ships, the Geneva recommendation of eight hours per day for seven days a week, i.e., 56 hours a week?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#reyburn">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The schedule of pay in respect of the officers and crews employed on the Administration&#x2019;s ships is based upon the determination of the British National Maritime Board which is a joint board of shipowners and seamen&#x2019;s representatives established for the purpose of dealing with pay and general conditions of service of officers, engineers and crews of British ships.</li>

</ol>

<p>The rates as paid by the Administration, which, however, are substantially higher than the Maritime Board rates, are as follows:&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

<td><p>s.</p></td>

<td><p>d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1st Mate</p></td>

<td><p>24</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>2nd Mate</p></td>

<td><p>19</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>3rd Mate</p></td>

<td><p>15</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>1st Engineer</p></td>

<td><p>30</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>2nd Engineer</p></td>

<td><p>24</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>3rd Engineer</p></td>

<td><p>19</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>4th Engineer</p></td>

<td><p>16</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>5th Engineer</p></td>

<td><p>14</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Carpenter</p></td>

<td><p>15</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Boatswain</p></td>

<td><p>14</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Lamptrimmer</p></td>

<td><p>11</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Able-bodied seaman</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Ordinary seaman</p></td>

<td><p>5</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Deckboy</p></td>

<td><p>3</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Donkeyman</p></td>

<td><p>14</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Greaser</p></td>

<td><p>11</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Fireman</p></td>

<td><p>11</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Trimmer</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Ship&#x2019;s steward</p></td>

<td><p>17</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Assistant steward</p></td>

<td><p>8</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Messroom steward</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Ship&#x2019;s cook</p></td>

<td><p>16</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Cook&#x2019;s assistant</p></td>

<td><p>8</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Wireless officer</p></td>

<td><p>18</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>The foregoing are for white ratings and the rates of pay for coloured ratings are:&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

<td><p>s.</p></td>

<td><p>d.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Donkeyman</p></td>

<td><p>11</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Greaser</p></td>

<td><p>8</p></td>

<td><p>10</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Fireman</p></td>

<td><p>8</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Trimmer</p></td>

<td><p>7</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

<td><p>0</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>All rates area on a monthly basis in addition to which the Administration provides free food, accommodation, all necessary medical and surgical treatment and cost of repatriation.</p>

<p>(2) The principle of an eight-hour day on the Administrations&#x2019;s steamships is already in force when ships are in port except in the victualling department where nine hours are worked. When ships are at sea, the eight-hour per diem principle applies to all officers and crew with the exception of certain deck ratings and members of the victualling department to whom owing to practical difficulties involved it is not proposed to extend the application of the eight-hour day.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Mr. Kuys.</heading>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) To what appointment has Mr. Kuys, formerly Assistant Secretary to the Minister of Railways and Harbours, been promoted;</li>

<li>(2) what is the name of the official appointed in his stead;</li>

<li>(3) what was the previous record of service and rate of pay of the latter and</li>

<li>(4) what is his present rate of pay?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) First grade clerk, South African tourist bureau, New York.</li>

<li>(2) Mr. I. D. Malan.</li>

<li>(3) (a) Mr. Malan was appointed as a third grade clerk in the Lands Department on the 18th December, 1924, and promoted to the second grade on the 18th December, 1925; (b) £240 on the scale £140-15-£200-20-£360.</li>

<li>(4) The same as he received in the Lands Department, namely, £240 per annum; from which department he has been seconded. In addition he, of course, receives the usual allowance applicable to private secretaries.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Why was it necessary to transfer Mr. Malan from another department to the exclusion of railwaymen who might have been given this appointment?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Because the decision lies with the Minister who is in charge.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Is this Mr. Malan a nephew of the Minister?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Yes, he is, as was the secretary of the late Minister, Sir Thomas Watt.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#jagger" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. JAGGER:</from>

<p>What has that to do with it?</p>

</question>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware that the sinister word nepotism is derived from the Latin word nepos, a nephew?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>Latin has not changed.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_3385-3386" refersTo="page_0353"/>Kruger Statue Fund.</heading>

<question by="#wessels" to="#prime_minister">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. WESSELS (for Mr. J. F. Tom Naud&#x00E9;)</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What are the amounts contributed to the fund for erecting a statue of President Kruger, including the pedestals, at Pretoria, (a) by the Government and (b) by the public and other bodies;</li>

<li>(2) whether it is a fact that more was collected than was required for the purpose and what does the credit balance of the fund amount to; and</li>

<li>(3) whether, seeing that a large section of the public is anxious that the arrangement and position of the statue itself and the pedestals shall be altered, the Government will make the necessary representations in order that it may be consulted about the disposal of the credit balance and that the said balance shall only be used for the purpose for which the money was contributed by the Government and the public, viz., for the erection of the monument?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#marwick">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>(1), (2) and (3) In 1925 the Government contributed £700 to a fund for the erection of a statue, with pedestals, of President Kruger at Pretoria. The funds were collected and the work was done by a local committee in conjunction with the Pretoria Town Council, but the Government has no definite information about, or say in, the matter.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Diamond Diggers&#x2019; Certificates.</heading>

<question by="#munnik" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. MUNNIK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many diggers&#x2019; certificates were issued on Grasfontein, district of Lichtenburg, on the 15th March, and how many diggers were operating on those certificates on that date; and</li>

<li>(2) how many certificates were renewed on the 1st May, and how many diggers were operating on those certificates on that date?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#munnik">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) It is impossible to reply to the question as framed, since diggers&#x2019; certificates are not issued in respect of any particular digging, but are available throughout the Province and for twelve months from the date of issue. If, however, the hon. member refers to claim licences, the position is that on the 15th March, 1927, approximately 28,363 licences had been issued for Grasfontein to approximately 8,500 registered claim holders. It is impossible to say how many of these were actually working.</li>

<li>(2) Up to and including 5th May, 1927, 2,393 licences had been renewed for May by 2,319 registered claim holders and probably all these are operating.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Mines: Life of.</heading>

<question by="#munnik" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. MUNNIK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries whether, in view of the fact that the present Government Mining Engineer does not agree with the late Government Mining Engineer with regard to the life and expansion of the mines on the Witwatersrand, he will lay the report of the Government Mining Engineer upon the Table?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#munnik">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I would refer the hon. member to the last sentence of the reply given to Question X. asked by the hon. member for Yeoville on the 4th March, 1927.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Wireless Telegraphy.</heading>

<question by="#oost" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Mr. OOST</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to the fact that the postal authorities of Mocambique have opened up their wireless &#x201C;beam&#x201D; station with Lisbon within a few months after the work was commenced;</li>

<li>(2) whether he can give an explanation as to what is the cause of the continuous delay in completing our own wireless installation;</li>

<li>(3) whether he can approach the Portuguese authorities with a view to arranging transmission of telegraphic work, should senders of oversea telegrams desire such, via Lourenco Marques arid Lisbon; and, if so;</li>

<li>(4) whether he will notify the present wireless contractant and the Post Office authorities in England that if arrangements for a wireless service are not completed within a reasonable time, the Government will consider itself at liberty to make arrangements with other parties and other countries?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#oost">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>I think it will be more satisfactory to answer this question by means of a consecutive statement covering all the points rather than to deal with them disjointedly. The original contract as regards the Union was for the erection of a high power wireless station of the &#x201C;broadcast&#x201D; type by Marconi&#x2019;s as contractors to the South African Wireless Telegraph Company. After a certain amount of progress had been made the company sought the permission of the Government to adopt the short-wave low power directional or &#x201C;beam&#x201D; system, which had in the meantime become the latest development of wireless, instead of the system which was originally intended. The Government agreed that a station of the beam type might be set up experimentally, and consented to several extensions of the period of the original contract to allow this to be done. It was made clear at the time and has been repeatedly emphasised since that even if the beam was proved to work successfully, the company might still be required to carry out the original plan of erecting a station of the &#x201C;broadcast&#x201D; type. The contractors appear to have experienced technical difficulties in adjusting the &#x201C;beam&#x201D; system to the particular conditions of the Union route.</p>

<p><span class="col_3387-3388" refersTo="page_0354"/>The long-continued delay in the completion of the Union system has been the subject of representations direct by me to the South African company for several months, and on the 5th April, 1927, I caused the following letter to be sent to the managing director of the company by the Postmaster-General&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">I am directed by the hon. the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs to say that it is considered that your company has had more than enough time allowed for the completion of its &#x201C;beam&#x201D; station, and that it is expected that arrangements will now be made without any further delay for the conducting of official working tests under the observation of technical officers of the department. I am accordingly to inform you that the Minister desires you to arrange for such tests to commence not later than a week after the date of this letter, and I shall be glad to hear from you at your earliest convenience that this will be arranged.</block>

<p>As a result of this, actual working tests are at the present moment being carried out, and though all adjustments have not yet been finally made, I am informed that very successful communication has taken place with the corresponding station in England during the last few nights.</p>

<p>The post office chief engineer and his staff are in continual touch with the company&#x2019;s progress, and doing everything possible to bring about speedy completion.</p>

<p>In addition, the chief engineer is investigating with a view to providing a Government wireless station capable of long distance communication in the event of there being much further delay. As regards Lourenco Marques, I understand that a wireless station has been erected there by the Portuguese Marconi Company for direct communication with Lisbon. It is however, in every way smaller than the station being erected in the Union, and therefore naturally quicker and easier to build. It has no arrangements for working at high speed and appears to be able to operate with Europe for only a very limited number of hours during the twenty-four. It is not capable of giving a service of the standard we expect from the Union station.</p>

<p>No official information has been yet received from the post office authorities at Lourenco Marques that the wireless service to Lisbon is available for public traffic. If the service is adopted by the post office there, however, a working arrangement will be made in the ordinary course between the Union and Lourenco Marques Postal Administration by means of which senders in the Union will be able to utilise the limited capacities of the Portuguese route if they desire. Such an arrangement would be made in any case, whether there was a direct South African service in contemplation or not. Radio telegrams handled in the Union for or from Lourenco Marques wireless station would of course be subject to the Union and Mozambique land charges in addition to the station charge.</p>

<p>If arrangements are made for the exchange of traffic with the Union, the Postmaster-General will announce the fact and publish the tariff from the Union in due course.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Arising out of that answer will the Minister tell us what will be the rate of transmission per minute when our station is completed.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>That is at the present time the subject of investigation.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Can you give us some idea?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>Not at the moment.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Cotton Blankets.</heading>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Mr. GILSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many factories in the Union of South Africa are manufacturing what are known in the trade as cotton blankets;</li>

<li>(2) where are such factories situated;</li>

<li>(3) what is the value of such cotton blankets manufactured in each such factory;</li>

<li>(4) whether the cotton used in such manufacture is imported or grown in the Union of South Africa;</li>

<li>(5) what is the value of such cotton used in such manufacture; and</li>

<li>(6) what is the present number of employees engaged in the manufacture of such cotton blankets in each of such factories, and how many thereof are (a) European, (b) coloured, and (c) natives?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#gilson">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Two.</li>

<li>(2) Cape Town and Paarl.</li>

<li>(3) On the basis of present monthly output £54,000 per annum in one case and £30,000 per annum in the other, of an average wholesale value of 3s. 0½d. per blanket.</li>

<li>(4) The class of blanket in question is so cheap that the basis of this industry, in all countries manufacturing such blankets, is the utilization of waste cotton material, rags, etc. The yarns spun from these materials are imported for the local manufacture of cotton blankets. No new cotton is used.</li>

<li>(5) Cotton yarns are imported to the value of £19,700 per annum in one case, of an average price of 7½d. per lb. landed. Figures not available in the case of the other factory.</li>

<li>(6) In one case 250, of whom 90 per cent. are Europeans, the remaining 10 per cent. being coloured and native. In the other case 46 Europeans, 43 coloured, 11 natives.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>What is the duty on blankets made of imported shoddy material?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I cannot say. I have not got the information at hand but I can get it for the right hon. member.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from><span class="col_3389-3390" refersTo="page_0355"/>Mr. NEL:</from>

<p>Arising out of that answer, will the Minister state why the firm of Linder Brothers, whom the Minister of Labour stated two years ago were to start a cotton factory in Durban, have not done so? It was used as an argument for putting the duty on cotton blankets.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I know nothing of any agreement with the firm.</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#nel">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>Perhaps the hon. member will put the question on the paper?</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister whether, considering these blankets to which he has referred are made out of imported shoddy material, as Minister of Mines and Industries he will not reconsider the situation as to whether such a large duty should be put on blankets of that sort which makes it practically impossible for natives to purchase them, especially when they are not made of materials grown in this country.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I will consider the point.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>I hope favourably.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Ostrich Feather Company, Oudtshoorn.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the present total indebtedness of the Ostrich Feather Company of Oudtshoorn to the Land and Agricultural Bank of South Africa (a) for loans granted, (b) in respect of interest thereon;</li>

<li>(2) whether it is the case that the said indebtedness became repayable on the 31st March, 1927, and that the company defaulted on the ground that no feathers were sold or saleable;</li>

<li>(3) whether the repayment of this loan has been guaranteed by the Government to the Land Bank, and, if so, upon whose authority was the guarantee given;</li>

<li>(4) whether it is true that the loan was granted in opposition to the views expressed by the board of the Land Bank that to them it seemed nothing more than bolstering up a dead industry at the risk of financial loss to the Government, and, if so, on what grounds were the expressed views of the board of the Land Bank ignored:</li>

<li>(5) what action, if any, is it intended to take to enforce payment by the company of its indebtedness and what are the prospects of recovery; and</li>

<li>(6) what is the capital of the company and how much of it is (a) paid up, and (b) unpaid?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) (a) £102,514 19s. 2d., (b) £4,713 8s. 1d.</li>

<li>(2) The loan was repayable on the 31st March last, but owing to the depressed condition of the feather market, the sales effected have been negligible and the period for repayment has been extended for twelve months.</li>

<li>(3) The Land Bank is acting as the agent of the Government and the funds involved are not Land Bank funds but are directly chargeable against Loan Votes so that the question of guarantee does not in reality arise.</li>

<li>(4) As the granting of the loan was in pursuance of the approval of Parliament which was given when the Loan Estimates for last financial year were passed, the views of the board of the Land Bank do not seem to affect the point. I would direct the hon. member&#x2019;s attention to my reply on the point of granting advances during the debate on these Estimates. In any case I am not prepared to go further into this at the present as the whole matter will come before the House when the Loan Estimates for the current year are under consideration.</li>

<li>(5) This matter will be considered when the time comes.</li>

<li>(6) £7,745, of which (a) £754 16s. is paid up, (b) £6,990 4s. unpaid.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Diamond Diggings Sanitation.</heading>

<question by="#munnik" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>Mr. MUNNIK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries whether a special report has been made for the Department of Mines and Industries on the sanitary and health conditions on the alluvial diggings, and, if so, whether he will lay the report upon the Table?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#munnik">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>A report was made on this matter by Dr. Milne, M.O.H., of Johannesburg, and I now lay a copy of this report on the Table.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Natives: Permits for Prospecting.</heading>

<question by="#duncan" to="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. DUNCAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Native Affairs whether he will lay upon the Table a statement showing in what cases permits have been given to prospect in native areas since the 1st July, 1924; to whom they have been granted, and by whom they are now held?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_native_affairs" to="#duncan">

<from>The MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS:</from>

<p>I have laid upon the Table a return of prospecting permits issued in respect of Crown native locations in the Transvaal since July, 1924, which, I take it, is what the hon. member really requires. It would be impossible to furnish full information in this connection in respect of native areas throughout the Union, as, for instance, as regards privately-owned land in native areas in the Transvaal any white person over sixteen years of age can, provided he has the written consent of the owner, obtain a prospecting permit from the mining commissioner of the area concerned; while as regards the Cape Province proper under the law any person on satisfying a magistrate that he is of good character may obtain a prospecting licence entitling the holder to prospect for precious minerals or precious stones on Crown lands and, subject to the consent of the owner, on private property, where-ever <span class="col_3391-3392" refersTo="page_0356"/>situate, save in so far as any land may be specially closed to prospecting.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Discipline.</heading>

<question by="#van_zyl" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Maj. G. B. VAN ZYL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether any enquiry was instituted during the last 18 months in regard to the alleged lack of discipline or falling off of discipline in the railway and harbour service; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether he is prepared to provide the press with copies of every report resulting from such enquiry; if not, whether he is prepared to lay copies of such reports upon the Table?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#van_zyl">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#van_zyl" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XVII.</num>

<p>Standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Natives: Mining in Native Areas.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#prime_minister">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Under what company or companies are mining operations being conducted on (a) Valtyn Makapan&#x2019;s Location, (b) Mpahlele&#x2019;s Location in the Transvaal;</li>

<li>(2) under what contract or agreement with the Government are such mining operations being carried on;</li>

<li>(3) whether such mining operations are being carried on as a result of the prospecting authorized by the issue of permits to General Muller, H. S. Lombard, F. D. Cohen and J. A. Eklund; and</li>

<li>(4) whether the locations referred to in 1 (a) and (b) are included in the Schedule of the Natives Land Act, 1913, as areas set apart for the use and occupation of natives?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#marwick">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>(1), (2) and (3) Questions (1), (2) and (3) as framed seem to indicate that the hon. member is unaware of the legal position as regards prospecting and mining in Transvaal locations. In the Transvaal the areas formally reserved as native locations comprise two classes of land, viz: Crown land specially set aside for location purposes and tribally-owned land formally recognised as locations. These two classes may co-exist in respect of one and the same locations. Under the Precious and Base Metals Act No. 35 of 1908 (Transvaal) any person before being entitled to carry on prospecting operations must obtain a prospecting permit from the mining commissioner of the area concerned, and any white person of the age of sixteen years or upwards is entitled on application to obtain such a prospecting permit providing certain conditions are complied with as regards various classes of land. No special formality is necessary in respect of ordinary Crown land open to prospecting, but, as regards Crown land reserved for location purposes, Section 13 (b) of the Act lays down that the written permission of the Minister of Native Affairs must first be obtained, so that a prospector before procuring from the mining commissioner the necessary permit to prospect a Crown native location must produce the written authority of the Minister of Native Affairs. Such written authority takes the form of a special prospecting permit containing conditions designed to protect the interests of the native inhabitants of the location concerned. Once a person duly authorized to prospect in a Crown native location as indicated has actually commenced prospecting operations his subsequent mining rights fall within the purview not of the Native Affairs but of the Mines Department and are entirely subject to the provisions of the law as regards discoverers&#x2019; rights, proclamation, mynpacht, etc. As regards tribally-owned land formally set apart as locations, Section 13 (b) of the Act recognizes the right of a chief and tribe to deal with their land in so far as allowing persons to prospect thereon is concerned, but, with a view to preventing exploitation of the natives, postulates the written consent of the Minister of Native Affairs as well as of the chief and tribe. Under these circumstances steps are always taken to obtain the best possible terms for the natives from persons wishing to prospect on tribally-owned location land and prospecting and mineral contracts are invariably entered into between the parties, subject to the approval of the Minister. The position is then that the law does not contemplate the prospecting of Crown land under contract while contracts are invariably entered into in respect of tribally-owned land. I am not aware of the extent to which mining as distinct from prospecting operations is actually at present carried on in the locations mentioned, but such operations, if any, must necessarily be as the result of discoverer&#x2019;s rights granted in terms of the law in respect of discoveries made by virtue of the prospecting operations carried out under the permits issued for these locations. If an individual obtains discoverer&#x2019;s rights in a native location there is apparently nothing to prevent him from floating a company to exploit those rights. I may add that the permits issued in respect of Mpahlele&#x2019;s location have lapsed.</p>

<p>(4) The locations concerned are included in the schedule to the Natives Land Act, 1913, but I would invite the attention of the hon. member to the fact that Section 8 (1) (f) of that law lays down that nothing in the Act contained shall be construed as in any way altering the law in force at the commencement of the Act relating to the acquisition of rights to minerals, precious or base metals or precious stones.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#payn" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Mr. PAYN:</from>

<p>What provision is made for natives who reside on the location, but who have to be removed owing to the carrying on of mining operations.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#payn">

<from><span class="col_3393-3394" refersTo="page_0357"/>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>It does not necessarily follow that because mining operations are carried on that natives have to be removed from the locations, even although the mining operations are on a fairly large scale, and where the natives don&#x2019;t even want to be removed. They are all the better for the mining operations as they have employment near at hand.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#payn" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Mr. PAYN:</from>

<p>But when they should want to be removed?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#payn">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>Then I suppose the Government will do what is necessary.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#prime_minister">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>How does the Prime Minister reconcile what he has just told us with Section 147 of the Act of the Union, which says that no native location may be alienated or in any way diverted from the purpose for which it is set apart, except on the authority of an Act of Parliament?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#marwick">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I still have to learn that any native location has been diverted or alienated.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Diverted from the purpose for which it was granted. It was not granted for mining.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#marwick">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I suppose that does not prevent mining operations being carried on.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#prime_minister">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>In view of the Pretoria convention which imposed the obligation on the native location commission to reserve to the native tribes such locations as they may be entitled to, and the fact that these particular locations were so reserved, how can the Minister consent to the alienation of the mining rights of these properties and the diversion of portions of the location to purposes other than those of the use and occupation of the natives?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#marwick">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I can only say that that is the opinion not only of myself but of everybody concerned in the office. What is the use of asking us why we have this particular opinion? All I can say that is the position. The natives have the right at any time if they question that position, to go to a court of Jaw.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Inspector Klopper.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XIX.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Upon what date did Mr. Klopper, Acting District Inspector, Ladysmith, Natal, pass his examination in trains working;</li>

<li>(2) whether it is correct that in grade III, from which Mr. Klopper was promoted, there are 2,290 clerks, 50 per cent. of whom are awaiting promotion, having reached their barrier in that grade; and</li>

<li>(3) whether it is correct that in grade II, from which Mr. Klopper was promoted, there are 750 clerks, 75 per cent. of whom are awaiting promotion, having reached their barrier in that grade?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Mr. Klopper passed his examination in trains working on the 2nd February, 1925.</li>

<li>(2) Yes, 53 per cent. of whom are at the barrier awaiting promotion.</li>

<li>(3) Yes, 53 per cent. of whom are at the barrier awaiting promotion.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Income Tax.</heading>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XX.</num>

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the amount of income tax due for the year ended the 30th June, 1925, collected after the 31st March, 1926; and</li>

<li>(2) what is the estimated amount of income tax due for the year ended 30th June, 1926, which was unpaid on the 1st April, 1927?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) £972,000. Of this amount £563,000 was assessed at 31st March, 1926, but was not due for payment until after 31st March, and £409,000 represents assessments issued after 31st March.</li>

<li>(2) £850,000. Of this amount £500,000 was assessed at 31st March, 1927, but was not due for payment until after 31st March, and £350,000 represents estimated value of assessments to be issued after 31st March.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Anerley Halt, Traffic at.</heading>

<question by="#arnott" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXI.</num>

<from>Brig.-Gen. ARNOTT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the number of passengers who arrived at Anerley Halt during the month of April this year;;</li>

<li>(2) what was the number of passengers who joined the train at Anerley Halt during the same period;</li>

<li>(3) what was the number of passengers who arrived at South Port Halt during the same period;</li>

<li>(4) what was the number of passengers who joined the train at South Port Halt during the same period; and</li>

<li>(5) what was the amount of parcels and goods traffic received and forwarded from these respective halts during the same period?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#arnott">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The information desired by the hon. member in regard to passengers is not available for the month of April, and the following figures in respect of items (1), (2), (3) and (4) refer to March.</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) 216.</li>

<li>(2) 194.</li>

<li>(3) 92.</li>

<li>(4) 112.</li>

<li>(5) Anerley halt: Parcels, 191; goods, 20 tons. Southport halt: Parcels, 139; goods, 29 tons.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_3395-3396" refersTo="page_0358"/>Voters&#x2019; Roll.</heading>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXII.</num>

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware that, according to the provisional lists just published, many persons otherwise possessing the requisite qualifications as voters have found their names omitted from the lists on the grounds, so far as can be ascertained, that they have not during a period of at least three months immediately preceding the date of the commencement of the registration of voters, resided, in fact, in the division in which ordinarily they would have been entitled to be registered;</li>

<li>(2) whether he is aware that in numerous cases the persons so omitted have been temporarily resident elsewhere during the whole or part of such period of three months, either at the seaside or attending to official duties elsewhere;</li>

<li>(3) what were the instructions given to registering officers in respect of the general principles to be observed in such cases; in particular, what construction was placed on the term &#x201C;retained his home&#x201D; as used in Section 4 paragraph (b) (4) of Act No. 11 of 1926;</li>

<li>(4) whether, if such instructions were in writing, the Minister will lay a copy of the same upon the Table;</li>

<li>(5) whether, when a person qualified for registration has been absent for a temporary purpose, such as above indicated, such instructions permit of his registration in the division in which his usual residence or home is situated;</li>

<li>(6) whether it is not a fact that where, in the case last referred to, such usual residence or home has been let, the person concerned has been excluded from the roll and thus has lost the opportunity of exercising the franchise, either in that division or in the division in which he is temporarily resident;</li>

<li>(7) whether, in view of the numerous cases of hardship that have already been discovered, he will give instructions for a fresh canvass to be instituted, so that the names of persons omitted from the roll for the reason stated can be restored thereto before the final settlement of the present roll;</li>

<li>(8) whether he is aware that as a result of the method adopted in framing the provisional roll large numbers of urban residents have been excluded entirely therefrom and so have been disfranchised; and</li>

<li>(9) whether he will state&#x2014;(a) the number of voters on the roll in each electoral division in the areas of the Witwatersrand, Durban, East London, Port Elizabeth, and the Cape Peninsula, immediately prior to the commencement of the present registration; (b) the number of the voters in the same divisions according to the provisional voters&#x2019; lists now framed, distinguishing in the case of the divisions within the Cape Province between European, coloured, Asiatic and native voters; and (c) the reasons why, in the cases where the number of such voters has diminished, such reduction has occurred?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I am aware that the names of many persons have been omitted from the provisional lists of voters, recently published, as the result of the operation of sub-section (4) of Section 4 of Act 12 of 1918 as amended by Act 11 of 1926.</li>

<li>(2) No.</li>

<li>(3) No instructions whatsoever were issued in respect of general principles to be observed in the application of the sub-section referred to above or in respect of the construction to be placed on any term used in that sub-section. It is the policy of the department that registering officers (who are in a quasi-judicial position) should themselves interpret any provision of the law relating to the qualifications or disqualifications of persons claiming to be enrolled as voters. The registering officer&#x2019;s interpretation of the law is in every case subject to review by the revising officer and may ultimately be reviewed by a judge of the Supreme Court.</li>

<li>(4) and (5) These parts of the question fall away.</li>

<li>(6) I have no information as to how registering officers have interpreted the law in the cases referred to.</li>

<li>(7) I am not prepared to issue instructions for a fresh canvass to be undertaken. All persons whose names have been omitted from the provisional lists and who consider that they are entitled to be registered, have the opportunity, during a period of at least twenty-eight days after the publication of the provisional lists, of lodging claims. I would also point out that during this period a notice of the omission of his name from the provisional list, is sent, with a blank claim form, to every existing voter whose name has been omitted from that list for any reason other than death. This notice is sent to the existing voter at his place of residence as appearing in the existing voters&#x2019; list.</li>

<li>(8) I am aware that the names of many persons resident in urban areas have been omitted from the provisional lists as the result of the operation of sub-section (4) of Section 4 of Act 12 of 1918 as amended by Act 11 of 1926.</li>

<li>(9) The figures are being obtained and will be laid on the Table at a later date.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Public Service: C. E. Viljoen, Promotion of.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XXIII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What promotion in grade and/or salary has Mr. C. E. Viljoen, formerly magistrate and now inspector. Public Service Commission, received subsequent to 1st January, 1926; and</li>

<li><span class="col_3397-3398" refersTo="page_0359"/>(2) over how many magistrates who were senior to him at the date of such promotion was Mr. Viljoen preferred?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>Mr. C. E. Viljoen has not been promoted in the Department of Justice since the date mentioned. He was selected by the Department of the Interior for appointment as an inspector on the staff of the Public Service Commission and the Department of Justice, in the circumstances, did not wish to stand in the way of his transfer. The appointment was made by the Minister of the Interior on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission. Although an officer may be a capable and efficient magistrate, it does not necessarily follow that he also possesses the qualifications necessary for an inspectorship, and the Department of the Interior, therefore, if it desires to appoint an officer with magisterial experience as an inspector, can hardly be expected to be tied in their selection by the strict order of seniority of the officers in the magisterial branch of this department. Question No. (2) is, therefore, irrelevant.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Was Mr. Viljoen promoted to a more highly paid appointment than the one he previously had?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>Yes, and I can give the answer that it does not affect the Department of Justice. The Department of the Interior has started him on a scale commencing at £800. The salary he was on in my department was £750.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>How many magistrates at that grade, who were senior to Mr. Viljoen at that time, failed to secure the more highly paid appointment?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I do not know how many men, but I have made it clear he has had no promotion in my department. The reason why the Department of the Interior chose him from the ranks of the magistrates in my department should be put to the Minister of the Interior. I know from previous experience that you do not have your oldest magistrates appointed as inspectors on your public service commission because they have to travel all over the country, so naturally you take younger and more active men. I assume that inspired the Department of the Interior when making the change. I might say that when appointments of this kind are filled up it is generally a magistrate of my department that is selected because they consider men of my department are better qualified to fill the position.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Were any magistrates senior to him eligible for the appointment?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I daresay it is so, but I cannot help it if the Minister of the Interior selects a man and passes over the others. I don&#x2019;t mind suggesting that he should change his name.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Can the Minister deny that Mr. Viljoen, who has had this unprecedented promotion, is the same gentleman who recommended the granting of a bottle store licence to Mr. Dirk Roos, the Minister&#x2019;s brother, who practises as a land surveyor at Kuruman?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>There is an old Latin saying&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Canis revertit ad vomitum suum.</block>

<p>I do not know whether in this case this maxim applies or not, but I made no recommendation in this case.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Quite a providential thing, was it not?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>Quite providential, especially for the &#x201C;canis.&#x201D;</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Voters&#x2019; Roll.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXIV.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is a fact that he did not reside in the electoral division of the Gardens on the 11th January last;</li>

<li>(2) (a) whether it is a fact that his name still appears on the parliamentary voters&#x2019; roll for Gardens, and (b) whether he will remain on that roll for the present as a voter; if so,</li>

<li>(3) (a) whether it is not a fact that by virtue of the provisions of the Electoral Act, 1918, if he was not resident in the Gardens division on the 11th January last, he is disqualified from being placed on that voters&#x2019; roll, and (b) whether he will cause his name to be removed from that voters&#x2019; roll; and</li>

<li>(4) whether he will introduce a Bill this session to remedy the defect, so that until qualified to be registered as a voter at his new residence, the existing registration of a voter shall, if not otherwise disqualified, hold good?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>(1), (2) and (3) These questions relate to the Minister of the Interior in his capacity as a private individual, not in his capacity as Minister, and consequently he does not consider it appropriate nor does he feel himself called upon to make any statement in this connection in Parliament.</p>

<p>(4) No.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>In connection with the answer might I inform the House hundreds of people are in the same position as the hon. Minister with this difference that his name has wrongly been left on the roll for Gardens whilst theirs have been removed.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member must confine himself to asking a question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware of a case where a person who left his residence on the 15th October last year, and therefore on the 11th January this year, not having been three months in his new residence, was not entitled to go on the roll and was not entitled <span class="col_3399-3400" refersTo="page_0360"/>to remain on the old roll because he was not in the old residence on the 11th January of this year?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>The hon. gentleman (Mr. Nathan) was evidently so concentrated upon his own question that he did not notice the very same question arising out of one which has already been replied to under No. 22. I would refer him to that reply.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister if it is a fact that so many people have, in the circumstances referred to by the hon. member (Mr. Nathan), owing to the new electoral arrangements, been disfranchised. If such is the case, does the Minister not recognize that he made a dreadful mess, through his obstinacy, of the Electoral Act of last session? Perhaps the Minister will answer.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>All I would say in connection with that is this, it is very strange that the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt), having been a Minister of the old Cape Colony, does not even to-day know that that was the law of the Cape Province all along.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>You were wrong, as usual. We told you last year you were making a mess of it.</p>

</question>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>The hon. Minister is generally possessed of courtesy. He is not so to-day.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I would ask the hon. member to confine himself to his question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>I would ask the Minister whether he is aware that my case is exactly the same as his, but whereas he is on the voters&#x2019; roll to-day, I am not.</p>

</question>

<question by="#krige" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>*Mr. KRIGE:</from>

<p>I should like to know from the Minister who has made such a serious statement if he is certain that what he stated with reference to the old Cape law is correct.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#nathan">

<from>*The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Fruit Export by Mailboat.</heading>

<question by="#heatlie" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXV.</num>

<from>Mr. HEATLIE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) On how many occasions during the months of February and March, 1927, did mail steamers leave Cape Town with space available for the carriage of fruit when such space could have been filled had fruit not been shipped or kept back from being shipped in other steamers;</li>

<li>(2) what is the amount of extra fruit which could have been carried by such mail steamers during the said months; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister is aware that the fact that fruit could have been, but was not, shipped by the mail steamers caused a great deal of loss to fruit-growers?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#heatlie">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) On one occasion, namely, the &#x201C;Walmer Castle&#x201D; (one chamber only), which left Cape Town on 25th February, 1927.</li>

<li>(2) 479 tons.</li>

<li>(3) No. The steamers, other than mail steamers, which loaded fruit here during February, 1927, discharged their cargo in as good a condition as did the mailboats. Moreover, the non-utilization of the one chamber in the &#x201C;Walmer Castle&#x201D; was the outcome of a conference between the Perishable Products Export Control Board and the official heads of organized growers.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Fruit Export, Preference for.</heading>

<question by="#heatlie" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXVI.</num>

<from>Mr. HEATLIE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) From what date during the month of March, 1927, did the Perishable Products Export Control Board grant a preference in shipping to soft fruits over hard fruits and for what period did that preference operate;</li>

<li>(2) what tonnage of soft fruit received such preference during that period, and what tonnage of hard fruit was delayed in respect of shipping the same during that period;</li>

<li>(3) what was the total amount levied on soft fruits in respect of the preference granted to such soft fruits; and</li>

<li>(4) how much of that amount was used in order to discharge the extra costs occasioned through the delay of the hard fruits, and if there is any balance, how is it proposed to deal with that balance?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#heatlie">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Qualified preference in shipment was extended to soft fruits over hard fruits in respect of the ships which sailed between 11th and 27th March, 1927, both dates inclusive.</li>

<li>(2) 679 tons in each case.</li>

<li>(3) The freight was collected through the Land Bank in London, and the figures are not yet available in Cape Town.</li>

<li>(4) Extra costs (cold storage charges) which resulted from deferred shipment of hard fruits were paid by the shippers themselves. Any balance over, after adjustment of freight charges collected on soft and hard fruits shipped within the period during which the special differentiation in the freight charges operated, will be returned to the shippers who paid the higher rate of freight, in proportion to their shipments.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Kroonstad, Footbridge for.</heading>

<question by="#terreblanche" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXVII.</num>

<from>Lt. Col. TERREBLANCHE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether, in the estimated expenditure for improvements during the current year, provision has been made for the construction of a footbridge over the railway at <span class="col_3401-3402" refersTo="page_0361"/>Kroonstad, especially for the sake of the railway employees residing in the village; if not,</li>

<li>(2) whether the Minister fully realizes the gravity of the position as brought to his notice when he was last at Kroonstad in June, and the anxiety it causes the parents of hundreds of children who on their way to school have either to cross the railway at dangerous points or otherwise go a roundabout way in order to cross by means of the dangerous subway, which is at times blocked by cattle and other traffic, and is, in addition, often after a few showers of rain impassable; and</li>

<li>(3) whether he will take steps to alter the state of affairs indicated in the preceding paragraph, in view of the size and increasing importance of the town and district of Kroonstad?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#terreblanche">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Careful consideration has been given to this matter, but, owing to the necessity for making provision for works of a more urgent nature, I regret it will not be possible to include in the current year&#x2019;s capital and betterment estimates of expenditure provision for a footbridge at Kroonstad. As soon as a favourable opportunity occurs, however, further consideration will be given to the matter.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Kroonstad, Platforms at.</heading>

<question by="#terreblanche" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXVIII.</num>

<from>Lt.-Col. TERREBLANCHE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Minister, in estimating for improvements, has kept in mind the necessity of supplying roofs for the passenger and goods platforms at Kroonstad during the current year;</li>

<li>(2) whether he has any objection against the transfer of the loading and unloading platforms and kraals for market stock to the point on the main line where the new auction kraals are now being built; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Administration is already able, with reasonable notice given or application made, to supply sufficient motor transport for maize, as, for instance, from Lindley and Edenville to the main lines, during the present promising season?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#terreblanche">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes; consideration was given to the matter, but it is regretted that, owing to the demands of more urgent works, it has not been found possible to include in the current year&#x2019;s capital and betterment estimates provision for roofing the passenger and goods platforms at Kroonstad.</li>

<li>(2) The site suggested by the municipality for the transfer of the loading and unloading platforms is unsuitable, owing to grade of the line.</li>

<li>(3) The Administration is not in a position to undertake the conveyance by road motor service of heavy seasonal crops at the present time. Certain experiments, however, are in the course of being made, and, when the results are known, further consideration will be given to the matter.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Kroonstad Experimental Farm.</heading>

<question by="#terreblanche" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XXIX.</num>

<from>Lt.-Col. TERREBLANCHE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he intends during the current year to effect the necessary improvements on the summer experimental farm at Kroonstad, especially in regard to quarters for the European officials; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether he is able to say when the work will be commenced?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#terreblanche">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes, it is hoped to include this service, with other urgent services, on the estimates which are now under consideration by the Government.</li>

<li>(2) As soon as funds are made available and the Public Works Department are able to commence work.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: Trotskie, Promotion of.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS replied to Question XIII. by Mr. Marwick, standing over from 3rd May.</p>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether, at the date of the Minister assuming office, Mr. Trotskie, at present employed in the office of the Railways and Harbours Board, was a clerk in grade</li>

<li>(2) whether he was subsequently promoted to (a) grade 1, (b) grade senior 2, (c) grade senior 1, and (d) grade principal clerk, the position he now holds; if so,</li>

<li>(3) upon what dates did he receive promotion to the four grades enumerated; and</li>

<li>(4) over how many officials who were his senior did he pass on his promotion to (a) grade 1, (b) grade senior 2, (c) grade senior 1, and (d) grade principal clerk?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) No. (d) Yes.</li>

<li>(3) (a) 1st January, 1925. (b) 29th March, 1925. (c) Falls away, (d) 1st April, 1926.</li>

<li>(4) (a) Nominations were invited from all departments in respect of the position in grade 1, and Mr. Trotskie was selected to fill it after his claims had been considered in conjunction with those of the other officers who were nominated, (b), (c) and (d) The officer in question was considered for the appointment to grade senior 2 only after officers who were senior to Mr. Trotskie were found not to possess the requisite qualifications. Nominations were invited for this position from all departments on two occasions, and resulted in Mr. Trotskie&#x2019;s selection on the recommendation of the general manager. When he was selected to fill the post for which by training and experience he was specially fitted, Mr. Trotskie <span class="col_3403-3404" refersTo="page_0362"/>was clearly entitled to the grading fixed for the appointment, the value of which was subsequently improved to a principal clerkship because of the importance and responsible nature of the work.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#women&#x2019;s_provincial_enfranchisement_bill">

<heading>WOMEN&#x2019;S PROVINCIAL ENFRANCHISEMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to Mr. D. M. Brown to introduce the Women&#x2019;s Provincial Enfranchisement Bill.</p>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. M. BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>Although it is late in the session, I introduce it now, so that there will be time to consider the Bill during the recess.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 17th May.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#citrus_exports_and_dock_strike_1925">

<heading>CITRUS EXPORTS AND DOCK STRIKE, 1925.</heading>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That, in view of the heavy loss suffered by citrus farmers through quantities of citrus fruits for export having been condemned in consequence of the docks strike in 1925, the Government be requested to consider the desirability of refunding to the consignors concerned the difference between the local and the export railway tariff.</block>

<p>It is a great pleasure to me to introduce this motion, because it is certainly one of the most reasonable which has ever been before this House. We remember the shipping strike of 1925. The fruit arrived from the interior, was held up here, and a great part of it went bad here, and the farmers suffered considerable damage. Notwithstanding that, the Railway Department decided to charge railway rates on the rejected fruit at the high tariff, viz., the local rate, which is about 1s. per box from the Transvaal, instead of the lower or export tariff. We do not say in the motion that the rates paid to the railways should be repaid or written off, but all we ask is&#x2014;and this the citrus farmers regard as fair and right&#x2014;that the export rate, instead of the local rate, should be charged for those consignments. It may possibly be said that if fruit which is sent here for export is rejected and then put on the local market, it will spoil the local market. I want to mention that that does not apply in this case. That fruit, I am speaking principally of the fruit sent from the districts of Marico, Rustenburg and Koster, was inspected before being sent here and approved by a qualified inspector. I also want to point out that an additional 7,945 boxes were condemned. The remaining boxes were therefore approved, sent to Cape Town, lay in a heap there, and subsequently, when some of them by the handling began to go off, were repacked, and this repacking cost the farmers 2s. a box, although the repacked boxes were subsequently also condemned, so that the farmers not only suffered the loss on the fruit, but also had to pay for the repacking. Therefore the motion is a fair one, viz., that the farmers who have lost about £50,000 as a result of the shipping strike shall be repaid the difference in railway rates between the higher and the lower tariff. The farmers do not ask for the writing-off of the railway charges, but they say that their fruit was approved, that they sent it to the Cape Town docks with the most honourable intentions, that it became bad owing to the strike and was condemned, and that eventually they still had to pay the railways, who relied upon their regulations, the highest railway rate, viz., the local rate. I think that it is unfair in a case where the farmers have lost thousands of pounds, that the railways should now come and make as much money as possible out of the poor farmers. Accordingly I have introduced the motion, and I hope the Minister and the House will accept it. There are always many members here who stand up as representatives of the farmers. I should like to see how they will vote to-day. There is no other way for the farmers to make up things in this connection, because the shipping contracts provide that if there is a strike, the farmers cannot hold them responsible for damages. That is a defect in the shipping contracts which is deplorable. Who suffers in consequence? The farmers. And we come here as farmers to the House with a reasonable request, and I hope the whole House will agree that the small amount&#x2014;I do not think it can be more than about £2,000&#x2014;should be refunded to the farmers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brink">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BRINK</person>:</from>

<p>I second the motion. I regard the motion as quite reasonable because there is no doubt the citrus farmers have suffered much damage. They could not help it but they nevertheless had afterwards to pay practically twice the export railway rate. The co-operative society in my district sent boxes of oranges from Mossel Bay to Cape Town, but after the fruit had been delayed three weeks it could not be exported, and the society subsequently received an account for the difference between the export and the local rate, which was more than the amount already paid under the export rate. I go further and say that the railway administration should consider whether all the rates cannot be revised. It is most unfair when the citrus farmers have sent away their oranges for export that they then have to pay a higher rate when the oranges are condemned in the port. The fact that the oranges have been condemned is sufficient loss because usually oranges are actually given away at a price which does not pay the expense of the boxes and the packing paper. The farmers not only lose on account of the condemnation, but have to take more money out of their pockets to pay the higher local rate. It was said some time ago that the citrus market was unlimited, and as a result of that many citrus trees were planted. To-day, however, the farmers find that the market is not unlimited, and if something is not done to reduce the expense of citrus export then the whole citrus industry will suffer in consequence. To show how much the farmers get I want to refer to the statement of the Rustenburg <span class="col_3405-3406" refersTo="page_0363"/>Co-operative Society. The members of the society last year received on the average 15s. 7¼d. per box on the London market, but the export costs were 9s. 5½d. so that the grower received a balance of about 6s. 1d. From that has to be deducted interest on capital, preparation of the boards, packing costs, and industrial expenditure, and hon. members can therefore see that with these high expenses it is practically impossible for the citrus farmers to make a living. The hon. member for Standerton (Gen. Smuts) in his speech on the budget referred to the White River Estates where the ground was practically given away for nothing, although planted with fruit trees. I think the hon. member must agree that the expense in connection with the export of fruit is altogether too high. People cannot invest their money in citrus farming because they do not know what is going to happen. If oranges are sold for 12s. or 12s. 6d. on the London market then it will be an impossible industry. Therefore, I want to urge the Government and the Railway Department to consider making the cost of citrus export as little as possible. The annual report of the Transvaal Citrus Exchange shows that a sum of £70,000 was paid to local agents alone on the 602,000 boxes which were exported. Is it a wonder then that people are afraid to invest their money in ground for the purpose of citrus growing. As we already have millions of trees in the country the question of high costs must be considered, so that steps can be taken to make the industry a success. The citrus farmers have to compete on the world market against the growers in California and Australia, but the high export costs make it practically impossible. Now the railway administration comes and lays an extra charge on the fruit which for some reason or other is condemned in the port instead of specially reducing the tariff to meet the farmers. The increase amounts to 50 per cent. of the export tariff and I regard that as very unreasonable. Therefore, I support the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I will commence by saying that I am very sympathetic towards the farmers concerned in the motion which is before the House to-day. Without doubt these people had a bad time during last season. They packed their oranges properly, sent them to the docks, they were passed by the inspectors, and put into cold storage so far as there was accommodation, but as a result of the shipping strike the farmers suffered much damage. Eventually the oranges were taken out of cold storage and sold on the local market. I want, therefore, to say at once that I sympathize with the people in connection with what the hon. member has said, but if we were to agree to accept this motion I fear we should be creating a dangerous precedent. Hon. members must bear in mind that the tariff for export of fruit is based on a much lower calculation than the tariff for fruit consumed in South Africa. If we were to permit that when fruit was carried at the export rate and was delayed in the docks in consequence of a strike or of bad packing or what not, if we, I say, were to allow such fruit from the Transvaal or the Free State to be sold in the local market and to only charge the usual export rate then we should take away the whole geographical advantage of the farmers of the Western Province, the South Western Districts and of the Eastern Province. Will the Transvaal farmers be prepared to give up the geographical advantage of Rustenburg, Zeerust, Barberton, etc., in reference to the Johannesburg market for the benefit of the Eastern or the Western Province? Would they not be dissatisfied if their geographical advantage with relation to the Johannesburg market were done away with? But the Western Province and the environs of Cape Town have the same right, and I see the great danger of a precedent which would make the position impossible, and therefore I do not see my way to accepting the motion. As to creating a precedent, we had not only to do with fruit, but, e.g., also with maize and mealie meal. If the maize is carried at the lower export rates and then sold in the local market then we shall get strong protests from the people who produce mealie meal here. In the circumstances I cannot accept the motion. I will only say that no one here can be held responsible for the strike, neither the Government nor the exporters.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>Why must the farmers pay for it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>If the hon. member had requested that the Department of Agriculture should take into favourable consideration the question on compensation for losses there would possibly have been something to say for it, but on what ground does he insist on relief from the Department of Railways? The railways are common carriers and how can the hon. member then ask that department for compensation to the farmers?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>I do not ask compensation but fairness.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>But on what right does the hon. member come to the Department of Railways with the simple request that the rates which are in accordance with the geographical advantages of the country should simply be disregarded? I ask the hon. member again whether he is prepared to sacrifice the geographical advantages of Rustenburg and all those districts in favour of the Western Province?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>That has nothing to do with it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>It has everything to do with it. The fruit arrived here, was not exported and was sold in the local market, and what my friend asks is that the fruit which was sold here in the local market should have been carried at such a rate that they could compete on the local market.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from><span class="col_3407-3408" refersTo="page_0364"/>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>They were given away here, not sold.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>If that occurred in some cases it is regrettable, but then the responsibility does not lie with the railways that they were not sooner taken out of cold storage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>We could not get a contract sooner.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member can surely not blame the Railway Department for that. But I want to point out a further great danger if the principle were to be accepted here. Then all maize or mealie meal which was sent to the coast&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>That has nothing to do with the point.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>But the Government could not stop the strike. If it was a case of responsibility of the State for the strike then that could be argued. But I want to point out a further danger of such a precedent. It would mean that the necessary care would no longer be given to proper packing, because the people would argue that they were sending their stuff to Cape Town for export and if it were condemned it could anyhow be sold in the local market. Then they would know that if the fruit were condemned that it could then immediately be sold in the local market, and that they need only pay the export rate to the railways.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>No one would ever do that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>If it is possible people will certainly do it. If they can get the advantage of the lower rates it will certainly occur. The whole scheme of the export rate is to assist the farmers to sell their produce in the oversea market. We must not create any precedent by which ports of shipment would get towns into difficulty in regard to their markets, and create an intolerable position. With regard to the speech of the hon. member for George (Mr. Brink) about the general position, we shall possibly have an opportunity on another occasion of going into it. I do not know whether it actually comes under this motion, but I just want to say that as a matter of fact the costs of export are exceptionally high though prices are dropping. What the reason is I cannot at the moment go into, but one thing is certain, viz., that the exporter should give more attention to the extension of markets.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Abolish the Export Control Board.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>If the hon. member knew anything about the position he would know that the board of control has nothing to do with the marketing. In the circumstances I am sorry that I cannot accept the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>Under ordinary circumstances I think the House would agree with what the Minister has said&#x2014;that there should be no confusion between export rates, to allow our produce to be put on the markets of the world, and the rates on produce for internal consumption. But it looks to me that the Minister has forgotten entirely the object which moved my hon. friend to put his resolution on the paper, because the unfortunate position in which the citrus growers found themselves was not due to any fault of themselves, but was owing to the fact that the fruit shipped at export rates, as a result of the strike, could not be put on board. The position really is that the railway department, in this particular case, were making a profit out of the unfortunate position of the citrus growers of the northern provinces, because, had that strike not taken place, all that the railways could claim was the export rate, but owing to the strike having taken place, the railways claimed the whole rate. That would have been justified if the fruit had been found unfit to go overseas. This was an entirely different thing. The Minister must realize that the loss the farmers sustained has not been discussed for the first time in this House. In 1925 the Minister and his colleagues were told that if they did not take up a firmer attitude, they would do a great injustice to the producers. In spite of that, they provided a camp at Wynberg and the present Minister of Defence, then the Minister of Labour, had an opportunity of interviewing the men.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>And encouraging them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I will not go so far as that, but my hon. friend and his associates went as far as they could to encourage the men in the attitude they adopted. Did not the hon. member for Salt River (Mr. Snow) march through the streets with a deputation of these people? Did he not, if my memory serves me, visit these people at the camp at Wynberg, and was it not said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Staan vas, onbeweeglik sterk.</block>

<p>At the same time, under the pressure which came from my hon. friends over there [Labour members] the Prime Minister was communicating with the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia, and telling him that if the strike came there, if he did not interfere, we would not buy sleepers in Australia anymore? In fact, the Prime Minister was extremely anxious to assist the sleeper sellers of Australia.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I am afraid the right hon. member is getting away from the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>With all due respect, Mr. Speaker, I would submit that my reason for telling the Minister to agree to the reasonable motion made by my hon. friend is that it would be unnecessary to make that motion had the Government done their duty and stepped in, and not interfered with men manning the ships and with farmers loading fruit <span class="col_3409-3410" refersTo="page_0365"/>on the ships. I have a perfect right, I think, to use that argument as having a tendency to soften the heart of the Minister of Railways and Harbours, who is a member of the Cabinet that refused to do their duty in the shipping crisis of 1925.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The right hon. member may refer to these things, but we should not have the strike of 1925 debated.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I am not dealing with the strike, Mr. Speaker. The redress, if the hon. member secures it, will go a little way indeed to meet the loss sustained by these producers of citrus fruit. Some of the fruit had to be repacked, and they had to pay 2s. a case. It is well within the memory of many hon. members that that fruit was practically given away on the Parade in Cape Town, and not only did these farmers suffer considerable loss, but the Western Province also suffered loss owing to the disorganization of the local market as a result of this stuff being thrown upon it. The Government should show a little contrition for the attitude they adopted in 1925. The Railway Department added insult to injury by asking these growers to pay extra money. It would be only a small amount of justice to reimburse these people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">To omit &#x201C;in consequence of the docks strike&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;owing to circumstances beyond the control of the consignors&#x201D;.</block>

<p>I am sorry the Minister cannot give his approval to the motion, and, therefore, I want to ask him whether he cannot agree to the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>So you do not want the strike to be mentioned?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member does not quite understand the position.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>You said last year that the farmers had suffered no damage in consequence of the shipping strike.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member is not properly informed in the matter. I admit that at the moment there is a lack of official figures, but I am certain that I may say that not more than one-fifth of the damage suffered by the exporters without their own fault was due to the docks strike. The hon. member for George (Mr. Brink) next to me is also doubtful about it. It is difficult for me to produce all the proofs, but of the 31,000 boxes from a certain district, I know of only 4,000 that were condemned as a result of the strike. One-fifth was said to be too small, and we may put it at one-eighth. The other boxes were condemned for other reasons. In the first place the year was very bad owing to the fact that the fruit had too much water.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>You cannot give fruit too much water.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member knows nothing about it. He has apparently never yet heard of the expression used in the trade that fruit is &#x201C;water logged.&#x201D; A great deal of the fruit which is exported had too much water in consequence of late rains during the previous summer, and I can speak with a certain amount of authority, because I saw some of the fruit loaded here and arriving in England. I can, therefore, judge better than the hon. member for Witwatersberg (Lt.-Col. N. J. Pretorius).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Is that the report of your visit overseas?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-speaker">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Hon. members must permit the hon. member to proceed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>The fact is that there were various causes through which the exporters, without any responsibility of their own, suffered great damage in 1925, and I can put the damage suffered owing to the dock strike at one-eight thereof.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_rensburg">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN RENSBURG</person>:</from>

<p>Why should the Government now suffer the damage?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>I do not advocate that the Government itself should pay the damage, but I plead for the people being met. Packing was done at two places in my constituency; one at Brits by the co-operative society, and the society is to-day still in difficulties, and we have to work hard and encourage the people to induce them to keep the society going. At De Wildt a private undertaking lost some thousands of pounds. Last year not a single box was sent from De Wildt. Now I ask the Minister if it is not worthy of his consideration, and if things cannot be done in such a way that we restart the fruit export. I admit that there were also other causes such as, e.g., that the packing in some cases was not well done, but at the coast there were also matters which contributed to causing the damage. There was, e.g., no cooling before the fruit was loaded. I know that in Durban fruit is shipped at a temperature of 100 degrees Fahrenheit or more, into the hold in which cold air is pumped. The result was that the boxes cooled down on the sides of the hold, but that never happened inside. When one reaches England one feels ashamed and hurt because there are rotten and mouldy oranges in the boxes which have to be thrown away. Now that we know that our future as fruit farmers depends on the export trade, and that there is an unlimited market in England and on the Continent provided we export correctly, I want to ask the Minister whether it is not worthy of consideration that the farmers who received a knock in 1925 should be assisted by the accepting of my amendment to prevent their being ruined. I should like to point out to the Minister that he said that a principle was being laid down, viz., that fruit intended for export condemned here and not exported is carried at the local rate, and not at the export rate. The Minister now fears that the principle will be abolished. We know that the difference between the two rates is <span class="col_3411-3412" refersTo="page_0366"/>great. From Pretoria the export rate is 8d., while the local rate is 1s. 6d. It is not laying down a principle, but only granting an urgent request to assist the farmers who suffered severely in 1925, and to give them a chance to get on their feet again.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>It is a matter which should be brought to the notice of the Minister of Agriculture.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>If the Minister thinks that it is a matter concerning the Minister of Agriculture then it does not make much difference to us. It is the same to us whether it comes from the brother or the sister as long as we get the money. I think my amendment is reasonable, and I hope I shall obtain the support of the Minister, because the word 1925 is maintained. I acknowledge that there must be an enquiry by the Department of Agriculture, but is it too much trouble to make an enquiry to see that the farmers get on their feet again so that they can organize export? We are glad about the splendid cold storage accommodation which is being built, but our gratitude will be greater if the Minister will support my amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#boshoff">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BOSHOFF</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment. I think that it is fair that the exporter in this case should receive compensation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sephton">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SEPHTON</person>:</from>

<p>The mover bases his plea for consideration on the losses sustained in consequence of the seamen&#x2019;s strike. I very much sympathize with the farmers who sustained losses. Hon. members opposite are very fond of saying that South African interests should come before those of overseas. But what was their attitude when the seamen&#x2019;s strike was discussed? They were silent on the question. We claimed that the strike was bound to influence this country adversely, and that we should suffer very seriously in consequence. In reply to these arguments the Minister of Defence assured the House that the farmers would lose nothing directly from the strike. Then we had the hon. member for Salt River (Mr. Snow) and the hon. member for Umbilo (Mr. Reyburn) leading processions of strikers. The only member on the Government side who took up a correct attitude on the matter was the hon. member for Jeppes (Mr. Sampson). Hon. members opposite should realize that they themselves are very largely responsible for the losses which the South African farmers sustained.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#waterston">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERSTON</person>:</from>

<p>The Labour party did not cause the seamen&#x2019;s strike.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>You encouraged it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-speaker">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Hon. members cannot go into the details of the strike.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#waterston">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERSTON</person>:</from>

<p>I want to point out that if the strike was responsible for any losses that was not the fault of the Government.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>The fault of the Labour party.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#waterston">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERSTON</person>:</from>

<p>Nor was it the fault of the Labour party. Do hon. members on the Opposition side believe that the sailors were receiving a living wage?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>When I was addressing the House the same question arose and Mr. Speaker recognized that the strike was a legitimate subject for discussion owing to the wording of the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-speaker">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I understand that Mr. Speaker ruled that hon. members may refer casually to the strike, but are not allowed to go into the details of it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#waterston">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERSTON</person>:</from>

<p>Had the strike been handled with the firm hand and mailed fist of the leader of the Opposition the losses incurred by the South African farmers would have been 100 times greater than they were, and the Union would have been plunged into a tremendous upheaval. The Government deserves the thanks of the country in that the strike was settled peaceably. If hon. members on that side of the House believe that the only way to handle a strike is to bring out the forces of the country and shoot the strikers down, let them say so. I challenge members on that side of the House to say what they would have done had they been in power.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>They would have gaoled the agitators.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#waterston">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERSTON</person>:</from>

<p>It is the policy of gaoling the agitators and suppressing these things by force which is creating Bolsheviks in the world to-day. It is entirely wrong to blame the Government for the strike, and to use this matter for party political propaganda is wrong. If the strike had been handled by the same methods as they have been handled in South Africa in the past the losses of the farmers would have been much greater. As it was the farmers came out very well. They should be thankful that the present Government was in power and handled it as they did. We were not responsible for the strike, and we do not hear a word about the capitalist shipping companies who employed these men on a miserable pittance month by month. During the war these seamen were held up as heroes, but in time of peace they are described as scoundrels and Bolsheviks by the same gentlemen who, in a week or two, when we discuss the flag, will be waving the flag.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I regret this matter is being debated in a party spirit, because I do not see how it will help the farmers. The point has been raised about responsibility for the strike. If the Opposition wanted that matter debated they should have put it down as a substantive motion. If they think the Government was responsible for creating the strike and continuing it, why did they not take the ample time available to table a motion? This question is raised in a perfectly fair form without our going into the question of the responsibility for the strike. Hon. members opposite have not gone so far as to say that the Government was responsible for the strike, <span class="col_3413-3414" refersTo="page_0367"/>but their effort to drag this in seems more in eagerness to damage the Government than eagerness to help the farmers. It is unnecessary to debate the rights and wrongs of the strike in order to adopt this motion and get sympathetic treatment for the farmers by combining to urge on the Government to agree to what is asked for in the motion. This question is not dependent on who was responsible for creating or continuing the strike. I put it to the Minister that it is an ordinary case of a contract between A and B. B undertakes to carry the fruit at a certain rate, but owing to a cataclysm, which neither party had anything to do with, the fruit was not exported. B then says that he was agreeable to accept the contract, but inasmuch as the cataclysm occurred he is going to take advantage of it to demand more for carrying that fruit. The Government undertook to carry the fruit at a set rate, but owing to the strike the fruit was not exported and the Railway Department turns round and says: &#x201C;Pay more money.&#x201D; It is an unfair position to take up. Any honourable commercial man not wishing to take advantage of the misfortune would say: &#x201C;You did your best to carry out the contract, and I am not going to charge more than the export rate,&#x201D; and surely the Railway Department will put itself in the position of a high-minded business man. The Railway Department does not suffer because they contracted to take the fruit to Cape Town at the export rate. The other man suffers very much because, had it been exported, he would have got a profit on the London market. Now you want to add to his suffering by compelling him to pay more for the export. If people had sent their fruit to Cape Town at the rate for export, and then changed their minds and sold it in Cape Town, the Minister would have been right in saying that they could not take advantage of the export rate under those circumstances. We all look upon the strike as a disaster to all concerned. I do not like strikes, but they are inevitable until you get the proper industrial machinery and a better trust between the men and the employers. I hope the Minister will realize the fruit farmer is in no sense responsible in any way, and why then should this terrible loss fall on the fruit farmer? Is it not fairer to spread the burden over the whole users of the railway? I cannot see how the Minister would be creating a precedent. It is not a precedent when it is an unusual thing that may only occur once in twenty years. I think the Minister would have the whole country behind him in saying that it is not fair to take advantage of the fruit farmers because of this strike. This motion should not be debated on party lines at all. It is a case of one section of the community being penalized instead of the penalty being spread over the whole community. Whatever is said of the individual members of the Government parties and how they showed their sympathy, and remember there was a great deal of public sympathy with the strikers, the Government itself did everything possible to bring the strike to an early termination by various efforts. If the responsibility rests on all of us, let the whole community bear the burden. Even if the motion is carried the losses of these unfortunate farmers are enormous, and by this motion you are seeing to it not to pile on further loss. That is all it means. I should like to support it, because on occasions like this men who represent urban areas can show their sympathy with the farmers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRUBEN</person>:</from>

<p>The real point of objection to the resolution was made clear by the hon. member for Pretoria (North) (Mr. Oost). The hon. member for Brakpan (Mr. Waterston) got unjustifiably warm with regard to the remarks made. He suggested that we, on this side, would have shot them down that remark is rubbish, and is stale now. What we should have done was to allow the farmers to load the ships, and we should have allowed the shipping companies to enrol temporary crews. The farmers themselves were begging to be allowed to go and load the ships, and to take them overseas. I should not have shot these men, but if I had been in the Government I should have said to the men: &#x201C;Look here, you started your voyage under a contract; it is up to you to finish it under that contract. Instead of that you allowed these snips to start from the ports, and then you left men and women and children living here for weeks on end on the ships, when every week&#x2019;s delay meant distress and comparatively heavy losses to these people.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>Who was to blame for it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRUBEN</person>:</from>

<p>The men who should have fulfilled the contract which they entered upon at the beginning of their voyage. I can support the motion as moved, but I cannot for one moment support the amendment. This amendment is merely a subterfuge to get out of the difficulty, and that is the admission we now have in this motion and speeches from the Nationalist benches, that the strike did cost the farmers money losses. It was said, when the debate took place on the strike, by members opposite and by Ministers that there was no loss to the country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>One-eighth only.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRUBEN</person>:</from>

<p>Don&#x2019;t let us split hairs. The hon. member who moved this motion has stated that there was a loss to citrus growers of £50,000 through the strike. I agree with him. That is the minimum loss through the strike. If we support the amendment, which states &#x201C;owing to circumstances beyond the control of the exporters,&#x201D; we open the door exceedingly wide. If you stick to a specific reason, and that is the reason given openly and manfully by the mover, namely, &#x201C;owing to the shipping strike,&#x201D; I say that I can support it, but if you open wide the door by saying that it was &#x201C;beyond the control of the exporters,&#x201D; you are laying the whole question open to discussion and controversy each time losses are sustained.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from><span class="col_3415-3416" refersTo="page_0368"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>You don&#x2019;t want to compensate the seven-eighths.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRUBEN</person>:</from>

<p>I am not a statistician; I am merely a plain, common-sense person. I realize that certain things have been done, that certain losses have been sustained, and that we have here an anomalous case where men forwarded their stuff at a low rate for export and, owing to the strike and the strike only, the stuff was prevented from being exported, and therefore I think it is quite reasonable to ask the railways to refund to the senders the difference in the rates. The hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander) spoke about a precedent. I agree with the hon. member that if the terms of the original motion as moved are adhered to, it will not be a precedent.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I did not support the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRUBEN</person>:</from>

<p>All right, as long as we are quite clear on that point that the amendment is of no use at all, I welcome immensely the admission at this late hour from the benches opposite that something might have been done to minimize those losses, and that they were caused by the strike, and by the strike only.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>In the first place, this is essentially, I would have thought, an agricultural matter, and yet the Minister of Agriculture is not in his place. I should have thought he would have been here to support the farmers in this matter, and see that justice is done to them. There is not a single Minister on the Treasury benches except the Minister of Railways. It certainly does one good, I must say, to hear the confession of the Minister in this matter, that enormous damage was done, and also the confession of the mover of this motion and those who have spoken in support of it, that enormous damage was done by the strike. When we brought this matter forward&#x2014; and the hon. member for Hanover Street cannot say it was not brought forward some two years ago when we had a debate on it&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>Not by a proper motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>At any rate, it was discussed. I want to point out the difference between the attitude taken up on the other side and the Minister on that occasion, and the attitude taken up by those hon. gentlemen now. Then it was said that no damage had been done, while now it is confessed that a large amount of damage had been done. They now come for, I won&#x2019;t say compensation, but some assistance in one form or another, and I think the plea which has been put forward in that regard is a very strong one. Of course, this just shows the farmers of this country what they are paying for the alliance with those people on the cross benches. Anybody who reflects and sees the trend of things will realize that this was a case where you had to pay the cost of the alliance with the cross benches. It is not the first time it has occurred that they have had to pay for the alliance on the other side. They have had to pay for it several times. They have had to pay for it on the buildings on their farms. The result was that the Minister of Justice has stepped in, and he has made an alteration in the administration of the law.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>On a point of order, is the hon. member discussing the strike instead of this motion?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>If my hon. friend does not like to hear this, I am sorry, but it is the solid truth. This was a strike of shipping in South African ports. I was here all the time, and I remember well that it was the opinion of men connected with shipping in this port that, had this strike been firmly handled, it would never have lasted anything like so long. The shipowners were not allowed to take on men to replace the strikers, nor were they allowed to prosecute men who had broken their contracts. They could not take on men to handle the ships and take them back to the European ports. They were practically prevented from taking these necessary steps, steps which our Government did not hesitate to take in Australia with their ships. The Minister of Labour came down to this port and&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Order. I do not think the hon. member can discuss the strike on this motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I am only trying to show that this strike need not have gone on anything like so long and the farmers need not have suffered in regard to their export of fruit if the situation had been properly handled. The whole motion is based on the strike. I say that the Government themselves are to blame for the extent of damage done by the strike. The Minister of Labour, when he came to Cape Town, placed obstacles in the way of the shipowners putting an end to the strike. Further, there were certain members on the cross benches who actually encouraged the strike. Take, for instance, the hon. member for Salt River (Mr. Snow).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person>:</from>

<p>He will do it again.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I have not the slightest doubt. Take the hon. member for Durban (Umbilo) (Mr. Reyburn) and the Labour party generally; they encouraged the men who were on strike. They encouraged the men to keep out and to hold out as long as they could. Now we are getting at the truth in regard to this matter. When we brought it up two years ago there was no damage being suffered. The truth has gradually forced itself out. Hon. members have to come here and confess that a large amount of damage has been done in regard to this matter. What are they getting from the Minister? Sympathy. Sympathy is a good stock-in-trade; it does not cost anything, it is cheap. But how is it going to compensate the fruit-growers? Does it pay their debts? Does it pay the cost of their labour in growing the fruit? Not a sixpence. Not one iota. It is the stock-in-trade of the <span class="col_3417-3418" refersTo="page_0369"/>Minister. He is always pouring out an ample supply. I agree with what was said by the hon. member for Cape Town (Hanover Street) (Mr. Alexander). I think the Government ought to come to the assistance of these growers. These men sent down their stuff for shipment. It was not their fault that it could not be shipped. It was the fault of the strike, which we think the Government might have ended considerably earlier than was the case. I could understand and support the Minister if he refused any remission of rates, because of bad packing, or because of the stuff being unsuitable for export. That would be justifiable, naturally, but when there is no fault on their part at all, when they sent their stuff in a bona fide manner, how can you refuse to meet them? I do not think it is possible. I will certainly support the motion of the hon. member for Marico (Mr. J. J. Pienaar). I think the growers should be met in this case.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry that the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger) has made such a speech and&#x2019; now wants to make out that we, who are in favour of this motion and admit the fairness of it&#x2014; that the people should be compensated with reference to certain rates which were paid by them on fruit that was not exported&#x2014;now admit that the Government was responsible for the shipping strike. It is surely not in the very least an admission of it. The fruit growers sent fruit for export, and a certain rate was charged. The fruit arrived, but in consequence of the strike was not exported. It was not our strike, but a strike of the British seamen. It was not a strike of South Africa, no strike of our nation. Why then do hon. members try to put the responsibility for it on to our shoulders? I cannot understand it. Our party did not say that the fruit growers had had no loss, and we will gladly assist them, but now the Railway Department comes and says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">It is not my fault that there was a strike.</block>

<p>That is correct, but it was not the fault of those producers either. Therefore, I think it would be quite fair if the Railway Department in the circumstances did not charge the additional amount of the difference in tariff. Then the loss would be a little divided. But if hon. members there represent the matter in such a way that if we vote for the motion we admit that the Government was to blame in connection with the strike, then I shall not vote for it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>I am surprised at the last speaker. When the matter of the shipping strike was before the House everyone on the opposite side stated that absolutely no damage had been caused by it to the farmers. The hon. member for Pretoria (North) (Mr. Oost), who held himself out as such an important representative of farmers, said that the farmers had suffered no damage. He comes from a constituency from which the farmers sent thousands of boxes to Durban which, as a result of the strike, came back again, and in consequence whereof the people lost thousands of pounds. Last year he knew nothing about it. To-day he comes and wants to support the motion. I am glad that the hon. members are waking up.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>Look at my amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>What is the amendment? He wants to gull the farmers by the amendment that the strike was not the cause of their loss. I still state that if it were not for the strike there would have been no loss.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>Look at the figures which I gave.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member said that the farmers only lost one-fifth to one-eighth.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>May I explain a little to the hon. member?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>I shall not give way. The hon. member had his opportunity. What he said was that the farmers had lost one-fifth, and he went further and said that they lost one-eighth.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>I did not say so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>His constituency adjoins mine, and I say that the farmers in some cases lost their entire harvest of from £700 to £800.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>To a point of order. I do not want&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member cannot rise to a point of explanation unless the hon. member gives way.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member does not want to know the truth.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>I know the facts; the oranges were sent to Durban by farmers, but got no further, and were sent back to Pretoria and put on the market there. And what did the farmers get? Not enough to pay for the packing and the freight there and back. The farmers suffered much damage, and I am glad that there is now an awakening amongst the members opposite.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#badenhorst">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BADENHORST</person>:</from>

<p>We are always awake.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member probably hoped in his heart that the strike would continue, just as the Government to a certain extent encouraged it. When we produced the facts and figures here in the House we were laughed at and told that we were producing facts which were not correct. To-day the hon. members come themselves and say that damage was suffered. I shall support the motion with all my influence, and I think that the Railway Department should repay the difference between the export rate, 8½d., and the local rate. Then the question of the establishing of a precedent was raised. What happened in the House last year. It was then decided to rebuild the Trades Hall in Benoni <span class="col_3419-3420" refersTo="page_0370"/>which was burnt down in consequence of the revolution, and the Government made £5,000 available for the purpose.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mullineux">

<from>The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MULLINEUX</person>:</from>

<p>It was malicious destruction.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>We are coming here merely for £2,000 for the farmers, because it will not be much, and now the Minister refuses because it would be laying down a precedent. Many worse precedents have already been laid down. The hon. member for Bloemfontein (North) (Mr. Barlow) also states that the farmers suffered absolutely no damage as the result of the strike. He now says the middleman suffered the loss. No, the farmers suffered it. I am sorry that the hon. mover did not go a little further and did not introduce a more general motion, and not one merely with reference to the railways. Then his attempt to assist the farmers would be more appreciated. Much damage was suffered.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>That is all I can bring up against the railways.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>That is just why I say that the motion ought to be more comprehensive.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>Then the hon. member can vote for my amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>No, because the hon. member wants to create the impression that the damage was not due to the strike, but to bad packing and handling by the farmers. That is not fair. The hon. member is acting unfairly towards his constituency if he puts the blame on the farmers there. He spoke about too much water in the oranges. Is the hon. member able to tell a citrus farmer how to lead water? The hon. member knows nothing about it. He cannot teach the farmers beyond the Magaliesberg. He made a report about the mildew of dried-up oranges. Does the hon. member not yet know that when oranges dry up they no longer go mouldy? The fact that they are mouldy shows that there is still dampness in the oranges.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#badenhorst">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BADENHORST</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. members of the Opposition now state that we said last year that the farmers had suffered no damage as a result of the strike. I say it is not true that we said so. People in my constituency suffered damage, and I said myself at meetings that damage had been suffered, and that I was very sorry, but that it was not our fault that the English seamen went on strike. Did hon. members want us to shoot the people? We did not say that no damage had been suffered.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#drummond_chaplin">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DRUMMOND CHAPLIN</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to say one word in support of this motion, because it seems to me an overwhelming case has been made out. The facts are that farmers sent down a large quantity of fruit for export, and when it arrived it could not be exported. The result was the railway applied the ordinary rule in cases of fruit which comes down and is not passed by the inspector, which cannot be shipped and is sold here. But there is a totally different state of affairs here. In this case there is no question whatever that the farmers who sent their fruit down were in any way to blame. The Government say they were not to blame for the strike. But the strike took place, and the farmers were penalized. It does seem to me extremely hard that the railways should, so to speak, add insult to injury and charge them the rate they would have to pay after condemnation of the fruit, if that had been due to bad packing and in any other way due to the negligence of the farmer. The Government has a considerable measure of responsibility. There may be differences of opinion as to what the Government should have done in connection with the strike and the manner in which they handled it, but there is no doubt that the strike was supported and encouraged by a considerable section of the Government&#x2019;s followers. The hon. member for Salt River (Mr. Snow) admitted it. He said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Of course I supported the strike, and would do so again.</block>

<p>There is not the slightest doubt he would, and so would some of my hon. friends there. [Labour members.] There is a certain measure of responsibility on the Government which has control over its followers, and that constitutes an additional reason why the claims of the fruit growers, who suffered through no fault of their own, should be met. I agree with the hon. member for Albany (Mr. Struben) that the motion in its original form is better than the amendment, and I hope the motion will be carried.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>We cannot but deplore the lines which this debate has followed this afternoon. Everybody certainly feels very much for the unfortunate farmers who suffered damage in consequence of the shipping strike of 1925, but I think the farmers themselves will appreciate that the form of the debate is not intended to assist them, and that there is no intention of supporting the introducer of the motion. It is as clear as daylight that the support which the hon. mover is getting has no other object than the making of political capital out of the motion and of doing harm to the Government. When the hon. member for South Peninsula (Sir Drummond Chaplin) and the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger) get up to defend the interests of the farmers then the latter appreciate that they are not their real supporters. We are sorry for the damage that has been suffered and would like to assist the farmers. Take the motion as it stands, however, in which the Minister of Railways and his department are asked to give their assistance and to refund the difference between the export and the local rates, then we see that the railway administration are governing the railways according to certain laws and regulations. If fruit is taken out of cold storage and is not shipped then, ipso facto, the higher rate is charged. If the payment of the higher rate is required by the regulations what argument are we to use to compel the railway administration to <span class="col_3421-3422" refersTo="page_0371"/>refund the difference. There is not a regulation which justifies the Minister in doing it, and he can only do it on the basis of a gratuity to the farmers who have suffered loss. Although in ordinary circumstances when the Treasury can contribute I would adopt a different attitude, I must, seeing that we recently had a debate in which the Opposition complained against the Minister and his department because casually there was a deficit in the railway accounts for the last financial year, take up a different attitude to-day. The Opposition also repeatedly quoted from the report of the Auditor-General, and tried to prove that the Government was guilty of an offence. Now I ask the Opposition a simple question. If the Minister should adopt the proposal and the Auditor-General should next year rightly mention that such a step had been taken, who will then be the first to use the argument that something wrong had been done if there were again a deficit? We all deplore the losses suffered, and I accept that those who oppose the motion feel just as deeply about it as hon. members who support it. When, however, we remember the facts it cannot be acceded to unless the grant is regarded as a gratuity. If that is done then the Minister and we who support it are liable to be condemned by the Auditor-General. In the circumstances I think that the Minister&#x2019;s attitude is quite right. As one who has the honour of representing farmers I feel that it is especially unfair to make an attack on the Government with regard to an accident for which it was not responsible. If we go on the principle that the State should suffer the loss&#x2014;which I do not want to admit &#x2014;then I cannot agree with it that the railway administration should suffer the loss. Although I regret the loss I shall support the Minister in the attitude he has adopted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I shall support the motion, and I must say that I cannot subscribe to the argument of the last speaker. He states that the Auditor-General will disapprove of such an expenditure, but the hon. member surely knows that that cannot be done after the passing of a resolution by Parliament. If the hon. member for Marico (Mr. J. J. Pienaar) was wrong in asking the Minister for repayment and if the request should have been made to the Minister of Agriculture we are sorry that the Minister of Agriculture is not here to say that he is prepared to make the payment. The Minister must say that he knows what the position is and how much loss was suffered, and he must acknowledge that the growers sent their fruit in good condition to the ports. If it was not suitable for export then it never would have been put into cold storage. After their fruit was sent to the ports there was the shipping strike over which they had no control and that caused the trouble. I am prepared to support the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>I fear that hon. members on this side of the House are taking the members of the Opposition too seriously. I must assume that the members of the Opposition are worried owing to their chances of political progress being very small, because otherwise they would not have started such a tremendous agitation with regard to the flag. We must not take it amiss in them for touching on the question of fruit as well. I just want to tell the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) that when it is a question of sympathy for the farmers there is no need for me to take a back place to him. Why are the Opposition suddenly concerned about the farmers now that an hon. member from this side has tabled a motion? Why did they not introduce such a motion last year or this year? Are we not justified in saying that their speeches are nothing but hypocrisy?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>They are not hypocritical.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>It is not only I that see through it but also every farmer outside. They possibly see through it even better than I do. What caused the trouble?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sephton">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SEPHTON</person>:</from>

<p>The strike.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>Did the Government strike?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sephton">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SEPHTON</person>:</from>

<p>How did you vote?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>The matter was never before Parliament or before the public outside. We had no say in the matter. What is worse it was not a South African strike because the strikers were all people from overseas. Hon. members opposite have always boasted that they represented the feelings of overseas people and we have never yet done so. If there was a party which could do anything then it was the hon. members opposite. If they have no more influence on the overseas people then in Heaven&#x2019;s name I wonder where they have any influence.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>In Natal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>No. In Natal their influence is much less than they think. They know that and therefore they are making such a fuss about the flag. The farmers used formerly also to suffer loss. When there were plenty of mealies in the country the late Government prohibited export and permitted import from Rhodesia and the loss then was much greater than the loss which the farmers have suffered now. Why did the virtuous hon. member for Worcester not raise his voice then and say that the farmers should be compensated.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I am not a hypocrite.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>I want to assure the Opposition that they will not catch a single vote by their attitude.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member who has just sat down attacked us.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>*An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>It was not an attack.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>He asks why we did not introduce a motion like that of the hon. member for Marico (Mr. J. J. Pienaar). During the last session we tried to say something for the farmers in connection with the loss suffered by <span class="col_3423-3424" refersTo="page_0372"/>them. Did we then receive any sympathy from hon. members opposite? It at once appeared that such a motion as this one would be immediately outvoted by members on the Government benches who represent farmers, if it came from this side of the House. The hon. member for Frankfort (Mr. Wessels) spoke about the people from overseas being our first concern.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>I did not say that hon. members opposite looked after the interests of overseas people because I can no longer say so. I only said that hon. members opposite always state that they interpret the feelings of people overseas. These are the people who struck and therefore it would have been more fitting if they had influenced the strikers not to strike. Those are two separate matters.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member wanted to insinuate that we had the opportunity of protecting overseas people and that we did not do So.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>No, that is not the case either.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>I used to think that hon. members of the Nationalist party always said &#x201C;South Africa first.&#x201D; At the time of the strike, however, it appeared that the interests of South Africa were neglected on account of the interests of the international elements in the world. The latter were put first. Hon. members of the Labour party shouted and assisted the strikers, and the Prime Minister and the Minister of Justice turned clean round and said just the opposite to the attitude taken up by them at the commencement of the strike. The Labour party decided the policy of the Government. I think that the hon. member for Marico is quite right, but when we ventured last session to speak about the loss by farmers the hon. members for Boshof (Mr. van Rensburg), Riversdale (Mr. Badenhorst) and Waterberg (Mr. van Niekerk) absolutely denied that the farmers had suffered loss. The attitude then taken up by us is now justified by hon. members opposite. Not only are the farmers suffering damage through the Labour party with regard to administration, but in this case also the farmers suffered loss. The motion of the hon. member clearly means that loss was suffered. Not only did the citrus farmers suffer loss but also the wool farmers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>The traders also.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>The wool market was in such an uncertain state owing to the strike that farmers in my constituency got a few pennies per lb. less than they would have received if they had sold later on. The position caused by the strike made them take the lower price rather than wait until, the strike was over.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#badenhorst">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BADENHORST</person>:</from>

<p>The wool market sagged again. Why did that happen?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member also represents wool farmers and why does he not admit that they suffered damage? If the Government had acted firmly the difficulty would not have arisen.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">M. L. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>What ought the Government to have done.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>The Government could, e.g., have acted as the Australian Government did. The Prime Minister of Australia did not only talk about the interests of his country in platitudes on the platform, but he acted in a statesmanlike way.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#swart">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SWART</person>:</from>

<p>Did not the shipping strike keep on longer in Australia?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>An Act was passed in Australia to deport the strikers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">M. L. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>The strike lasted longer there than in South Africa.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>When New South Wales refused to carry out the Act of the Federal Government the Prime Minister said that it was a challenge to the true interests of Australia and he appealed to the country. The farmers gave him a majority as large as any Prime Minister had ever had. It was the duty of our Government to take action at the time, and to carry out the slogan of &#x201C;South Africa first.&#x201D; Now we see that the policy of socialism is No. 1 and South Africa last. If the Government had exhibited courage at the time then the farmers would not have felt so strongly about the damage that they suffered. The interests of the farmers and of the country were neglected at that time. The hon. member for Frankfort made a remark about business people. It is still in doubt how much damage they suffered. It is a thing which cannot be calculated.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>Include them in the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>The traders and the farmers suffered much damage and the economic life of the country was injuriously affected. It is late now to hear that the farmers suffered loss. When it was time to admit it then hon. members opposite did not do so. When we tried to protect the interests of the farmers we were shouted down. Where were the so-called farmers&#x2019; representatives last year? The hon. member for Frankfort belongs to one of the old South Africa families, but to-day he is hanging to the coat-tails of hon. members on the cross benches. It is with their assistance that he hopes his party will remain another six years in office, but one thing is certain, viz., that the shipping strike is one of the things which opened the eyes of the people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member must not go too much into the strike.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>Hon. members of the Labour party then said that the farmers&#x2019; interests counted for nothing and gave the preference to the interests of international socialism.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">M. L. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>Moscow!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>Is that not the Moscow spirit? They want to deny it, but whence do <span class="col_3425-3426" refersTo="page_0373"/>hon. members on the cross benches get their inspiration?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_members">

<from>*<person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBERS</person>:</from>

<p>Moscow, Moscow.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>It is no good being frivolous about it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#badenhorst">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BADENHORST</person>:</from>

<p>What about the calves?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>The eyes of people on the countryside are being opened to-day. Although the hon. member for Marico has introduced the motion he gets no sympathy from farmers&#x2019; representatives opposite. No, some of them have already got up and said that they will vote against the motion. I shall vote for it even it does no good, even if only as a protest against the action of the Government during the strike.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cilliers">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>One is really surprised at the things which are said here by people who are entrusted with the advancement of the country&#x2019;s interests. We can employ our time more usefully than by talking of the strike. I think I have just as much interest in farming as anyone else. I have always lived from farming and will do anything I can for the farmers&#x2019; interests. We, however, often have difficult circumstances, and in this case we must be careful of the precedent we shall be laying down. It has rightly been said that there was a case where mealies were sent here about which trouble arose. I had myself to do with a case last year. People from Harrismith sent oats here. They did it with the best intentions, and when the oats came into contact with the sea air here it was found that they were not suitable for export, and they had to be sold here. They then wrote to me to see what I could do. If we are going to create such a precedent we should constantly be having similar cases. The hon. members opposite are now making such a fuss about the interests of the farmers; they do not love the farmers so much but they are fond of the possibility of making party capital, and therefore the matter of the strike is brought up from the past which we are so pleased is passed and a great noise is made. Let us rather try to do the work there is to do than to talk all this nonsense. We should be creating a wrong precedent by this motion, and I cannot vote for it as it stands.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>I have intervened in this debate because I believe that for two reasons the Government would be wrong in accepting this resolution. I want to say at the outset that I am as much in sympathy with the farmers as any hon. member on the Opposition side&#x2014;perhaps more&#x2014;but I am not actuated in discussing this matter by the point of view that appears to actuate the South African party, namely, to make party capital, as has been definitely shown by the arguments they have brought forward. The hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige) quite obviously got up to speak in order to introduce the staple argument about the influence of Moscow. I do not know whether that was a reflection on the hon. member for Zoutpansberg (Mr. Pirow) and that it is suggested that he is influencing the Labour party, because as far as I recollect, and as far as I am aware, the hon. member for Zoutpansberg is the only member of this House who has ever been to Moscow. My regret in connection with many of the actions of the present Government is, not that we are influencing the Government too much, but that we are influencing the Government too little, of which we had evidence the other day in the attitude of the Minister of Finance towards us. As far as the Government in connection with this matter is concerned, assuming that the Government was responsible for the strike, is it suggested that it should then be liable in compensation? If that be the suggestion, then one is entitled to ask the S.A.P. members on this side, was that the policy which they pursued when they were responsible for strikes? We had quite a number of strikes in South Africa before the present Government came into office, and I do not recollect that when people suffered as a result of a strike they were compensated for their losses. The only occasion when they were compensated, I believe, was in 1913, when they did not compensate the people who suffered, but a number of scabs who were got out to work for the mines. They cannot point to a single instance where during the various strikes which came into being during the existence of the S.A.P. Government compensation was given to the people who suffered losses as a result of those strikes. We have not merely had a shipping strike; we have had railway strikes during the regime of the South African party Government, when the farming community and the commercial community must have suffered tremendous loss, and on no occasion did the South African party attempt or suggest that compensation should be given. That being the case I was very surprised at the attitude taken up by the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger). I know as a general rule he is sufficiently independent not even to follow his party, and I am surprised that the hon. member, who is a stringent economist, should have taken up the attitude he did on this occasion unless he thought it as well for party purposes to support his party.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>You are wrong there.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>Even if the Government had been responsible for the strike, they would not be liable to pay compensation, following the precedent of the South African party. But we are discussing something for which the Government was not responsible. It was not a strike engineered in South Africa; it originated and resulted from conditions overseas as the result of a contract with which the men were dissatisfied. There were only three courses for the Government under these circumstances. They could either have adopted the methods of the South African party&#x2014;and some were advocated this afternoon&#x2014;and said to the farmers&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">You come along in your hundreds and thousands and start loading these ships.</block>

<p><span class="col_3427-3428" refersTo="page_0374"/>They could have said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">If you want to scab, come along, and we will allow you to load the ships.</block>

<p>Supposing the Government had adopted this attitude, it is obvious that the only result would have been bloodshed in South Africa and probably intervention from overseas, because we should have been imposing our forces against men who were not citizens of South Africa. They could have adopted an attitude of helping the strikers, a course which we would have favoured, but the Government did not adopt. The Government adopted the third course, an attitude of neutrality, helpful not towards the seamen, but towards the shipping companies. A breach of a contract entered into overseas was treated criminally in South Africa, The Government therefore took up an attitude not of absolute neutrality, but of friendly neutrality towards the shipowners. They are therefore not responsible either one way or the other for the strike. The people who are responsible for bringing the strike to a settlement much earlier than might otherwise have been the case are members of the South African Labour party, and I personally had some share in settling that strike. That being the case, I submit that the Government was not responsible for the strike, and that to pay compensation would be creating a precedent which I think would be most serious in regard to the finance of this country. Strikes, whether you like them or not, are bound to continue as long as you have conditions under which one handful of people are able to impose conditions of labour on another section. The ultimate resort of men who are dissatisfied is to strike. If you accept as a precedent that whenever a strike takes place the Government shall be responsible for loss occasioned by that strike, then you will have a financial state of affairs which I am sure the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) would be the first one to shudder at. Not only is the Government right in not accepting responsibility, but the South African party, if it really carried out its ideas of finance, would be the first to support the Minister in his attitude. The only excuse I can find for the attitude of the South African party is not because they love the farmers, not because they are in favour of a policy of compensation, but because they want to oppose the Government, and they think this is an opportunity to create a certain amount of unpleasantness between the two sections of the Pact by trying to make out that the results which arose from the strike were due to the terrible influence of the South African Labour party. That is grossly incorrect, because the influence of the Labour party is infinitesimal on the present Government of South Africa.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#steytler">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STEYTLER</person>:</from>

<p>Hon. members opposite, especially the hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige), are now speaking as representatives of the countryside, and the hon. member says that the eyes of people on the countryside are now being opened. Yes, they are, and what the people notice is that the members of the Opposition are catching at every straw to make party capital, and even use farming interests for the purpose. I ask what will become of the interests of the farmers if hon. members opposite make a party matter of such an innocent motion as this?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>Innocent?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#steytler">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STEYTLER</person>:</from>

<p>I think the proposal is quite fair and innocent, and I should like to support it, but now hon. members opposite say that we must pass the motion not because we are sorry for the farmers, but to give them an opportunity of reproaching the Government with being responsible for the strike. Are hon. members there really serving the interests of the countryside by this action? I feel sorry when I think of the improbability of the countryside being again handed over to the mercy of the Opposition. I should like to ask hon. members opposite&#x2014;I do not speak of the big business men, like the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger)&#x2014;but of hon. members who are farmers, and who certainly feel that to further the farmers&#x2019; interests it is wrong to make a party matter of it, why they are every time carried away by party feeling?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>We feel sorry for you over there.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#steytler">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STEYTLER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member is sorry that we are collaborating with the Labour party. That is quite another matter. We have here to do with a motion on behalf of the farmers, people who work hard&#x2014;we know what the position of the fruit-growers is. They sent their fruit to Cape Town, and lost all their labour, but hon. members opposite have practically killed this motion by making a party matter of it. They know quite well that they are killing it and sacrificing it for the sake of telling the world that we were at fault in connection with the strike. We debated the strike last year, and therefore I shall not go into it again to-day, but the Opposition is only out for party benefit. The countryside, however, is not so green as hon. members there seem to think. The countryside knows the position, and reads &#x201C;Die Burger&#x201D; very regularly, and &#x201C;Die Burger&#x201D; gives the facts. The countryside does not hold the Government responsible for the strike. We had nothing to do with it. This is a motion which I should like to support, and although possibly I agree with the Minister of Railways and Harbours that it should not be directed to the Department of Railways, I should like to support the principle that the people should be compensated, but after all the contradictions on the other side of the House, and because they say there that if the motion is passed it will imply that the Government admits liability for the strike, I shall vote against it. I think the countryside will understand the matter quite-well.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>You are making a party matter of it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#steytler">

<from><span class="col_3429-3430" refersTo="page_0375"/>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STEYTLER</person>:</from>

<p>I am compelled to by what hon. members opposite say. I am quite sympathetic with the farmers. Hon. members opposite, however, are not.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>A wonderful argument.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#steytler">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STEYTLER</person>:</from>

<p>I can follow the argument quite well, and I do not mind what the hon. member says. The countryside will be able to form a good judgment, and I am certain that the hon. member knows little of the countryside, and that it will pay more attention to me than to the hon. member. The countryside knows that its interests are safe with this Government, because there are so many farmers sitting here, and this Government therefore has to look after the interests of the countryside.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. S. GROBLER</person>:</from>

<p>I am astonished at the attitude of hon. members opposite in this matter. They always reproach us for not representing the farmers, but I should like to ask them how many practical farmers are sitting on this side of the House?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>They are much thinned out.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. S. GROBLER</person>:</from>

<p>When we want to speak about farmers&#x2019; matters, then we are accused that we want to make political capital out of it, and I cannot allow that to pass unnoticed. If we remain silent about farming interests, then the farmers will have little chance of being represented in the House. There is no logic in the speeches of hon. members opposite about this motion. Was not the motion intended to help the farmers?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#steytler">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STEYTLER</person>:</from>

<p>What is the intention of the Opposition in supporting the motion?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. S. GROBLER</person>:</from>

<p>We want to assist the farmers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#steytler">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STEYTLER</person>:</from>

<p>Your leaders did not say so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. S. GROBLER</person>:</from>

<p>I say so. It is not only the fruit farmers who have suffered loss, but also the mealie farmers. Contracts were entered into overseas which could not be carried out, owing to the strike. I do not claim that they should be paid out, but I support the motion that the fruit farmers should be assisted. It is quite illogical to say that we are not speaking in the interests of the farmers. As a farmer you cannot help your blood boiling when you hear the remarks of hon. members opposite. They were afraid to take action against the strike, and now the farmers have to suffer through it. I think these people should be given a chance. It is unfair for hon. members opposite to make the speeches they do. There are practical farmers sitting here who take more interest in farming than hon. members opposite.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>Repetition of an untruth does not convert it into a truth.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#allen">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALLEN</person>:</from>

<p>Apropos the remarks of the hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge) anent the methods of the South African party in supporting his motion, in order to make a party matter of it, it is perfectly legitimate, and is only to be expected. It is more than delightful to find the staunchest and sternest opponents of socialism advocating a socialistic method of getting over this difficulty. To find the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger), that sturdy advocate of individualism, urging the Government to an obviously socialistic expedient is Gilbertian. He wants the Minister to mulct the Railway Administration and the taxpayers generally to compensate shippers on the railways for losses for which the railways are in no sense responsible.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>It is a matter of charging lower rates, not compensating.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#allen">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALLEN</person>:</from>

<p>It is indirect compensation for loss on an ordinary trade risk&#x2014;a surrender of revenue, legally due, from one party to a contract. I think there is only one thing to be considered, and that is what the Government contracted to do when it took this freightage. It contracted to take certain goods to the port of shipment for export purposes. I fail to see why the Government should be specially selected to bear the whole brunt of this risk without sharing profit where such accrues. It is a case of &#x201C;heads I win tails you lose,&#x201D; and the Government must always lose. If the Government had in any way failed to undertake and carry out what they contracted to do for the shippers, Parliament would be bound to meet them, but because the goods were consumed in the country, through no fault of the Government, the shipper, who, naturally, took the ordinary trade risk, was unfortunate that he lost by it. Hon. members on the cross-benches have as much sympathy with the farmer as anyone else, but the farmer or other producer cannot live on sympathy. I would suggest that the shipping companies, which profited by the circumstances of that strike by a very substantial lowering of costs, through&#x2019; a cutting of wages, might extend to the shippers a substantial refund by way of a rebate on rates for, say, this year and next.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>They lost money, as the ships were not running.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#allen">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALLEN</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, and that loss is a good investment. When the fruit was disposed of in the local market one might have expected that, under the circumstances, the cold storage company, which monopolizes the profit in storage of perishables, would have placed their stores at the disposal of the fruit growers gratis, and shared the loss with the Government and the shipping lines. That would have been a very good business proposition. Had the South African party advocates of socialistic principles (tempered with competitive trade proclivities) influenced the cold storage companies to do this, and also made representations to the shipping companies to meet the fruit exporters, we would have believed in their sincerity. I would like to revert to the position touched upon by the hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge). While the traders and farmers have a preponderating voice in the conduct of <span class="col_3431-3432" refersTo="page_0376"/>the country&#x2019;s affairs, there is another section which, whilst it has not such political weight, yet is indispensable&#x2014;the organized workers. Had the Union Government adopted coercive measures during the seamen&#x2019;s strike, there is not the slightest doubt but that the organized workers would have taken measures to support the strikers. The sympathy of the wage-earning element was with these men, and the sympathy of everybody should have been with them, because only a few years previously we could not speak highly enough of them for the risk they ran in carrying out their important duties during the great war. Our friends opposite could not laud too highly the heroes of the Merchant Service. The workers of South Africa would not have stood aside and seen British seamen coerced. The instinct of the mass of the people is generally right.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>The mass in the seamen&#x2019;s union were against it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#allen">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALLEN</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, we know. We have had bitter experience in South Africa of Crawfordism in the industrial movement!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think the hon. member should go so deeply into the merits of the shipping strike.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#allen">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALLEN</person>:</from>

<p>Had the hon. members opposite endeavoured to secure the co-operation of all sides vitally concerned in the conveyance of fruit, and which share in the profits of that trade, rather than to use this motion to castigate the Government with, then we would have been more impressed with the sincerity of the Opposition.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person>:</from>

<p>I understand that my name has been mentioned once or twice this afternoon, and that an attack has been made on me for the part I took in the seamen&#x2019;s strike. I have nothing to regret for anything I did in that direction. I believe the men were right, because the strike was their only way of making a protest against the proposal to reduce wages below the subsistence level. The strike broke out here without any warning, and for any hon. member to suggest that men like myself had anything to do with fomenting the strike is absolutely wrong. It was not a South African strike, but a world-wide one, and as an old trade unionist I made it my business to do what I could for the men. I want to give the lie direct to statements that I addressed meetings of the strikers or led them in procession. All I did was to help and advise the men to the best of my ability. I discovered seven or eight hundred British seamen, who by the way, were good enough to win the war for us whilst well-fed people stayed at home, walking the streets one night, and I went to the Castle and secured the use of the drill hall so that at least they could have shelter for the night. That was not taking part in the strike, but doing something for my fellow-workers, and something that I always would do under similar circumstances. I also assisted in arrangements being made for the men to be accommodated at the Wynberg Camp, as it was essential, in my opinion, that they should not be allowed to wander around the streets of this city. They had their own Strike Committee, and certainly preferred to run their own business in their own way. Their conduct from first to last was exemplary, and there was no disorder.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I think the hon. member is rather far off the subject of the debate. He is entitled to make an explanation, but must not discuss the strike in detail.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person>:</from>

<p>I do not propose to do so. I simply want to deny that I took an active part in the strike, but I think the men were absolutely right in protesting as they did. I cannot understand how members of the Labour party can be charged with instigating the strike. The hon. member for Troyeville has also been mentioned in this connection. There are members who would never strike a match for any cause whatever, but these men were British seamen and had pluck enough to strike. I received a telegram from the hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge)&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think that has anything to do with the debate.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person>:</from>

<p>It is difficult to reply to an attack made on me and on my party without referring to certain actions that were taken at that time, and I want to prove that these statements are absolutely untrue, and I think I am justified&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member may reply to any accusation made in respect of himself.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person>:</from>

<p>I received a telegram on October 10th, 1925, which I want to read, from the hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge) to prove he was trying his best to settle the dispute.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#marwick">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MARWICK</person>:</from>

<p>What became of the strike funds?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person>:</from>

<p>From Kentridge, Durban, to Snow, Cape Town.&#x2014;Have arranged settlement seamen&#x2019;s strike here. See Freestone for particulars. Ballot resulted: For resuming work, 311; against. 230. Meeting decided abide majority vote. Strike will now be declared off Durban and strongly recommend similar action Cape Town. Use your efforts this direction.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#marwick">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MARWICK</person>:</from>

<p>What became of the strike funds?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person>:</from>

<p>That telegram goes to prove that those of us who were interested in the strike were doing our best to bring it to a conclusion. I have a letter to the effect that a certain Commander Struben was trying to get members of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve. South Africa, to scab on the seamen, and that he was reprimanded by the Admiralty for so doing. I believe that the hon. member for Albany knows this gentleman.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#marwick">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MARWICK</person>:</from>

<p>What became of the strike funds?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from><span class="col_3433-3434" refersTo="page_0377"/>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member must not be led astray by the hon. member for Illovo.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person>:</from>

<p>As far as I am concerned, we did all we could to assist these men, and every step was taken to keep them quiet, and if they had not been housed properly there would have been serious disorders. They were trained soldiers and sailors and knew their job, and at one time these seamen were seriously considering making a mass attack at the docks on account of something that had taken place there. With regard to the motion of my hon. friend, in my opinion, he has not made out a good case why sums of money should be taken from the railway revenue to compensate for certain losses, a large portion of which were not due to the strike at all. I went down to the docks at the time the &#x201C;Roman Star&#x201D; was being loaded, and I found a mass of fruit was condemned by Mr. Bulmer, not because of the strike, but because it was of rotten quality, and it was not in the interests of South Africa to export such fruit from this country. I make that statement knowing what I say is correct Hundreds of packages had to be packed and repacked four or five times before they could be exported. Therefore, I say that it would be most unfair for the Railway Administration to compensate the citrus farmers through causes that the Administration had no control over, and was not in any way responsible for.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">M. L. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the debate be adjourned.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#vermooten">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VERMOOTEN</person></from>

<p>seconded the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>Before putting that motion I would appeal to my hon. friend. The motion moved by my friend opposite is of such a serious character that if it is not decided to-night, there will be no opportunity of getting it before Parliament again. Under the circumstances, I appeal to my hon. friend to realize my hon. friend is earnestly desirous of seeing some assistance is given to these people and, irrespective of party, there are a large number of members anxious to see that assistance given. I appeal to my friend not to be an obstructionist, and to withdraw his motion for the adjournment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#malan">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">M. L. MALAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member appeals to me to withdraw my motion for adjournment. If it were not for the attitude of the Opposition the motion would long since have been voted upon.</p>

</speech>

<p>Motion for the adjournment of the debate put, and the House divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;58.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Hertzog, J. B. M.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Madeley, W. B.</p>

<p>Malan, C. W.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pirow, O.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. v. W.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen. H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston. R. B.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Mullineux, J.; Vermooten, 0. S.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;44.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Brown, D. M.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Chaplin, F. D. P.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Miller, A. M.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Oppenheimer, E.</p>

<p>Payn, A. 0. B.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: De Jager, A. L.; Robinson, C. P.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly agreed to; debate to be resumed to-morrow.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1927-05-10T18:07:00">6.7 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

