---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol10 - WEDNESDAY 8 FEBRUARY 1928'
layout: debate
year: 1928
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>WEDNESDAY, 8th FEBRUARY, 1928.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1928-02-08T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#liquor_bill">

<heading>LIQUOR BILL.</heading>

<p>First Order read: House to resume in Committee on Liquor Bill.</p>

<p>House in Committee:</p>

<p>[Progress reported on 6th February on Clause 13, to which amendments had been moved.]</p>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>I have an amendment&#x2014;to substitute 1 for 2 in line 4</p>

<p>and I want to move as a consequential amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">in lines 5 and 6 to omit &#x201C;urban local authorities&#x201D; and substitute &#x201C;municipalities&#x201D; and in line 10 to omit &#x201C;members thereof&#x201D; and substitute &#x201C;a member of a council of such a municipality, one of whom of the district comprises the area or portion of an area of one or more divisional councils, shall be a member of such a council.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The amendment I am moving is what the Bill originally proposed. In other words I am challenging the proposal of the select committee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to support the amendment. I do not know whether the Minister has explained why he has eliminated &#x201C;divisional councils&#x201D; altogether. Under the law as it stands three members of the divisional council sit on the board and also of a municipality. As the law is now amended he has eliminated &#x201C;divisional councils&#x201D; altogether. It seems to me, as far as the Cape Province is concerned, a very unwise proceeding. The divisional councils have for generations functioned on the licensing board, and unless the Minister has already explained, I hope he will give us an explanation. I would like to move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit paragraph (b) of sub-section (2) and to substitute the following new paragraph:</block>

<ol>

<li>(b) Four other members to be appointed by the Governor-General one of whom shall, if there be within the district one or more urban local authorities, be a member of such authority, and one of whom if the district comprises the area or portion of an area of one or more divisional councils, shall be a member of such council.</li>

</ol>

<p>That will then allocate one member of the board to a divisional council where there is one and one to a municipality. I am moving this amendment for the sake of greater clarity.</p>

<p>I cannot understand why the divisional councils have been eliminated, and I hope the Minister will give us an explanation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#william_macintosh">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILLIAM MACINTOSH</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to point out that in the area the hon. member represents there are two municipalities. Which one would have the privilege?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I see the difficulty but I should think in a case like that there is always one dominating municipality and the Governor-General would have to make a selection. In the case mentioned by my hon. colleague there is a small municipality and a very much larger one. Why should the small municipality have a member and the divisional council, which is a far more important body, be excluded altogether? It all goes to show that this clause has not been very thoughtfully conceived. The original Bill did make provision for divisional councils to be represented. The original read&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Four other members to be appointed by the Governor-General, one of whom shall, if there be a municipality, be a member of the municipality, and one of whom, if there be a divisional council, shall be a member of the divisional council.</block>

<p>I hope the Minister will tell us what induced him to change his mind. I admit the instance quoted by the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (South) (Sir William Macintosh) complicates the matter still more, but it shows there is room for overhauling the clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Your proposal is a minimum? It could easily be arranged by appointing someone from another municipality.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>That is so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>I am willing to withdraw my amendment in favour of that of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz). I wish to make it clear that we only want the Cape system, which has always worked well, to be followed. We cannot allow every municipality to be represented. In my constituency, Piquetberg, there are three municipalities, and if each were to be represented it would mean that three members of municipalities would have to be appointed in my division.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I want to point out that under the present system divisional councils have no less than three members on the licensing court, while under the proposed Bill their <span class="col_799-800" refersTo="page_0466"/>representation is entirely deleted, and yet municipalities obtain full representation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I am very glad that the hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal) and the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) see that local bodies must have representation on the licensing boards. I hope that that standpoint will be generally adopted. The number, however, must not be restricted to two, because in my constituency, Winburg, there are four municipalities, and to which one are we to give a representative? As for the divisional councils, there can be no objection to their being represented where they exist. If there are more municipalities in the constituency, the number of members of the licensing board can be increased so that each municipality is represented. I think, however, that municipalities should themselves appoint their representatives, and not the Minister. If we allow the munipalities to be represented, we should also have enough confidence in them to allow them to select their own representatives. If hon. members therefore want to add that divisional councils should be represented, I will support it. Divisional councils at present only exist in the Cape Province, but possibly we may have them later in the Free State. It is necessary for us to make the number of members of a licensing board elastic. Why should we not increase the number? If the Cape members wish it, then we can amend it without difficulty, but I hope my proposal will be adopted.</p>

<p>With leave of committee, amendment proposed by Mr. de Waal withdrawn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sephton">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SEPHTON</person>:</from>

<p>I am quite sure the amendment of the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) deserves the attention of the committee. I am a strong supporter of members being appointed by local authorities. Magistrates are apt to be biassed in one direction or another. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit paragraph (b) of sub-section (2) and to substitute the following new paragraphs:</block>

<ol>

<li>(b) four members to be appointed by the Governor-General, if there be within the district no local authority; or</li>

<li>(c) two members to be appointed by the Governor-General, if there be within the district only one local authority and two members to be appointed by such local authority; or</li>

<li>(d) two members to be appointed by the Governor-General, if there be within the district more than one local authority and as many additional members as there are local authorities, each of which shall appoint one member.</li>

</ol>

<p>To make it read properly it will be necessary to move a further amendment at a later stage, and then to define &#x201C;local authority.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>It is defined in the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sephton">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SEPHTON</person>:</from>

<p>It does not include divisional councils. I propose that &#x201C;local authority&#x201D; shall mean any urban local authority and include any divisional council. This meets the case entirely, and I hope the hon. member for Winburg will accept this.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. S. F. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>The Bill here lays down the qualifications for members of the licensing board. Will local bodies not come under it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member can speak about that later.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rider">

<from>&#x2020;The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">RIDER</person>:</from>

<p>I want to draw attention to the great power placed in the hands nominally of the Governor-General, but really of the local magistrates. In the Cape Province there has been free election of members of the licensing courts by the divisional and municipal councils. Why take away this right, inherent to us as a people, of appointing through the local bodies members to serve on the licensing board. Further, in paragraph (b) there seems to be some vagueness in relation to the existence of divisional councils. They are not urban councils, but all the same they ought to have a measure of control over licensed premises within their area.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. M. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I only wish to speak in connection with the amendment of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz). He was not in the House when I moved my amendment. It is practically the same and possibly he may be prepared to withdraw his amendment in favour of mine, which reads. [Amendment read.] The Minister said why he would not accept it, but I think that the divisional councils are such important bodies that they must not be excluded from the licensing courts. It is not right to exclude the countryside, and to give the towns representation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>There seem to be half-a-dozen amendments on this clause, and I have to propose a further one which I think will assist members very much in coming to a conclusion. It will be a great mistake to allow a municipal election to be affected by the question of liquor selling. Politics have been introduced into municipal affairs, and it is highly undesirable that they should be complicated still further by the intrusion of licensing problems. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">in line 16, after &#x201C;general&#x201D; to delete all words to the end of sub-section (b).</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>That has already been moved by the hon. member for Barkly (Mr. W. B. de Villiers).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I am very glad to hear it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The reason why the commission, in the elegant language of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth &#x201C;messed about&#x201D; with this clause&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member had better find another word.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I will withdraw the word. The reason why we altered this clause for the <span class="col_801-802" refersTo="page_0467"/>better was because we had to consider the representation of divisional councils. Under the Bill no new licences will be granted for the rural areas, and that being so, there does not appear to be any necessity for the representation of divisional councils on licensing boards. After hearing the arguments I have come to the conclusion that the commission did not change the clause sufficiently, and for that reason I will support the amendment of the hon. member for Barkly.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. A. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the further consideration of the clause stand over.</block>

<p>I am surprised at the remarks of the hon. member for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz) that divisional councils have nothing to do with the licensing courts, because no new licensed premises will be granted on the countryside. The hon. member surely does not suggest that the people living on the countryside never come to the towns. I can assure him that the farmers are greatly interested in the town; they go to it, and are much interested in the way in which liquor is obtainable there. It is of great importance for the farm workers, who go to the town with the wagons, to return home sober, and not drunk. The hon. member for North-East Rand is a townsman, and knows nothing about the countryside. That is why the clause is so confused that we cannot pass it to-day. It seems to me that the Minister is not disinclined to accept what we regard as a fair request, namely that local bodies shall have something to say in connection with the constitution of licensing boards, but with all the amendments now proposed I fear the House will not know how to vote. Will the Minister, if he is in favour of it, not rather allow the clause to stand over for a proper amendment to be drafted to meet our needs? I think that will make the matter easier.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Does the hon. member move that the clause stand over?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. A. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I suggest that the Minister should move that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I just want to say that, in my opinion, any proposal about the constitution of licensing boards, whether it comes from the extremists in the Transvaal, or the Cape Province, practically amounts to the same thing. I also think that the view of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) is compromising, so that one part of the country shall be allowed to have the licensing court appointed by the Governor-General, and the other part shall be allowed to elect the members themselves. I think the element of election ought not to come in here, especially as liquor legislation comes under the Union and is not the business of the provinces. I think that it would be a little illogical for local bodies to elect members, while the central Government administers the law. If the election were left to the local bodies we should have little quarrels there about the selection of members, and in connection with the liquor question I think that would be wrong. I prefer the amendment of the hon. member for Barkly West (Mr. W. B. de Villiers), but I do not think we need attach much value to the difference between my proposal in the original Bill, and that of the select committee. The select committee, however, has possibly given more time to it than I have, and I am therefore prepared to give preference to their proposal. I do not, however, agree with the hon. member for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz) that the countryside will have no concern with licensing boards, because no new licensed premises will be granted there. The whole district has an interest in what takes place in the town. The countryside has a real interest in it. We shall therefore always try, apart from any provision with regard to divisional councils, to see that the countryside is represented on the licensing board. The outside public must be on the board, because they, just as much as the townsmen, have an interest in urban matters. I therefore think that we had better abide by the proposed clause. I see no reason for allowing it to stand over. There are two principles. One, whether there is to be an election or not, the second whether there should be members nominated from the bodies or not, and, further, how many of the bodies must nominate the members. I think we can dispose of the matter now.</p>

<p>Motion put and negatived.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I think the Minister&#x2019;s argument is illogical. He says he will accept the amendment made in select committee but he disagrees in toto with the grounds for the amendment, and the only argument he used was that it is in the book so let it stand. The argument of the hon. member for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz) was that the divisional council should be excluded because they have nothing to do with the urban areas. The Minister says it is wrong yet he accepts the amendment. Surely it would be a wrong principle for us to say that the countryside has nothing to do with these matters, they belong to the towns. The hon. member for North-East Rand is wrong in thinking it is restricted to the country. Take Port Elizabeth. They levy an urban rate for the town. The majority of the smaller towns are the focus for the countryside, and it would be a very wrong principle to exclude the countryside from an important matter affecting the lives and welfare of the people, and for that reason I insist upon putting this amendment. It seems to me from the Minister&#x2019;s own statement he has no strong feeling on the subject. I hope he will agree with the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to mention one or two points. The Minister is bound to be faced with a difficulty in making appointments from the local urban authorities where he has to deal with more than one local urban authority in a district. I know cases where there are four urban authorities in one magisterial district.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>You would make the body too Unwieldy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from><span class="col_803-804" refersTo="page_0468"/>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>It seems to me that each urban local authority should have one nominee, otherwise it may lead to very grave injustice. I can foresee a great difficulty as far as the Minister is concerned, if the clause stands as it is, in making these appointments. I think the proposal of the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) is in the circumstances a sound one to overcome that difficulty. In Natal the urban local authorities have had absolute control. Seeing that they are giving up control, won&#x2019;t the Minister agree to allow each urban local authority to have one nominee on the Board? I should be prepared to leave the appointment of that nominee in the hands of the Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>There is a general feeling on this side of the House, and also among some members opposite, that we should not vote for the amendment of the hon. member for Ceres (Mr. Roux). That would mean that a part of the public would have all the influence, and the other part merely have to look on. We do not want the municipalities to have too much representation, we wish the countryside also to have a say. The Minister says that care will be taken to see the countryside represented. Who will see to it? The Minister will not sit there for ever. I am confident that under the present Minister of Justice that will be the case, but what if someone succeeds him, who will make use of the right of nominating three members of municipalities. I have therefore moved a restriction of the number of municipal members. The Minister himself originally proposed it, but has now abandoned it, since the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) exercised his influence. I hope the Minister will abide by his original proposal, and see that the countryside is properly represented. The amendment of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) is a very fair compromise. I hope the farmer members will support us in not putting all the power into the hands of the municipalities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mostert">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOSTERT</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot follow the argument of hon. members in favour of representation for the municipality. The municipalities already have the magistrate as their representative on the licensing board. The magistrate belongs to the town. He is the friend of the townsmen and the country people have nothing to do with him. They take off their hats to him, and give him a cup of coffee when he comes to a farm, but that is all. They are afraid of the law, and see that they do not come into conflict with it. The magistrate is a representative for the towns and the municipalities do not need another. We can see what will occur if the municipalities are represented. They say to each other &#x201C;To-day I scratch your back, to-morrow you will do mine.&#x201D; Let the divisional councils send their representative. There are no divisional councils in the Free State and Transvaal; let us therefore make separate provision for the Cape, and for the Transvaal and Free State. Our old system in the Cape has always worked well, and we are satisfied with it. Give them their way, but let us keep our own. We are quite satisfied with the scale of civilization we have attained in the Cape, and we need not take lessons in this respect from other parts of the country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I trust the Minister will not think we are wasting time. There is strong feeling about this matter in the Free State. The Free State has never had the privilege of seeing local interests properly represented on the licensing boards. The proper local representation is, as appears from the Bill, a principle also respected by the Minister. Why should the law provide for two representatives? If we allow municipal representatives, we should have enough confidence in the municipalities to allow them to make the choice. The position is different in the Free State from that at the Cape, but I appreciate their objections. They are very anxious for the country people also to be represented on the licensing board. I therefore wish to withdraw my amendment, and to re-introduce it in a different form, to meet the objections of the Cape members.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Is there any objection to leave being granted to the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) to withdraw his amendment?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>I object.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>We want the amendment to go-through.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The amendment stands on the paper.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I fear that the hon. member has not understood me well. I want to point out that the amendment is being made to meet the objections of the Cape members.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The with drawal has been objected to, and the amendment therefore remains.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal) said that there is no objection to the existing position in the Cape. I admit it, but the hon. member for Piquetberg attacked me for saying that each municipality in a district should be represented on the licensing board, and that that was the practice in the past. I just want to refer him to Clause 28 of Act 28 of 1883, which says that the members of licensing courts shall consist of the magistrate and the chairmen of any and every municipality in the district. Now, regarding the municipalities, I want to point out that the municipal members are very often well acquainted with the interests of the countryside. The hon. member must not forget that many retired farmers live in the towns, and they are often nominated as members of the licensing board, because they have a good knowledge of conditions on the countryside, and in the town, and have not too much to do. I just want to mention the case of the deputy-mayor of Ceres, who stopped farming some years ago, and now, as deputy-mayor, sits as a member of the licensing board when the mayor is absent. There is <span class="col_805-806" refersTo="page_0469"/>no objection to nominating representatives of divisional councils, where these exist, and I provide for it in my amendment, but the appointment must be done by the Minister because he knows best who the most suitable person is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I am afraid if this amendment is accepted it will make these boards altogether too unwieldy. I do not believe that it is the intention of the Bill to set town against country. The principle is that the country should have some representation on these boards and to my mind it does not matter materially whether there are two members from a municipality and one from the country, or vice versa, as long as there is representation. I quite agree with the Minister that an election would be wrong. We do not want to introduce a system of holding &#x201C;wet&#x201D; or &#x201C;dry&#x201D; elections in our municipalities or divisional councils. I am quite willing to leave the appointment of these members of the board to the Government, but I am not prepared to have the Government exclude the country altogether. I do not think it is practicable to give representation to each individual municipality. You might even have a ca.se where they might hive off into more municipalities to get fresh representation. I think my amendment is a sound one. As long as the country has representation, as long as they know what is going on and as long as they feel they are not excluded altogether. I think the thing will work and I hope the Minister will still see his way to accept this.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I do not object to municipalities being represented, but if the State controls liquor traffic then the State must also have a say on the licensing board, and therefore I should like to see that the Minister, in appointing members, will see that he has the majority in any case. If the municipalities have so much representation, then the result will necessarily be that the feeling of local circles will exercise the greatest influence on the licensing hoards, and possibly the intentions or policy of the Minister will not be carried out. I therefore hope that care will be taken that the State has a majority on the licensing court. Besides the reasons already mentioned in favour of the amendment of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) I want to add that, according to the Bill, there will practically be no more licences allowed on the countryside. We are not yet all abstainers there. There are some of us who use a little liquor in one way or another. The large majority of us will have to be served by licensed persons living in the towns and villages, and I hope the Minister will bear this in mind. The people on the countryside thus have great interest in conditions regarding the liquor traffic in the towns.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#vax_der_merwe">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAX DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I understand there is some misapprehension with regard to my request to withdraw my amendment. I want to make it clear that all I really wanted to change was to make provision that as well as the municipality, each divisional council, if there be one in the district, would also be represented on the licensing board I want to extend the number of members of a licensing board in accordance with the number of municipalities or divisional councils in the district.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member cannot withdraw it. It was objected to by the hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) and I do not see him in the House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>Three persons objected to the withdrawal of the amendment. There is such confusion owing to all the amendments that the committee does not want any new ones. A few days ago when I spoke on the Bill the Minister said that the divisional councils would be represented, now he says that they will not be represented. I hope the Minister will reconsider this. As the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) has said every municipality will be allowed a representative on the licensing court, hut the divisional council will not he properly represented. Many municipal members of the countryside have a vote in the divisional councils, and have influence there as well. The influence of the municipalities on the licensing courts will be too great, and I hope the Minister will not allow the divisional councils to be represented.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I must rule that the amendment cannot be withdrawn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>I think the Minister is making a mistake in referring to local authorities. We know in large centres land companies or great interests throw all their weight into municipal council elections in order to get people elected. They do not call them nominees, but a ticket, and they throw in all their weight and influence to get them elected. By this paragraph the Minister is bringing in a new element, and the best thing would be to delete the whole paragraph after the word &#x201C;Governor-General&#x201D; and make no reference whatever to local authorities. Municipal elections are complicated enough in the big centres without introducing a new element.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>As I was refused permission to withdraw my amendment, I just want to point out that the hon. member for Ceres (Mr. Roux) wanted to move the same proposal that I did. The only difference&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member cannot ask three times to withdraw his amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I am not asking it. I am only saying that I can support the amendment of the hon. member for Ceres (Mr. Roux). I cannot, however, agree with the principle that the municipalities or divisional councils shall not nominate their representatives. Perhaps, if those amendments are passed we can alter them at the report stage, so that the bodies will themselves obtain the right of nominating their representatives.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. A. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>There are so many amendments that I am afraid of confusion. The hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) says that his amendment more or less coincides with that of the hon. member for Ceres (Mr. Roux), except that local bodies will not, themselves, <span class="col_807-808" refersTo="page_0470"/>nominate their representatives. The amendment of the hon. member for Aliwal North (Mr. Sephton) embraces what both the hon. member for Ceres and the hon. member for Winburg want. I hope the House will appreciate that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sephton">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SEPHTON</person>:</from>

<p>I do hope the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) is not prepared to accept the amendment of the hon. member for Ceres (Mr. Roux), because the whole principle for which he is standing is repudiated by that amendment, whereas the amendment I have proposed covers the whole of the ground which is sought to be covered by the hon. member for Winburg. I hope the hon. member will reconsider his decision.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Colesberg (Mr. G. A. Louw) has let the cat out of the bag. The amendment of the hon. member for Ceres (Mr. Roux) is supported by the hon. members for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) and Colesberg. This shows how dangerous that amendment is to the farmers. The amendment will have the effect that four to five members of municipalities, and only one member of the divisional council in a district will sit on a licensing court.</p>

<p>Question put: That the words &#x201C;four other members to be appointed by the Governor-General&#x201D;, proposed to be omitted, stand part of the clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>If these words are retained the amendments of the hon. members for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe), Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz), Barkly (Mr. W. B. de Villiers) and Aliwal (Mr. Sephton) will fall away. Is there any misunderstanding?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>There is some misunderstanding, for how can it be said that the amendment of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) falls away if the first four words of the clause are retained, for his amendment contains those words.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>It would have been better if he had left those words out.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>You are only putting the first few words of his amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I am not. If the hon. member is not satisfied with my ruling he can always call in Mr. Speaker.</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;55.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Brown. G.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>Da Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>Da Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van Heerden. I. P.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R.: Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;42.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Chaplin, F. D. P.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. T.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe. N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Vermooten. O. S.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Tellers: de Jager, A. L.: Robinson, C. P.</p>

<p>Question accordingly affirmed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The amendments proposed by Dr. van der Merwe, Mr. Roux, Mr. Sephton and Col. D. Reitz have consequently dropped.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The new paragraph (b) which I proposed contained the words which the committee had decided should stand part of the clause, and I submit that my amendment has therefore not dropped. May I move another amendment?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>It depends upon what it is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I beg to move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In (b) all the words after &#x201C;general,&#x201D; line 16, be deleted and other words substituted.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot accept that amendment. It has been decided.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>On a point of order. We have voted to retain the words in line 15, first line of sub-section (b)&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote"><span class="col_809-810" refersTo="page_0471"/>Four other members to be appointed by the Governor-General.</block>

<p>That is as far as the committee has gone. Still before the committee is the whole of the rest of the sub section and the clause which has not been dealt with. Surely the liberty of members will be very far curtailed if by a motion to delete the first line of a sub-section being defeated, it is not open to members to move any amendment they desire in connection with other portions of the clause. Surely that is the ordinary parliamentary ruling. If not, it will defeat the rights and privileges of members of this House to amend any portion of a Bill not already amended on an amendment subsequent to that portion of the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Will the hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal) tell me what he thinks about this. I should like to hear the opinion of other members.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>The House has not voted on the principle of the hon. member&#x2019;s amendment. It drops on a technicality because of the wording of the amendment. Surely the hon. member is entitled to put it again? The part which has not been put to the committee yet is a part on which the committee has not decided. The committee, as far as it has gone, has actually adopted the wording of the hon. member&#x2019;s resolution.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The custom is to test the feeling of the House on the various amendments by putting them seriatim as the Chairman has tried to do. But in the present case there undoubtedly was a misunderstanding, no one is opposed to retention of the first word of the amendment of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz). The amendment should actually have been interpolated after the word &#x201C;Governor-General.&#x201D; In the circumstances I would suggest that the amendments be put again.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>It seems to me there are two points that we have got to decide. In the first place, is the hon. member in his proposition doing anything inconsistent with the vote of the committee? Clearly there is nothing inconsistent with the vote of the committee. The committee has decided that certain words be retained. The hon. member does not propose to substitute anything for those words. He proposes to add certain words after the words which the committee has decided to retain. Secondly, no closure has been moved. Therefore, it is not necessary that all the amendments should now be put. It is open, after any division, to any hon. member to move a further amendment which is not inconsistent with what has already been done. I would therefore urge that it is competent for the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) to move his amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I take it that what is before the committee now is sub-section (b). So far as the four other members to be appointed by the Governor-General are concerned, it is not possible for any member of this committee to move any amendment in connection with those words. It has been moved that these words be deleted, and the committee has decided that these words be retained. What is now before the committee is the following&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Two of whom shall, if there be within the district one or more urban local authorities, be members of any such authority at the time of their appointment.</block>

<p>What I respectfully submit is this, that to give everybody an opportunity of expressing his opinions and having them vote upon it is competent, so far as the latter portion of subsection (b) is concerned, to move any amendment that any member may desire, and further to move that the whole sub-section be deleted, otherwise members will not have an opportunity of really having their views brought before the committee, because though a member may desire that four members should be appointed by the Governor-General, he may desire to give instructions in regard to the panel from which the Governor-General shall choose those four members.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>There is no doubt that the majority in the House are in favour of leaving the selection of these members to the Governor-General, but there is also a strong feeling in the Cape Province that, at any rate, the countryside shall have a show-in with regard to the selection of these candidates. The sub-section, as it appears at present, speaks of &#x201C;one or more urban local authorities.&#x201D; Therefore, according to this the choice must be made from the urban local authorities, while, as I say, there is strong feeling in the Cape that the countryside should have a show. I would suggest that we should take out the word &#x201C;urban&#x201D; and then leave the selection entirely to the Governor-General and he may appoint a member from the urban authority or the rural authority, that is, the divisional council.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>He need not select from them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>He may select both from the urban authority or both from the divisional council, but at any rate it leaves it open to him. He can select a member of the divisional council as representing the countryside, and a member of the municipality as representing the urban authorities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The Chair is not responsible for the form in which a member drafts an amendment provided it is not irregular. The House always allows a member to propose the omission of a paragraph for the purpose of substituting another containing some of the same words or sentences, and since the hon. member has chosen that form of amendment his proposal dropped when the committee decided to retain certain words of the original paragraph. The hon. member should have asked leave to move his amendment in a different form, had he desired to do so, before the division took place, but if the committee has no objection I shall allow the hon. member to do so now.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from><span class="col_811-812" refersTo="page_0472"/>&#x2020;Gol. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>In that case may I put my amendment now?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I will allow you to put it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>May we know what your ruling was?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I am going to give my decision in favour of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz). As I am only the Deputy-Chairman of Committees, somebody may wish to test it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_members">

<from><person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBERS</person>:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>In view of your ruling, for which I am very grateful, I withdraw my amendment with leave of the committee, and move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit all the words after &#x201C;Governor-General,&#x201D; in lines 15 and 16, to the end of paragraph (b) and to substitute &#x201C;one of whom shall, if there be within the district one or more urban local authorities, be a member of such authority and one of whom, if the district comprises the area or portion of an area of one or more divisional councils, shall be a member of such a council.&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>May I just point out that the hon. member is only thinking of the Cape Province. If the amendment is passed we shall have fewer representatives on the licensing board in the Free State than we have now. There will then only be one person representing the municipalities, and the position in the Free State will, therefore, be less favourable.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Suppose a case where there is no divisional council. What is going to be the position then?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#henderson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HENDERSON</person>:</from>

<p>There will only be one member.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Well, that is not fair. Delete the word &#x201C;urban&#x201D; and leave it to the Governor-General.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Hon. members know I have allowed this amendment on account of a misunderstanding. I said it could be tested, if the committee wished, by the Speaker. I went contrary to the practice of the House and allowed the hon. member to put it forward because certain members had disagreed and because the hon. member had made a drafting mistake, so the hon. member&#x2019;s amendment now stands. The amendments by the hon. members for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe), Ceres (Mr. Roux) and Aliwal North (Mr. Sephton), have now dropped.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cilliers">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>I just want to say that we, in the Free State, want to have the law as it is at present. If we vote for the amendment we shall be less favourably situated there.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I take it what you are putting now really is that if the committee deletes these words then the amendment of the hon. member will be put before the committee. It is quite clear to my mind.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. M. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>In as much as the amendment of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) has been so changed that it practically coincides with mine, I will withdraw my amendment.</p>

<p>Objection taken to the withdrawal of the amendment by Mr. J. J. M. van Zyl.</p>

<p>Question put: That all the words after &#x201C;Governor-General&#x201D;, in lines 15 and 16, to the end of paragraph (b), proposed to be omitted, stand part of the clause,</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;51.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Oost, H Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Richards. G. R.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Hugo, D.; Pienaar, B. J.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;48.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Mullineux. J.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk. P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J M.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R.; de Jager, A. L.</p>

<p><span class="col_813-814" refersTo="page_0473"/>Question accordingly affirmed and the amendments proposed by Col. D. Reitz and Mr. W. B. de Villiers dropped.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Nicholls put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>Is it now competent to move an amendment? I should like to move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">&#x201C;be appointed on the advice of such local authorities and&#x201D;</block>

<p>This will ensure that the Minister in appointing these two members will consult the local authorities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>You cannot go back now. It is voted up to &#x201C;appointment&#x201D;.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>It may be possible for a man to lose his seat on a local authority. I take it that the Minister will appoint a man only by virtue of his being on a local authority.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>This point, like so many others we have discussed on this section, is the difference between Tweedledum and Tweedledee. The argument against is, the appointments are made for a year, and for the next year they will be changed. Assuming a man is appointed because he is on a local authority, when he ceases to be a member it will mean that appointment falls to the ground, and it will be impossible to put anybody in his place. I do not think there is much in it; but if it is going to avoid another discussion I will accept it with both hands. I have no objection to the amendment of the hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) (&#x201C;during membership of the board&#x201D;)&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#allen">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALLEN</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to object. I think a false move has been made already by accepting what we have, but if we are going to place that still further in the hands of local authorities&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>This has been suggested but not moved.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>I will move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To add at the end of paragraph (b) &#x201C;provided that in making such appointment the Minister shall consult the local authorities converned&#x201D;,</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#allen">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALLEN</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to oppose that amendment. The whole object of this Bill is, as far as possible, to place the control of the liquor trade in the hands of the central Government. There are very drastic clauses in the measure which aim at cleansing out of the trade abuses which undoubtedly have existed up to the present. If, however, you make membership of the local authority another field for the exploitation of patronage, then you will not only allow one field of possible public patronage to remain poisoned, but you will poison another. In many instances local authorities have been severely reprimanded by administrators, who in some cases have had to go so far as to suspend municipalities for exceeding their powers and put commissioners in their place. I fail to see what object is to be achieved by entrusting municipalities with still further powers. Local authorities have too many fields of patronage open to them as it is, and it is very difficult for any man to be a member of a local authority for a considerable number of years without being suspected of serving his own interests rather than the interests of the community. If local authorities have any influence on the issue of liquor licences the object of the majority of them will be to increase the number of licences. Such a power will have a very derogatory effect on the cleanliness of local administration. There are many members of local authorities in my own town who hold licences.</p>

<p>Amendment put.</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;47.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Radenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Collins, W. R.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Van Zvl. J. J. M.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Tellers: de Jager, A. L.; Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;33</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Brown. G.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Terreblanche. P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Tellers: Conradie, D. G.; Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Amendment accordingly agreed to.</p>

<p>Remaining amendments by Mr. J. J. M. van Zyl and the Minister of Justice put and agreed to.</p>

<p><span class="col_815-816" refersTo="page_0474"/>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 15,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To insert the following new sub-section to follow sub-section (1):</block>

<ol>

<li>(2) A member of a local authority appointed to a licensing board under paragraph (b) of sub-section (2) of section 13 shall, on ceasing to be a member of such local authority, ipso facto, cease to be a member of the licensing board.</li>

</ol>

<p>I hope the Minister will accept that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I accept that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit paragraph (c) of sub-section (1)</block>

<p>which disqualifies anyone engaged in viticulture who may not be interested in licensing at all beyond a general interest. Later on, it depends on how the vote goes on this, I will move for the deletion of sub-section (e) and to put in a new sub-section&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Any person opposed in principle to the sale of liquor as a beverage</block>

<p>It follows that if one who is engaged in viticulture has to be excluded, why not a person who may not have any interest in wine making? If you disqualify him, why allow a person who is opposed to the selling of liquor as a beverage to sit on the board?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I hope this discussion on disqualification will not go on. It will lead nowhere, just as three and a half hours&#x2019; discussion on Clause 13 has not led to anywhere, and I do hope that, as far as disqualification is concerned, we are not going to have another absurd and useless discussion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>We have not done much of the talking up to now.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>No, that is so. I think that what my hon. friend refers to is that the word &#x201C;viticulture&#x2019;&#x201D; would be applied to a man who is producing grapes for table consumption or for export as grapes. If there is any doubt about that, we might delete the word &#x201C;viticulture&#x201D; and insert &#x201C;making wine&#x201D;.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Or brandy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, &#x201C;making wine or brandy&#x201D;. I will propose, diffidently&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 47, to omit &#x201C;viticulture&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;making wine or spirits</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I am quite satisfied with the Minister&#x2019;s explanation. I merely wanted to delete &#x201C;viticulture&#x201D; and insert &#x201C;the making of wine or brandy&#x201D;. There are a good many of my friends who wish me to get the whole paragraph deleted, and only in deference to their wish have I moved that. I know what the feeling of the committee is, and I do not wish to raise the whole question. I am pleased that the Minister has moved the omission of the word &#x201C;viticulture&#x201D; and the substitution of &#x201C;the making of wine and spirits&#x201D;.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) now seems to be afraid of the Minister. I think we have the same right to look after wine farmers as the total abstainers have to defend their point of view. The reason why we should speak more than they is that they have got their way in the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I support the Bill as it now reads.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>I have no objection to the wine farmers not sitting on licensing boards, but then I ask why they are prevented, when total abstainers are allowed to sit. According to the Bill the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell), who is one of the greatest champions of prohibition, may sit on a licensing court, but the hon. member for Ladismith (Mr. J. J. M. van Zyl) may not. I say this is unfair, and I shall heartily support a motion to delete the provision. The Minister talks of trivialities. Whenever we talk on behalf of the wine farmers it is trivialities. If we could get the provision that abstainers also could not sit on the licensing courts we would thank the Minister, but, if he does not meet us, I say that he is playing into the hands of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I should like the Minister to understand that I have taken no part in the question, and that I honestly wish to obtain a good liquor law. I have no instructions from any part of the population, or from any body, so that there I am free, but, as various amendments are proposed, which, in my opinion, are unnecessary and provocative, I think I must express my view. With reference to paragraph (c), which says that no one interested in wine farming may sit on a licensing board, I want, quite seriously, to ask the Minister to delete it. I think it is very unfair. It applies to all the people who make moskonfyt, produce table grapes, export grapes and make raisins, etc. The amendment of the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) is a concession, but it is not enough. The provision presses on a portion of society that does not deserve it, and which always exercises sound judgment. The wine farmers are respected, and the small section who have abused the circumstances does not justify blame or a slur being cast on all wine farmers. I have already said that there are many members of the House who are directly or indirectly concerned in wine farming. Wine farmers can become Prime Ministers, members of this House and judges, they can fill any position, but; they may not be members of the licensing courts! I have never yet heard of such an insinuation. I will move to let it lapse. In the first instance the intention existed as a matter of fact to put them on the same footing as the abstainers. Now the latter have been <span class="col_817-818" refersTo="page_0475"/>put in a more favourable position. I want further to point out that in many villages there are retired wine farmers who have let their farms, or in other ways still have an interest in wine farming. Is the Minister going to exclude them as well? I hope the Minister will not put such a slur on to the statute book. Perhaps he may find a way out, but, in any case, I hope he will do something to meet the objection.</p>

<p>With leave of committee, amendment proposed by Mr. Heatlie withdrawn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_rensburg">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN RENSBURG</person>:</from>

<p>I want to say a few words about the speech of the hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal). The hon. member is making a habit of attacking the supporters of local option and accusing them of being hostile to the interests of the wine farmers. I just want to tell him that we want the wine farmer to be protected, just as much as anyone else. We are not fighting against the wine farmer, but we do not put his interests above the evil which is devastating the souls and bodies of the people. If the majority in the constituency say that they want no bar in their district, then it is only reasonable that there shall be none. That is our object.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member cannot now discuss it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_rensburg">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN RENSBURG</person>:</from>

<p>I just wanted to dispose of the attack of the member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. B DE VILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 56, after &#x201C;trade&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;and any person who is opposed on principle to the consumption of liquor&#x201D;,</block>

<p>That was in the original Bill, and it is most unreasonable to think that anyone opposed to the liquor trade should sit on a licensing board. That is the reason I move this amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I would like the hon. member for Barkly (Mr. W. B. de Villiers) to wait a little with his amendment in case the Minister climbs down a bit and allows the amendment just proposed by the hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal). In that case this will not be necessary.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit paragraph (c) of sub-section (1).</block>

<p>I do not know whether the amendment of the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) still stands, or whether it has been withdrawn. I think he proposed the deletion of para. (3). If not, then I move it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Do I understand that the hon. member for Barkly has moved the addition to sub-section (e) that was read out to the House? In that case I feel I cannot allow the committee to give a silent vote on this matter without understanding what is proposed. The whole scheme of Clause 15 is that no person who has a direct interest in the sale of liquor should serve on a licensing board. It is quite obvious that a person who manufactures wine or brandy has a direct interest. It seems to me an elementary principle that no such person, whatever his other virtues may be, should serve on a board which has the giving out of licences for the sale of liquor. In other words, he has a direct financial interest in promoting the sale of liquor. It may be right, it may be wrong, I am not making any attack on the wine farmers, susceptible as they seem to be. I merely say that whether he be a wine farmer or a licensed victualler, or have any other interest in the sale of liquor, he should not serve on a licensing board. The hon. member for Stellenbosch (Mr. J. P. Louw) advised the hon. member for Barkly to wait and sec what happened to sub-section (c) before moving his amendment to (e). In other words, a little threat was held out to the Minister and the committee. If the wine farmers are allowed to serve on licensing boards, they will allow the temperance people to serve, but if they are not allowed to serve they will not allow these wicked temperance people to serve! There is not the slightest parity between the two cases. If a person is actually an official of the society for promoting temperance or of a society for promoting the liquor trade, then under section (e) he cannot serve on any board. That is already in the Act, and it is intended it should remain in the Act, but to go further and say a person who holds temperance views or is generally opposed to the sale of liquor shall not serve on any licensing board, is absolutely preposterous. They have no financial interest in the sale of liquor at all. If we are going to exclude from licensing boards persons who hold temperance convictions, where are you going to end? I venture to say that this day one half the people of South Africa in some shape or form hold temperance convictions, and I venture to say the time will come when three-quarters of the people will do so. Take a small town. If half the people in it hold temperance convictions, the choice would be restricted to the other half, and they are to be allowed to serve on the licensing board. I assume that a person holding temperance views thinks the sale of liquor should be cut down as much as possible, but to say that such a person shall not sit on a licensing board is ridiculous, and I hope the clause will be accepted as it appears.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#gilson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GILSON</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will not accuse me of obstruction; I did not mean to speak, but I have never heard a more provocative speech than that by the last speaker where he said that half of the people of the country bold temperance views, and that this half is the better half. There are people like the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) who pose as St. George and the dragon in their crusade against liquor. Some say he was Don Quixote tilting at a windmill. If that is to be the intolerant attitude of the temperance party&#x2014;I say that advisedly&#x2014;then I <span class="col_819-820" refersTo="page_0476"/>think every one of us who do not hold such extreme views should make their position very plain in this House, and indicate by their vote that the spirit of some of those who sat on the committee and drafted this Bill is not acceptable by this House. I am a teetotaler myself&#x2014;to all intents and purposes.; but at the same time I strongly object to every man who does not hold these teetotal views being branded as belonging to the worst section of the community. I do hope we shall come to a frank vote on this. The hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) has stressed the word &#x201C;financial.&#x201D; Let me take the case of the Rev. Mr. Cook; directly that gentleman resigns as an office holder in any temperance society he becomes eligible to go on such a board. Does he not put his sacred principles higher than his financial principles? Any person who has taken such a personal interest and definite attitude in the matter as Mr. Cook puts his sacred convictions higher than others place their financial interests, and therefore the hon. member&#x2019;s contention is wrong. Those holding intolerant and bigoted views on either side should be prevented from serving on any licensing board, and I shall vote accordingly.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Cannot we come to a vote on the subject? One of two courses lies before us; one to accept this disqualification, and the other course, which I think better, is to scrap the whole of this clause. Where men are going to be appointed, they are going to be the ordinary temperate people of the town&#x2014;I use the word &#x201C;temperate&#x201D; in the proper sense, because I do not consider a total abstainer a temperate man. If anybody looks at this clause in a temperate way, he will see we can get on quite well without it. If we are going to extend it or cut it down, it will make very little difference, except in the time we are going to waste on discussion. We have been fighting on clauses that really do not matter. The real trouble of this Bill lies far ahead of where we are to-day. I like to come to the biting stage, and not to remain behind and talk about things which do not matter. There I do not seem to agree with the feeling of this committee.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by the Minister of Justice put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>What about my amendment&#x2014;the omission of all those words?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member never brought the amendment to the Table. He knows better than any other what he should do. Does he move to omit the whole of (c)?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>With a view to what has been said, and the conflicting opinions, I should like to propose deleting Clause 15. Let us leave it to the good sense of the Minister and the people to judge who shall sit on the licensing boards. If we exclude the wine farmers we shall incontrovertibly offend a large and honourable section of the population. If we exclude members of clubs we shall offend another section, and if we exclude supporters of prohibition we shall turn them against us. The Minister rightly says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Let us adopt or reject the whole clause.</block>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit Clause 15.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member need not move it. He can vote against the clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I move to amend para, (c) by providing that the wine farmers who have direct financial interest in the matter can be excluded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Perhaps the hon. member has not noticed that section (a) says that already&#x2014;the &#x201C;holder of any licence.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Hopetown (Dr. Stals) will see that that is already included, and that being so, I cannot accept his amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>It is not a question of interest as I see it. We want an absolutely impartial body, but a man who is opposed to the principle of the selling of liquor, however honest and conscientious he may be, is constitutionally incapable of being impartial, on the question, for instance, of whether there should be an extension of hours. He will always naturally vote against it, as he believes liquor is a poison. Is it fair to place such enormous interests in the hands of such a man and to constitute him as part of what ought to be an impartial tribunal? He may be as honest as the day and not financially interested. By all means let him come before the Court as a pleader. I have nothing against the temperance people, but members of licensing boards must be people without any prejudice either in favour of or against the sale of liquor.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not wish to detain the House, but I want this clause of the Bill to stop as it is. An attempt is being made to meet everybody as much as possible. I was surprised at the attitude of the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander). He recently spoke strongly against the institution of a kind of inquisition. Now he wants members of a licensing board first to make a declaration about their faith, and to say whether they are supporters of the sale of liquor or not. Hon. members are inconsistent. The subjective influence in a licensing board can never be entirely removed. There are people in the country who want to have as many canteens and hotels as possible, others again are quite opposed to them. Everybody will agree that it is right that people who are financially interested in the matter should not sit on licensing courts.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Griqualand (Mr. Gilson) entirely misunderstood the tone of my remarks. There was no intolerance, but I wanted no intolerance to be shown <span class="col_821-822" refersTo="page_0477"/>towards that very large section of people who think the consumption of liquor an evil thing.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#gilson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GILSON</person>:</from>

<p>You said they were the best section.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I still say that the people who support temperance views are the better section of the people. But that is a matter of opinion. Does the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander) realize that the temperance party agreed to the deletion from the Bill of all semblance of local option and of the memorial system of the Cape, and yet now it is proposed to shut off from representation on the licensing boards representation of that large section of the community who hold definite temperance views, and to leave the board to consist of members of one section of the community and they may grant as many licences as they please. That is grossly unfair. If the establishment of bars and bottle stores concerned only one-half of the community that would not be so bad, but it concerns the community as a whole and therefore the community as a whole has a right to be represented.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#david_harris">

<from>&#x2020;Col. Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DAVID HARRIS</person>:</from>

<p>As chairman of the Kimberley Club, I am not entitled under the Bill to sit on a licensing board. I flatter myself that I am not prejudiced either one way or the other, but because I am chairman of the club, although I have no financial interest in it, I am debarred from sitting on a licensing board. But a good templar, who would rejoice to see every place where liquor is sold closed down, irrespective of the misery and ruination that would entail on a large section of the community, would be allowed to sit on a licensing board. That is not fair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>The fallacy underlying the speech of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) is that he has spoken as if these four persons were representatives of the people. They are nothing of the sort. The Minister will not select four representatives, hut four gentlemen who he thinks will be capable of impartially hearing both sides of the question. Persons who hold extreme views on the one side or the other should not sit on licensing boards</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. de Waal put and negatived.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. W. B. de Villiers put.</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;31.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Tellers de Jager, A. L.; Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;62.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R.: van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Amendment accordingly negatived.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 73, after &#x201C;any&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;licensed&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#gilson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GILSON</person>:</from>

<p>What is the meaning of this word &#x201C;club&#x201D;? I don&#x2019;t see any definition. It might mean a sports club, in which case no member of a cricket club would be allowed to sit on a licensing board.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It has just been moved to make it &#x201C;licensed.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>Will the Minister accept a small drafting amendment to sub-clause (g), which provides for any person who is the owner, lessor or lessee of or the holder of any mortgage bond upon such premises. Under Clause 32 (1) it might affect a man who owns land on which there is no building, and I want to move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 65, after &#x201C;premises&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;or upon any land in respect of which an application is made under sub-section (2) of section 32&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I think that the language &#x201C;licensed club&#x201D; is not clear <span class="col_823-824" refersTo="page_0478"/>enough, because the club may not be a club in which drink is sold. It is quite possible that it may be licensed for the sale of other articles. I think better language would be &#x201C;any club holding a liquor licence.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Should it not be &#x201C;any club in respect of which a liquor licence is held&#x201D;?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>That is even better.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 73, after &#x201C;club&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;in respect of which any liquor licence is held&#x201D;,</block>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Coulter put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Heatlie put and negatived.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by Mr. J. P. Louw and Mr. Nel put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put,</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;60.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Nicholls, G. H.; Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;34.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Terreblanche. P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. I. M.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R.; de Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, accordingly agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 16,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#william_macintosh">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILLIAM MACINTOSH</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit paragraph (d).</block>

<p>There is a possibility of a difficulty arising if that sub-section is retained. At Port Elizabeth, for instance, five out of the six members of the court are members of the Port Elizabeth club, and as they would be debarred from sitting there could be no quorum.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>There is a difficulty with regard to a quorum.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Special provision for that is made in Clause 23.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not see that there is very much value in subsection (d), and I am prepared to accept the amendment.</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 17,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 24, after &#x201C;Governor-General&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;under this Act&#x201D; and at the end of the Clause to add &#x201C;: Provided that every member appointed in the year 1928 shall hold office from the date of his appointment until the last day of December, 1929, or, in the event of an adjournment of the annual meeting beyond that day, until the close of the annual meeting.&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Has the Minister forgotten that this afternoon he accepted an amendment by the hon. member for Newcastle (Mr. Nel) which is quite in conflict with this clause?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>That only means providing every member keep that and make it subject to the provision of the previous clause. I want to deal with both these matters in the report stage, because there are difficulties in the amendments of the hon. member for Newcastle (Mr. Nel).</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 19,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from><span class="col_825-826" refersTo="page_0479"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 51, after &#x201C;proceedings,&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;and no legal proceedings shall be instituted by any board&#x201D; and to add the following new sub-section to follow sub-section (2):</block>

<ol>

<li>(3) The cost incurred by members of any licensing board in connection with proceedings instituted by or against them in their official capacity shall, unless the court before which the proceedings are taken orders the costs to be borne by the opposite party or by the said members de bonis propriis, be paid out of the Treasury.</li>

</ol>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 20,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I want to suggest an amendment there in which I want to give the Minister discretion without fixing a definite date as it is at present in the Transvaal. We have it on a uniform fixed day here, and it has been found to be inconvenient. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In lines 68 and 69, on page 18, to omit &#x201C;the first Wednesday in the month of December of each year or, if that day be a public holiday on the following day&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;any such day during the first three weeks in the month of December as may be appointed by the Governor-General&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 76, to omit &#x201C;twenty-four&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;twenty-three&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I want to point out to the Minister that in fixing the first Wednesday in December nothing is said about continuing on subsequent days. It distinctly lays down the first Wednesday of the month, and only on that day.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Say &#x201C;shall he commenced&#x201D;.</p>

<p>Business suspended at 6 p.m., and resumed at 8.7 p.m.</p>

</speech>

<debateSection name="#evening_sitting">

<heading>Evening Sitting.</heading>

<p>With leave of committee, amendment proposed by Minister of Justice withdrawn.</p>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. G. CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>I want to call the Minister&#x2019;s attention to paragraph (2) with reference to notices. Provision is made for certain notices, through the magistrate. We find in Clauses 21, 22 and 35 further notices. Clause 35 provides for precisely the same notices as this sub-section. A certain amount of confusion may arise, and the magistrates will not know whether it is necessary to issue one or two notices. Take the case of new licences, or even removal from one place to another. In both cases such a notice is provided for. It seems to me that it is better to delete paragraph (2) and to make it clear in Clause 35 what notices are necessary.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It may be well, I think, that I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit paragraphs (c) and (d),</block>

<p>for this reason that (c) and (d) depend upon whether the rental provisions of the Bill pass or not. Those provisions will be submitted to a good deal of scrutiny, and I think I had better withdraw paragraphs (c) and (d) and restore them at the report stage in case the rental provisions are passed unaffected, otherwise we are in a side way dealing with the rental provisions at this stage, and we may, to a certain extent, feel ourselves bound when we get to a later stage. I would, therefore, move that paragraphs (c) and (d) be omitted at this stage. Then, in connection with the motion to have no fixed date for the meetings but to have different dates in different parts of the country, I think it might easily cause confusion as far as the people are concerned who apply for licences. I think we will eliminate confusion, and I think that is the better course to meet the position. In regard to the hon. member for Von Brandis (Mr. Nathan), some provision might be inserted that the sitting of the licensing court will be commenced in each district on certain days. I suggest the hon. member might move that, perhaps.</p>

<p>*In the matter of notices it seems to me better to let the dates in sub-section (2) stand and to explain the notices later. When we come to Clause 35 we can, perhaps, lay down the same notices as in sub-section (2).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I am very thankful for the Minister&#x2019;s suggestion, and I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 67, to omit &#x201C;be held&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;commence&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#hattingh">

<from>*The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HATTINGH</person>:</from>

<p>I should like the Minister not to move the deletion of paragraphs (c) and (d), but, if it is necessary, to allow the clause to stand over so that the committee can discuss it fully later on. But I think it is not necessary. Let us allow the clause to stand, and withdraw it subsequently at the report stage if it appears necessary.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I think that is quite right. It is much better to let the clause stand over. I should be very sorry, not glad, if we did omit the rent clauses. It looks rather like pre-judging the matter. Let it stand over until we get to the rent clauses.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I have no objection, but I think my suggestion is best. We do not pre-judge it at all by removing it from this clause at this stage. We can always restore it at a later stage. It is impossible to decide this question on a side issue. Either course is effective, but I do not want to have a discussion at this stage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>You need not discuss it&#x2014;simply move that this clause stand over. It certainly looks more like surrender than to have the clause stand over.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not want the whole clause to stand over.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from><span class="col_827-828" refersTo="page_0480"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the further consideration of this clause stand over.</block>

<p>Motion put and negatived.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>For 25 years this has been in the Transvaal Act&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">A meeting of the licensing court open to the public shall be held in such places as the Lieutenant-Governor may appoint on the second Monday in June and December.</block>

<p>We have never had any difficulty I think you had better stick to it as drafted.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by Mr. Nathan and Mr. Alexander put and negatived.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by the Minister of Justice put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 21,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 10 to omit &#x201C;of police&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;in police charge&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 22,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To add the following new sub-section to follow sub-section (3):</block>

<ol>

<li>(4) A special meeting of a board may be held at any time upon the order, made/under sub-section (2) of section 29 or otherwise, by a division of the Supreme Court having jurisdiction. At such meeting the board shall have power to deal with any matter in terms of any order made by the said division. Save where otherwise expressed or implied in such order, notice of any such meeting shall be given in terms of sub-section (3).</li>

</ol>

<p>The amendment simply proposes to make provision for the court where it has power to order that a special meeting of the board may be held. It is not intended to give power the court would not otherwise have.</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 25,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I move as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 34, after &#x201C;documents&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;relevant to the matter before the court&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Surely the Minister and the committee will see that as the clause stands it may cause a tremendous amount of inconvenience to the applicant. Why should he have to produce books which do not pertain to the particular subject under discussion? I hope the Minister will see the advisability of accepting the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>We have changed the title from licensing court to licensing board. In order to follow that language, I suggest to the hon. member that he follows that form and alters his amendment to read. &#x201C;board&#x201D;.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I agree.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 31, after the word &#x201C;board&#x201D;, to insert &#x201C;or who is alleged by the applicant&#x201D;.</block>

<p>It might also happen that power should be given to him to call witnesses under subpoena. These witnesses who can be compelled to attend by order of the board have not their position properly defined. If a witness gives evidence I submit he should have the same privileges as he has in a court of law. I move as a further amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 35, after &#x201C;control&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;and any person so called to testify shall have the same privileges in respect of any question put to him as if he were giving evidence in any court of law.&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>As far as the first point is concerned, I think it would be dangerous to give powers of that kind to an applicant, because, after all, the applicant will make his case to the board and the board will decide what witnesses are necessary. If you leave the power to the applicant he may call a large number of witnesses who may not be able to throw light on the matter, and hold up the proceedings of the court. In regard to the witnesses, we are not dealing with them as if, in every respect, they are witnesses in a court of law. I doubt very much whether we are not making it too formal in talking about the privileges of witnesses in a court of law. If a witness refuses to throw light on the matter he does not suffer, and there is nothing to put him in the same position as a man who is appearing in a court of law. After all, this is an informal type of body, and we should not make the proceedings so enormously formal as if they were in a court of law. If an amendment of that kind were accepted, we should have to add other amendments as to what the rules of evidence would be, and all kinds of provisions would have to be made. That is not the intention; the intention is that people who are willing to testify should come to testify. I should prefer the clause standing as it is. There is no harm in the amendment of the hon. member for Von Brandis (Mr. Nathan), which makes it clear that only relevant documents should be produced.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member will not achieve his object. By adding the words he proposes to add it does not take it further. It says&#x2014;&#x201C;the board may&#x201D;.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>Under certain circumstances &#x201C;may&#x201D; means &#x201C;shall&#x201D;. The Minister has not clearly understood the effect of my amendment. Would a witness compelled by the board to come to testify be compelled to answer the questions? Secondly, if he gave evidence <span class="col_829-830" refersTo="page_0481"/>quite bona fide, but which was defamatory, would he be liable later to an action for defamation?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>He would have qualified privilege.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>In order to achieve the Minister&#x2019;s object it is necessary to make it clear that any witnesses who are compelled to answer questions put by the board can do so freely without running the risk of an action for defamation.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Nathan put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by Mr. Coulter put and negatived.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 27,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#vermooten">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VERMOOTEN</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit all the words after &#x201C;board&#x201D;, in line 54, to the end of sub-section (1).</block>

<p>A dangerous power is being placed in the hands of the magistrate by giving him a casting, as well as a deliberative, vote. Where the voting is equal between four members he can, by his casting vote, do something which is in conflict with the general interests of the inhabitants of the district. I want to point out that in divisional councils the same provision occurs. There also the chairman has only a deliberative, and not a casting, vote.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#keyter">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KEYTER</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to support the amendment. In consequence of the casting vote licences were forced on to us formerly, which would never have been granted without the casting vote. The chairman votes first, and then has another vote on an equality of votes, possibly to do something which is not desirable. In this way he can turn a minority into a majority.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Should an equal number of members vote on each side and there is no casting vote, how are you going to bring matters to a conclusion?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#vermooten">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VERMOOTEN</person>:</from>

<p>The Cape Divisional Councils&#x2019; Ordinance has the same provision, the chairman of divisional councils having no casting vote. If the members cannot arrive at a decision and the voting is equal, the matter is left over until the next meeting.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>In the case of a divisional council the matter at issue may be simply one of rates, and that can stand over, but in the case of granting a liquor licence the chairman should have a casting vote.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>If the court consists of five men and they always attend, the question does not arise, but it does arise should a member not be present when a matter must be brought to finality. It does not follow that in every case the chairman will be the magistrate. In most cases, and especially in the big towns, the magistrate is absolutely impartial, and I would rather the casting vote be in his hands than in the hands of somebody else. It is absolutely essential to have a provision of this kind.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. G. CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>But if it so happens as the Minister says, there is actually no majority for the proposal, because the chairman has two votes. I would like to move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit all the words after &#x201C;votes&#x201D;, in line 55, to the end of sub-section (1) and to substitute &#x201C;the proposal shall be regarded negatived</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#mostert">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOSTERT</person>:</from>

<p>What if only one member besides the magistrate is present? Cannot then provision be made that the members must form a quorum? If members are absent the decision may be quite wrong through the double vote.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to know how, on an equality of votes the minority decides and has the majority. It conflicts with my mathematical ideas.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#keyter">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KEYTER</person>:</from>

<p>If there are three members besides the chairman, and two of the members are against a proposal, then the chairman will first of all, by his deliberative vote, equalize the votes, and then by his casting vote allow the minority to win. The power is too great, and too dangerous.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. G. CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>I just want to point out that I mean that the minority of the district will constitute the majority, because the magistrate is not the inhabitant of the district. He is usually from elsewhere and can, by his two votes, turn a minority of the members in the district into a majority. There is another point. The hon. member, who is accustomed to pleading in court, will appreciate it. If a man makes a proposal to the licensing court, and he can only get an equality of votes in his favour, then it is best for the proposal not to be passed. If there is not even a majority, it is not worth passing it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I am not going to go into this mathematical question at all. This provision has existed in all the provinces without objection from the beginning of time, and it should be easy to consolidate it in a consolidating Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#vermooten">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VERMOOTEN</person>:</from>

<p>It does not work well. That is the point.</p>

<p>Amendments put and negatived.</p>

<p>Clause, as printed, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 31,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I want to move an amendment. Every time a man applies for a renewal of a licence, he must give over again all the particulars he may have given for twenty years, instead of being able to say the particulars can be found in the magistrate&#x2019;s office, and they have not changed. After all, the particulars have been supplied, and why ask him to supply them over and over again year after year. I suggest that the provisions with regard to these particulars should not apply <span class="col_831-832" refersTo="page_0482"/>to the man who is applying for the renewal of a licence. It should be sufficient that he submits an affidavit that there has been no change, and I hope the Minister will accept that. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 1, on page 26, after &#x201C;application&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;save as provided in sub-section (4) hereof&#x201D; and to insert the following new sub-section to follow sub-section (3):</block>

<ol>

<li>(4) The provisions of sub-section (3) shall not apply to an application for a renewal of a licence if the applicant with his application submits an affidavit setting forth that the particulars previously supplied in terms of sub-section (3) remain unchanged.</li>

</ol>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Personally, I see no objection to this, and one, of course, is bound to interfere as little as possible with the members of the trade. As this will be a convenience to them, I think it should be granted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It is really a convenience to the attorney in charge, because he has not to draw such long documents. I hope hon. members opposite also consider the question that the fees will be a good deal less. At all events, I agree entirely with this amendment, and I am prepared to accept it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry to disturb the harmony of this gathering. Let me ask my hon. friend, the member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander), to consider this case. Supposing this is a case of a renewal and all these particulars have not been supplied before this Act comes into force, at what stage and in what manner are these particulars to be supplied?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>Everyone has to make an application, because he has to decide the particular licence he is going to take out under the schedule. That application will be under sub-section (3). My amendment says that subsection (3) shall not apply to a renewal. This is an application under sub-section (3), not under any previous law. I think the hon. member will see that this will be a convenient form and that it will harm nobody, except perhaps that the lawyers will get less fees for the shorter form that is sent in.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hattingh">

<from>&#x2020;The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HATTINGH</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to ask whether I shall be able to move the amendment standing in my name at a later stage if this clause is carried.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Not if the clause is carried.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hattingh">

<from>&#x2020;The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HATTINGH</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister withdrew his clause in regard to rent. This amendment of mine has reference to the rent clause. If I am not able to move it in committee I shall have to move it at the report stage. In committee one can always explain, while in the report stage you can only speak once and you cannot explain. If the amendment cannot be moved in this way I would ask that this clause stand over, so that this point can be discussed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Does the hon. member move that this clause stand over?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hattingh">

<from>&#x2020;The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HATTINGH</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to know whether the Minister would agree to that. Is there a way of moving it in at a later stage?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Not unless the clause stands over.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>With reference to the remark of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) about the alteration proposed by the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander), it is not clear to me whether when application is made for renewal of a licence; it only refers to a renewal under this Bill, and not to renewals under the old law. This Bill requires a certain form, certain information to be supplied with the application, but it was always the case that to renew a licence only a small declaration was necessary that the position remained unchanged. The point is doubtful and may give rise to misunderstanding.</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 32,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">At the end of sub-section (2) to add &#x201C;and shall be accompanied by an affidavit fully setting forth the particulars described in paragraph (a) of sub-section (3) of section 31 and by the copies of documents described in paragraphs (b) and (c) of that subsection.&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister to consider whether, in line 32 after &#x201C;hotel&#x201D; he would not add the words &#x201C;club or restaurant,&#x201D; because the very same reasons that caused the Minister to make this section for an hotel would also apply to a club or a restaurant. If it was desired to build a new club or restaurant the same reasons would apply, as in the case of an hotel. I would also suggest that in line 39 the word &#x201C;last&#x201D; should be deleted and &#x201C;15th&#x201D; substituted, because 30 days&#x2019; notice has to be published in the Gazette in terms of Section 22, and if the last day of October remains in this clause, the first Wednesday in December might arrive on the first day of that month and then there would not be sufficient time. I would therefore move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 39, to omit &#x201C;last&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;fifteenth.&#x201D;</block>

<p>With regard to the restaurant and club, I would ask the Minister to consider that point. It seems to me logical that if an hotel can get this facility a club or restaurant should also get it. I am quite satisfied to leave it to the Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not like the responsibility, but I want to say that the reason for this is that where a person wishes to build an hotel which would be a decent building, a proper building, we do not want him to go to that expense unless he has <span class="col_833-834" refersTo="page_0483"/>the assurance that he can obtain a licence. That does not apply to a club, and, as far as a restaurant is concerned, they are very seldom built on this large scale. I think it would be such an exceptional case that we should not trouble to legislate for that in this section.</p>

<p>Amendments put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 33,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>The commission recommended the payment under sub-section (a) of &#x00A3;50. The Minister has reduced that to &#x00A3;25. I cannot move back to &#x00A3;50, but I would like to tell the committee exactly what this payment is. Under the existing law, if an applicant is foolish enough not to apply in time for a renewal of his licence, he has no remedy, but under this Bill we are providing that he can apply for a special meeting of the licensing board, especially to hear his application. We thought that for putting the Department of Justice and the licensing board to this inconvenience, he should pay &#x00A3;50 for the privilege, because that would be about the cost of it. Do not let us encourage carelessness by making it too cheap. Though I have not the power to move it at this stage because it would mean an increase of taxation, I would ask my hon. friend to reconsider the matter between now and the report stage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>It seems to me this is a ridiculous proposal. To suggest that to call a meeting to consider whether a man shall get a renewal of his licence would cost &#x00A3;50 is an unheard of thing. What other industry would submit to such exorbitant taxation? None. It is just because the hon. member has this feeling towards this particular industry. Where is the reasonableness of it? Is the State put to that expense? As a matter of fact, the amounts proposed here are still very high. Compared with what used to be charged in the Cape they are tremendously high. In the Cape at present there Is no stamp fee for renewal at all. In the other provinces the maximum charge is &#x00A3;1. I submit the charges for licence fees and so on are prohibitive in this Bill. To have to put a &#x00A3;5 stamp on every renewal, no matter how long the licence has been in existence, is unreasonable. In the other provinces the maximum is &#x00A3;1, and I suggest &#x00A3;1 all round is quite enough. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 27, to omit &#x201C;five pounds&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;one pound.&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I have no particular brief for the liquor trade, but the attitude does seem to be that, having no friends, it may as well be bled. You also find that if the application is granted he has to pay &#x00A3;100. If he applies for a renewal in the same month it is going to cost him another &#x00A3;50, so it is conceivable that this unfortunate applicant may be called upon to pay &#x00A3;165 in one month. So it does seem to me it is rubbing it into this trade. We are approaching it on the principle that, as it has no friends, heave half a brick at it. I would certainly ask the Minister to accept the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister to accept the amendment of the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander). As other hon. members have already shown, it is very difficult for hotel keepers to pay their taxes, licences, etc. Possibly there are certain members who only know something about hotels in places like Cape Town and Johannesburg, where &#x00A3;5 is of no account, but I can assure the Minister that the small hotel keepers in the villages find it very difficult to pay their taxes and licences, and to keep their hotels in order. I appeal to the Minister to make the fee on an application for renewal &#x00A3;1 instead of &#x00A3;5.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>May I draw the attention of the committee to the fact that in the Transvaal the amount fixed there is &#x00A3;1? Why has this departure taken place of taxing this industry practically out of existence? The liquor people pay more in taxation than anyone else in South Africa.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>There seems to be a general idea that this amount should be reduced to &#x00A3;1. I have no objection to reducing it from &#x00A3;5 to &#x00A3;1. It is not a question of a transfer for an existing licence, and, in these circumstances, I think the complaint may be justified that we should make the amount as small as possible, and not as large as possible. As far as (a) is concerned, it is, of course, rather a difficult thing to say what should be the fee to be paid by the default of the applicant who makes it necessary to hold the special meeting. It was suggested by the select committee that the right fee should be &#x00A3;50. That seems to the department and myself rather a high figure, and we thought &#x00A3;25 would be the right one, which, is, after all, a substantial amount. The object is largely to avoid special meetings, but one does not want to avoid them by placing a tax upon them; one wants to reimburse the State for the expense to which it is put.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>There is one case in which the fee of &#x00A3;25 is unreasonable&#x2014;where the application is filed late. There may be a case where an application for the renewal of an existing licence was 14 days late. The Minister might advertise that application to be heard after the conclusion of the next annual meeting of the licensing board or the day on which the meeting is adjourned, and the expense would be very small. I suggest the fee should be &#x00A3;7 10s., which is &#x00A3;2 10s. more than the &#x00A3;5 charged in the ordinary course. I move as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">At the end of sub-clause (a) to add &#x201C;unless such special meeting is fixed for the day on which the annual meeting or the adjourned annual meeting is held, when such fee shall be &#x00A3;7 10s.&#x201D;</block>

<p>If I have sprung this amendment on the Minister, he might give me the assurance that he will consider it at the report stage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from><span class="col_835-836" refersTo="page_0484"/>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not object to considering the matter. As at present advised, I would be strongly against making this distinction, because once you do, you never know what refinements you may be driven to at the end. But I will consider it before the report stage.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Alexander put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 32, to omit &#x201C;five pounds&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;one pound&#x201D;.</block>

<p>The reason which induced the Minister to make the committee accept the &#x00A3;1 in the other instance also applies to this one. Why are you proposing an extra &#x00A3;5 on the licensee? There is no more work entailed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>There is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>Who does the work?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>The police.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>The police supervise all this business, and it is simply a matter of machinery.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>There are, I think, two differences. There is undoubtedly more work, because the police have to consider whether the new premises are suitable, and whether there is no reason for the transfer or removal except the ostensible reason. They have to consider whether it is not near a class of houses where it is undesirable to have licensed premises, and the removal or the transfer of a licence is generally of great value to the man who obtains the removal or the transfer&#x2014;generally from premises where a small living can be made to where a large living can be made. I think &#x00A3;5 cannot be regarded as excessive, for these two reasons.</p>

<p>Amendment put and negatived.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Coulter withdrawn.</p>

<p>Clause as amended put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 35,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 63, after &#x201C;&#x2018;Gazette&#x2019; and&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;in the case of a new licence or the transfer or removal of an existing licence also and in lines 63 and 64, to omit &#x201C;and in an English and a Dutch newspaper circulating in the district in which the board meets&#x201D;.</block>

<p>The main reason for this is economy. We find on the report of the Government stationer that this publication runs away with a considerable amount of money, and I doubt whether any great purpose is served by it. After all, as soon as the liquor interest finds out that all the information with regard to liquor matters will be in the &#x201C;Government Gazette,&#x201D; they will refer to the &#x201C;Government Gazette,&#x201D; and not to the newspapers. I doubt whether a large portion of the public peruses the newspapers on that point. It becomes a very large question&#x2014;the amount of expenses we are put to in regard to advertising and stationery generally, which is becoming a very heavy burden.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I take the strongest objection to the proposal. In Section 33 the Minister has laid down a very handsome and generous scale of stamp fees for applications and he cannot now come along with this plea of poverty, as the State will receive very much more from applicants than it ever got before. The main value of licensing courts is their publicity, and the only way in which you can obtain publicity is not by means of the &#x201C;Government Gazette,&#x201D; which no one ever reads, but by intimations in the daily press. If the Minister thinks the list of applications hitherto published in the daily papers are not read by the general public, he is making a very grave mistake. An ordinary application for a renewal does not interest the public so much, but the public are greatly interested in applications for new licences and for removal of licences from one district to another. No proposal could be more dangerous than to confine these advertisements to the &#x201C;Government Gazette.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I agree as to the necessity for publicity in the interests of the public. Not only is the public interested in attempts which may be made to remove a licence, but also in the number of licences and the persons to whom licences may be granted. If publication of these notices were confined to the <i>&#x201C;</i>Government Gazette&#x201D; the public would be deprived of the opportunity of knowing what is going to happen. It is no answer to say that the general public should study the &#x201C;Gazette.&#x201D; It is no doubt highly interesting to the Minister, but I wonder how many members of Parliament find it sufficiently amusing to go through its pages every week. It is possible for a lessee to make an application which may damage the licensed property, so an opportunity should be given to the owners and mortgagees to know what applicants are doing, and if necessary they can appear before the court to safeguard their interests. The omission of this publication from the daily papers will very likely cause more expense to certain interests than the publication in the newspapers to the State. When these applications are advertised interested parties are able to check what is happening, but unless they have that opportunity it will be necessary for owners, lessors and mortgagees to go to the court for information. Then it is vitally important to an area like Cape Town that people should know when it is proposed to move a liquor licence from one district to another. There are certain areas which have been protected through the inhabitants consistently opposing the granting of licences and these protected areas now have a definite residential character. I would instance <span class="col_837-838" refersTo="page_0485"/>Sea Point, the Gardens and Observatory. The inhabitants of these districts for years have felt that the introduction of a liquor licence is not desirable, because it depreciates surrounding property or attracted a wrong type of person to the neighbourhood. If the Minister is going to take away local option fuller facilities should be given to the public to make representation to the courts. The right of members of the public to voice their views before the courts has been strenuously opposed, but in Cape Town the right of audience has been vindicated. Publication in the &#x201C;Gazette&#x201D; alone will give no opportunity to the public to know what applications are being made. The publication of these notices in the daily press is a well-established, well-known and valuable practice.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>As a compromise I will move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 30, to insert &#x201C;in the case of new licences or the transfer or removal of an existing licence.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Under the amendment all applications for new licences or transfers would be published in the daily papers, but notices with reference to the renewal of existing licences would appear in the &#x201C;Government Gazette&#x201D; only</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister forgets that with regard to existing licences conditions may have changed since the last sitting of the court. For instance, some of the existing licence holders may have diverged from a proper course of conduct. A licence holder has no vested rights and he must be prepared to justify the issue of a licence to him year by year. It is not sufficient to say that he secured a licence some years ago and the public has no further interest in the matter. There may be other good reasons why it should be brought prominently to the notice of the public. The Minister admits publicity is necessary, but thinks it is sufficient to make an insertion in the &#x201C;Gazette.&#x201D; If publicity is necessary, to confine it to the &#x201C;Gazette&#x201D; is not sufficient publication for the purpose of giving reasonable publicity.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#henderson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HENDERSON</person>:</from>

<p>I think the Minister is wrong. It is essential to have publicity, and the Minister makes a plea of economy the excuse for stopping publicity in newspapers, which I think is rather far-fetched. In subsection (2) of this clause it is not even necessary for it to be posted or published, and if not it does not affect the validity of the licence. This clause says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">The validity of a licence granted by the licensing board shall not be affected merely by reason of the fact that any notice required by this section was not duly posted, published or sent as herein provided.</block>

<p>If the Minister wishes to give publicity he must alter sub-section (2), or else include the newspapers, which is the only way possible of giving advice of what is going on. I hope the Minister will go the whole length and leave the clause as it is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I support the proposal of the Minister because people who want to object to an existing licence must know about it. If they do not know about the licence what objection can they have against it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>As this Bill is drafted it means a double publication, in an English and a Dutch newspaper. There are some districts where there is no Dutch paper circulating. There are also some districts where no English paper circulates. The Minister can be met on the plea for economy if the words &#x201C;English and Dutch&#x201D; are deleted, and it was left as &#x201C;publication in a newspaper circulating in the district.&#x201D; I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 63, to omit &#x201C;an English and a Dutch&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;a&#x201D;,</block>

<p>because I believe that the Minister will not embark upon a campaign similar to that recently embarked upon by the Minister of the Interior.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I think I am prepared to withdraw my amendment in favour of that amendment. It meets what the hon. member for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz) and myself are aiming at, and it meets economy without interfering with publicity. I withdraw my amendments in favour of the amendment of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I suggest the Minister inserts &#x201C;at least one newspaper,&#x201D; which will give him discretion to act in whatever way he thinks desirable.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

<p>With leave of committee, amendments proposed by the Minister of Justice withdrawn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 63, to omit &#x201C;an English and a Dutch&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;at least one&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Coulter put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Blackwell dropped.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 38,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>It is provided that any objector can have the benefit of any legal assistance. I move, therefore&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 35, after &#x201C;(1)&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;Any person who has lodged an application as aforesaid may appear before the licensing board personally or by counsel or attorney and&#x201D;.</block>

<p>I hope the Minister will agree to that.</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 39,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>In sub-section (2) it appears that in the case of a renewal of a licence the board can take objection, and does not need <span class="col_839-840" refersTo="page_0486"/>to inform the applicant, and the applicant has no right to a postponement in order to reply thereto. I do not see why that difference should occur between a new licence and a renewal. I ask the Minister to delete the words &#x201C;where the application is for a licence or renewal of a licence.&#x201D; If the Minister has no objection, I will move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In lines 63 and 64, to omit &#x201C;where the application is for the renewal, transfer or removal of a licence</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to support the remarks of the hon. member for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz), and remind the Minister that that is the existing law in the Cape. In the case of a man who raises an objection, and who is not a member of the court, he has to give notice of the objection to the applicant, but the board may take notice of an objection amongst themselves. Then, of course, as a man has no notice of the objection that is taken, it is only fair that he should have notice. It seems to me, from sub-section (1), as if the intention had been simply to take over the existing Cape law, which, in this connection, speaks of notice, whether it be the granting of a licence or the renewal, transfer or removal of a licence.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I am afraid the hon. member for North-East Rand has been somewhat hasty in this matter. We discussed this very point in our commission. This is exactly what is in the Transvaal proclamation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>That is where you were too persuasive.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Section 28 (2) of the Transvaal Proclamation is exactly word for word as it appears here. The reason is this&#x2014;that, if the licensing court is about to take the drastic step of refusing an existing licence, that is very much more serious than telling a man who is applying for a licence that the court is not going to give him one. Sometimes there are 150 applicants for new licences, and I have known the court say at the beginning: &#x201C;We are going to give no new licences to any of you.&#x201D; If they had to adjourn for four days in the case of every application for a new licence, the whole thing would be held up.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) seems to realize the point we are taking. Why should a man not know the secret reason in the mind of the court why he is not to get his licence? They may have thought that he is a man of bad character, and have confused him with someone else. Why is he not entitled to be told: &#x201C;We are not giving you a licence because of our own knowledge we take the point that you are not a man of good character.&#x201D; Surely every man who is prevented from getting a valuable thing for which he has applied, for a good reason is entitled to know that reason, and entitled to know it in time to put his case before the tribunal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Section 27 (2) says that the board shall give no reason for its decision.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>If that has escaped us I hope we shall deal with it at the report stage. The hon. member&#x2019;s great idea seems to blot everybody out without giving a reason.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Tell us what your idea is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>My idea is to give every man fair play whether he is an applicant for a new licence or a renewal. The board may have an objection which makes an application for a licence hopeless. If another man outside the court took an objection he would have to inform them. The board may not give a licence to a man because he belongs to a particular race, or because of his political views. Surely, in common justice, if they have got an objection to that individual, he is entitled to know it. There have been cases on record where a man who had a bad criminal record, and who was not the applicant in the particular case, was mixed up with another innocent person of the same name, who was the applicant. That man has no chance of rectifying it until he has learnt that he has been confused with somebody else. If the board have a sound objection to the man, let them tell him what it is, and he can meet it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I think that might be so where there is a personal objection, but so far as new licences are concerned, your objections are usually general objections. There may be too many licences, and the board does not want to add to the number, and the result of notice being given to every individual of the objection would mean an enormous expansion of the number of days on which the court would have to sit. The general objection is you have too many licences, and there would be a hundred people asking for their Cases to be heard on that general ground. I do not think that a special objection to the person himself would be a very common ground, because that special objection very seldom arises, and there is generally very good information before the court. I also wish to accentuate the other point, that there is no injustice to the applicant. He is able, on a subsequent occasion, again to make application. You are not depriving him of rights by this course. It would make the work of the licensing court enormously difficult and unduly protracted, and it would make the position much worse than in the section as it is worded. The section as worded is the section which has been used in our licensing laws, and I have never heard of a case where an injustice has been permitted. There should be more facilities with regard to the first application than with regard to renewals.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to put to the Minister this case. If any member of the public feels that a new licence should not be granted, he must lodge his objection seven days before the sitting of the court. The applicant is entitled to know what particular case he has to <span class="col_841-842" refersTo="page_0487"/>meet, which, after all, facilitates the work of the court. We find in Clause 39 that the right is given to the licensing court to take objections on its own motion. That is because, at the last moment, the police authorities have discovered something which they want to bring to the notice of the court. It may be wrong, it might come from a poisoned source.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>He has no rights.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>He has the right to justice. Something is said to the magistrate by the police authority which the applicant might be able to meet. He appears in court and is told of this for the first time. I ask the hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) if that is the method with which he would deal with the case. I think it would be a flaw in the procedure laid down in this Act unless you follow quite logically the terms of 39 (1), and say that at least you will give the applicant an opportunity of meeting the objection.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Let me put this to my hon. friend. It would simply result in giving increased work to lawyers, and it would take weeks to get through the work of the board if each application had to be considered separately.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>Surely the hon. member does not mean to say that because there is pressure of work at the court those who come last shall be worse served.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I do not mean to say that at all.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>I do not know much about licensing courts, but I do know that in all other cases, except the first application, the applicant has a vested interest of some kind. He has something at stake, but what has the first applicant at stake? He loses nothing if he does not get that licence, and here to have the whole of the courts of the country congested in order to hear objections to the first application Is absurd.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I totally disagree with the last speaker for the reason that before a man sometimes applies for a licence he puts up a fairly good hotel. In the first application he makes he usually has his brother licensed victuallers working hand in hand with the teetotalers to object to his licence.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) is usually a fair man, but he seems to have missed the whole point. We do not say an applicant has the right to a licence. We say he has the right to get a fair hearing of his case. Supposing there is a case of mistaken identity, and that one of the members of the board tells the others that he knows a man of that name who was sentenced to imprisonment, and they say: &#x201C;We have taken account of something which renders it impossible to grant a licence.&#x201D; But they do not tell him what it is. Does the hon. member not see how grossly unfair that is? That man is going to labour under the great injustice for the rest of his life that be has been refused a licence without being able to ascertain what was in the minds of the court. In the Cape courts they had to give a man notice, and it has worked perfectly well. It does not follow they had to give him a licence, but he went away with the satisfaction that he had had a fair hearing.</p>

<p>Question put: That the words proposed to be omitted, stand part of the clause,</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;49.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt. T. W.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Pienaar, B. J.; Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;27.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Barlow, A. G.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>Du Toit. F. J.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Tellers: Alexander, M.; de Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Question accordingly affirmed and the amendment proposed by Dr. H. Reitz negatived.</p>

<p>Clause, as printed, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 40,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 6, after &#x201C;generally&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;but without reference to any particular application under or coming under the consideration of the board&#x201D;.</block>

<p>I would like to refer the committee to Clauses 36 and 37. The public are permitted by these clauses to address licensing boards. The words used in the margin are &#x201C;general addresses to <span class="col_843-844" refersTo="page_0488"/>licensing boards&#x201D;. In line 6 the word &#x201C;generally&#x201D; is used, and in order to avoid any confusion I would like the Minister to accept these words, by which anybody appearing may address the board generally and not specifically.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I think the word &#x201C;generally&#x201D; is quite sufficient. After all, the board must see that the limits are not transgressed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>Does the Minister say that when anybody appears before the court they may only speak in general terms and not refer specifically to one particular licence?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>They may refer incidentally to a particular application.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>Why should people be allowed to make a rambling objection which would defeat the provision which states that where objection is taken to a particular licence that objection must be submitted in writing to the secretary of the board? If you allow a general debate&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>It does not allow a general debate.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I think it does. The intention is that notice should be given to an applicant so that he can be forewarned, and he cannot be forewarned if people can take objection to his licence in a general statement. I have no objection to the temperance people having a hearing, not in the least. What does &#x201C;generally&#x201D; mean?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>Generally</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>For that lucid explanation, thanks; but notwithstanding I press my amendment.</p>

<p>Amendment put and negatived.</p>

<p>Clause as printed put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 41,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 47 to omit &#x201C;or&#x201D; where it occurs for the first time; and in the same line, after &#x201C;transfer&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;or ratification of temporary transfer or removal&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>New clause to follow Clause 41,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the following be a new clause to follow Clause 41:</block>

<ol>

<li>42. If in the Province of the Cape of Good Hope any application is made for a new licence within a municipality it shall not be lawful for the board to grant such licence unless there shall be lodged with the magistrate of the district at least four days before the meeting of the board to consider the said application a memorial or memorials approving of the issue of the said licence, signed by a majority of the voters registered on the municipal voters&#x2019; roll for the election of members of the municipal council within the limits of the municipality (or where the municipality is divided into wards, within the limits of the ward of the municipality) in which municipality or ward respectively the premises proposed to be licensed are situated.</li>

</ol>

<p>In the Bill as it stands no provision is made for the exercise of local option. It simply means if it is proposed to introduce a new licence into a particular municipality or a particular ward in a municipality the majority of the municipal registered voters in the municipality or the ward respectively can object to the introduction of the licence. That is only a small part of the local option right which we have in the Cape law at present. That particular form of right has been very highly treasured. In one ward, in Observatory, for 30 years by hard work on the part of the residents they have managed to keep this particular ward entirely free of licensed premises. I think this should be retained for the Cape to allow people who live in particular areas to decide for themselves whether a licence shall be admitted in the ward or not. It is a question of the knowledge of the way in which the thing works. We have found the exercize of the right to be of the highest benefit to the particular ward in which the right has been exercized. The deprivation of that right will be seriously felt. The loss of the power will be deeply deplored, and I ask the House to take into consideration the desire of the people to say for themselves whether licensed premises should or should not be introduced. With these few words I hope the Minister will accept the motion. The hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) the other day in discussing this matter of the local option clause said there had been a certain amount of abuse in connection with memorials. Of course, all these things are open to certain kinds of abuse in a small way, but I think the idea of the abuse of memorials is greatly exaggerated, and I think they can be safely regulated and safeguarded so that there can be no abuse at all. I urge the Minister to realize the deep feeling and earnest desire of a large number of people in the province to retain the right they have under the law at present.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>As I understand the hon. member for Rondebosch (Mr. Close), he only provides for a memorial against the issue of a licence. He says nothing about extending it further to meet the case of those in favour of a licence. Then it should follow when you have a memorial in favour of a licence, that the licensing board should grant such a licence. The hon. member only takes one half and leaves the other half. I hope the Minister will at this stage report progress so that we can have time to consider the amendment moved by the hon. member for Rondebosch.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>It simply forms a new clause in the Act. I suggest that the licensing board shall not grant a licence unless there is lodged with the licensing board a memorial or memorials approving of the issue of the licence.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from><span class="col_845-846" refersTo="page_0489"/>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will accept this amendment. He proposes to take away a right of the Western Province. In one neighbourhood here, a working class neighbourhood, they have protected themselves for years against a bar being started in their vicinity. There are other areas like the Garden City springing up, and under the present conditions the residents can protect themselves against the introduction of bars. Why should my hon. friend want to take this away? It is a right that is very much valued by the people of the Cape Province.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRUBEN</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to support this amendment very strongly, and I hope the Minister will find it possible to accept it. This right is valued not only in the towns, but in other parts of the country. Take Grabouw, over the mountains. It has no licence. A strong endeavour has been made to introduce a licence. It is one of the few places in the Western Province where they have a sober coloured community. I do not think we ought to give up that right of a community to decide whether or not there should be a licence. It is only right that the community which is concerned with the consumption or sale of liquor should have a say whether a new licence is to be granted or not.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I drew the amendment up in its present form for the Cape of Good Hope because the law is that way at present. The people from Natal have said it is the same, and people from the Free State have suggested it might be applied there, but I have tried to put the minimum which I thought the Minister would accept. I am quite prepared to accept amendments extending it to the Transvaal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>This is a motion by a side wind introducing some portion of local option, because after all it is local option to say that a new licence cannot be granted by the licensing court unless the majority of the people sign a memorial in favour of the licence being granted. That is a principle to which I am very strongly opposed, because I think the law should be laid down that the central administration should deal with the matter, and not the inhabitants of any particular area, and I think, where we have so carefully dealt with the position of the licensing court in this Bill and laid down the quota system which ought to make a difference in the Cape Province, that these provisions were intended to take the place of a provision of this kind. I would submit very strongly that this would form properly part of a Bill dealing specifically with the question of local option. I quite agree that we have not heard the last of local option, that we shall probably be troubled with it on some future occasion, and it will surely be time enough when we have that trouble to deal also with this question of the memorial system, which is closely analogous to local option, in that Bill dealing with local option. The people are to decide if any application for a new licence shall be considered by a licensing board. That is very analogous to local option. I do not say it is the same principle. I think it really puts the provisions of this Bill out of gear, because the memorial system was not in force in those parts of the country where you have the quota system. The quota system has been included in this Bill, and I submit it is not right to put in the memorial system.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry to hear the Minister say that this is a side wind introducing a measure of local option in this Bill. It is a consolidating Bill, it is an endeavour to consolidate the liquor laws of the four provinces of the Union, and we who come from the Cape Province have been accustomed since 1891 to a system under which those immediately concerned had a voice in saying whether they preferred to have or have not liquor licences in their midst. If the Minister had called it, as he has done on another clause, a consolidating Bill, surely he will recognize that to deprive the Cape Province of something which it deliberately placed on its statute book so many years ago to consolidate the liquor laws, is to take away from the Cape Province a privilege which I believe throughout this province is very highly valued. From where does the demand come in the Cape Province that there should be any alteration? I have not heard the liquor trade express it in any definite way. After all, we must remember that the operation of this local option clause preserves rights which may have been created. It is very often found that those who possess vested rights in the liquor trade join with other persons in preventing the increase of facilities. But we have to put on one side such questions as pro-liquor or temperance interests, and judge the matter in the general interests of the public. I would like to put it to the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) that, whether or not we can be sure that the retention of these provisions is desired in rural areas, we can be certain of one thing, that in the urban areas of the Cape Province the retention of this clause is highly desirable. I would put it to the Minister, even though he may feel disinclined to deal with this so far as the whole province is concerned, that the cities of the province are entitled to consideration. He may feel that those of us who come from the cities do not speak for the rural areas. This is a very important matter, and I would like to ask the Minister whether he would be agreeable to report progress and ask leave to sit again.</p>

<p>On the motion of Mr. Coulter, it was agreed to report progress and ask leave to sit again.</p>

<p>House Resumed.</p>

<p>Progress reported; House to resume in committee to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1928-02-08T22:38:00">10.38 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

