---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol10 - MONDAY 6 FEBRUARY 1928'
layout: debate
year: 1928
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>MONDAY, 6th FEBRUARY, 1928.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1928-02-06T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#children&#x2019;s_protection_further_amendment_bill">

<heading>CHILDREN&#x2019;S PROTECTION (FURTHER AMENDMENT) BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Education to introduce the Children&#x2019;s Protection (Further Amendment) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 9th February.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#medical_dental_and_pharmacy_bill">

<heading>MEDICAL, DENTAL AND PHARMACY BILL.</heading>

<p>First Order read: House to resume in Committee on Medical, Dental and Pharmacy Bill.</p>

<p>House in Committee:</p>

<p>[Progress reported on 2nd February on Clause 76 standing over, to which amendments had been moved.]</p>

<speech by="#christie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHRISTIE</person>:</from>

<p>After the committee adjourned after considering this clause there was a certain amount of confusion in the minds of various members. It was stated that a delegation representing the associated pharmaceutical societies in South Africa was to wait upon the Minister. They then stated the opinion of the chemists, being the unanimous opinion of all wholesale and retail chemists in South Africa. The Minister, after discussing the matter with the delegation, said he would state the case fairly to the committee and he would leave it to the committee to come to a decision. In other words, he would not make this a party question, or a Government question. It would save a tremendous lot of discussion and meet the wishes of almost everybody if he would accept my amendment. He is now slowly completing this Bill, and I would ask him to do this. The Minister has one little difficulty in regard to this question and several members have the same difficulty, and that is a circular issued by Burroughs &amp; Wellcome, Ltd. In this they set forth arguments that have little to do with the clause at all. They tell you they have reduced the price of insulin from 36s. to 3s. 4d. While they have always been progressive chemists they have also been a business firm. They are not a firm that manufactures anything in this country. Even the labels and capsules attached to medicine are made in England. Burroughs, Wellcome &amp; Co. in South Africa is purely and simply a depot. They have an office at the bottom of Hout Street, Cape Town, where there is a general manager and one or two clerks, and that is all, so far as the company is concerned in South Africa. They now ask that the Government should so alter this clause as to meet their difficulty. They are taking up the attitude that the Government should legislate so as to fit in with the articles of association in this country. The firm of Lennon, Ltd., to-day have a 100 per cent. directorate of chemists and druggists because they believe it is the best policy for them. They are a very successful firm and one of the biggest firms in this country. Another point is that my amendment will bring the South African consolidating Bill into line with what exists to-day in the Transvaal. The Transvaal Pharmacy Bill, passed in 1904&#x2014;and the hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Duncan) had a great deal to do with the passing of it&#x2014;says that the managing director of a company trading as chemists and druggists must be an accredited chemist and druggist, When the Minister had difficulties with the Bill he reminded the House he was not taking away any rights from any person. [Time limit.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry that I could not entirely follow the hon. member for Langlaagte (Mr. Christie), but as far as I could follow him I entirely disagree with him. The Minister moved an amendment on Thursday by the insertion of further words, and this amendment does clarify the clause to a considerable extent, but it does not go quite <span class="col_705-706" refersTo="page_0419"/>so far and clarify it so completely as mine did. It will be best if I withdraw my amendment and support that of the Minister. We will then have a clear issue between the hon. member for Langlaagte, who is an employing chemist, and the Minister. As the Minister&#x2019;s amendment stands, the public are entirely protected, and nobody can deal in any of these dangerous medicines except a duly qualified man. Under the Minister&#x2019;s amendment there is one individual in the Union responsible to the Public Health Department to see that all the chemistry work is carried out properly and within the law. Under the Minister&#x2019;s amendment it would particularly allow of a storekeeper in a small town to provide it with the advantages of a qualified chemist, because he could utilize that man in his business for other purposes, while it would never pay for a chemist to set up for himself in a small village. The principal point the hon. member for Langlaagte made as far as I could catch it was that all the big chemists in this country are in favour of his amendment, and it is suggested that they have all the influence of the big chemists behind them&#x2014;I will not say that they wave the big stick. They are chemist employers, not employees. Yet here is an hon. member from the Labour benches talking good employers&#x2019; stuff, and here am I from these benches talking diametrically opposite. I do not suggest that as the hon. member is an employer that is why he is taking up the line be is, but his amendment is distinctly in favour of the chemist employer and diametrically opposed to the chemist&#x2019;s assistant. Under the Minister&#x2019;s amendment it means that there must be a bigger demand and more employment for chemists&#x2019; assistants. Under the amendment of the hon. member there would be an entirely close corporation in chemists&#x2019; business in this country controlled by the big concerns. I would suggest that there is no reason whatever why chemists&#x2019; businesses should be drawn into a close corporation. Provided the public are protected against unsatisfactory chemical preparations the country should be prepared to leave the matter an open one. In the ordinary chemists&#x2019; business not more than 15 per cent. comes from professional work and the other 85 per cent. is purely the ordinary trade of a general dealer. When one goes away from the larger centres if you want notepaper or a walking stick or a sponge, you go to the chemist for it. You do not want to protect people who sell these things, and they can look after themselves. Provided the individual dealing with the 15 per cent. is a properly qualified man, the committee should leave it at that. With the leave of the committee I withdraw my amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>The chemists have now agreed to accept the amendment of the hon. member for Langlaagte&#x2014;not that they are satisfied, and they would very much prefer mine&#x2014;but in the present state of affairs in the House they know it is not prepared to carry it. The hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford) looks upon the chemists&#x2019; business purely as a business concern. I would like to look upon it as a business to do good to and protect the public.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>15 per cent. of it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I do not care whether it is 15 per cent. or 5 per cent.; it is in the interests of the public, and we are out to protect the public. The chemist has a licence to dispense, and that is the part we have to look after. The hon. member referred to a close corporation; not a single other profession has a man who is allowed to be a partner and is not qualified. Clause 75 provides, in effect, that every partner in a chemist&#x2019;s and druggist&#x2019;s business must be a qualified man. The moment, however, that they accept the privileges given by the Companies Act we depart from the principle that every man concerned must be qualified. We must consider not only the interests of the public, but the interests of the chemists, and to be qualified professionally a man must first pass a preliminary examination, serve for three years and then pass a stiff professional examination. Assuming that he is qualified to be a druggist, but does not happen to have money, he may enter into partnership with a man who has capital. We have cases of absolutely unqualified men forming a company and putting in a man who has never been qualified, or who has been disqualified. I feel very strongly that we have to put aside the idea of simply protecting the men who are running chemists&#x2019; establishments as a commercial concern. We have to consider the public, and unless all the men in the business are qualified they have no right to be there.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I don&#x2019;t agree with my hon. friend. Is it necessary that every man in a big concern for the sale of drugs should be a qualified chemist, as they do not all do dispensing work? Some of them, for instance, have to look out for the financial side of the undertaking. I shall support the Minister&#x2019;s amendment, for it meets the case thoroughly.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>I am in favour of the amendment of the hon. member for Langlaagte (Mr. Christie). Take a printing establishment. I do not quote it because some people will say the press is analogous to a chemist shop, because it spreads so much poison, but because, if the director knows nothing about printing, there is a danger of the business being a failure. As managing director he ought, for the sake of the business itself, to be a man who understands printing. In this case, the point is, I think, very strong. The danger that may arise through wrong treatment, etc., in a chemist&#x2019;s shop, is very great, and therefore the chemists in the Transvaal are apparently somewhat proud, impressed with the position they at present occupy, because, as I understand, the provision that the managing director must be an expert in pharmaceutical matters has existed for years&#x2014;and this is one of the <span class="col_707-708" refersTo="page_0420"/>most important reasons, I think&#x2014;and my constituency has asked me to vote for the amendment. We in the Transvaal have hitherto been successful with the stipulation, and I think our friends in the Cape should also try the system. I think it will prove a great success here.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>It seems to me that the Minister&#x2019;s amendment meets the whole case&#x2014;I don&#x2019;t see what more is required. It amused me to hear the hon. member for Langlaagte (Mr. Christie) talk about the letter from Burroughs, Wellcome and Company. He said they were a very progressive firm, but they always have an eye on profits. Perhaps the hon. member for Langlaagte is an exception, but I have never known a chemist who had not an eye on the profits. When I was in office and the department was trying to get supplies of drugs for its various institutions, we found the chemists in particular places made an absolute agreement with each other, and put in one tender only. They took advantage of the fact that they are a limited profession in order to form a ring and force up prices against the Government. One poor man who tried to stand outside the ring, and tendered at a low price, was dealt with very promptly and sharply by his brethren. Does the pious observation of the hon. member for Langlaagte that Burroughs, Wellcome and Co. are actuated by profits mean that other members of the profession take a very much higher outlook? That, at any rate, does not agree with my experience of chemists. We should be very careful before we do anything to enable these people to draw a tighter line around themselves than is necessary. If we provide, as the Minister proposes to do, that in respect of its business as chemists there should be a qualified manager, then we are going quite as far as public interests demand.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#christie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHRISTIE</person>:</from>

<p>I am very much surprised that the hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Duncan) should suggest that argument&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>We cannot hear.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#christie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHRISTIE</person>:</from>

<p>Chemists have never forced up prices, but they combine to protect their interests against departmental stores, such as Norman Ansteys in Johannesburg and Stuttaford &amp; Co. in Cape Town and other companies who try to exploit chemists&#x2019; business for the purpose of having an advertisement to show how cheaply they sold drapery and other things. The chemists were compelled to combine not to raise prices but to prevent themselves being exploited by firms such as I have just mentioned. The profession of the hon. member for Yeoville recognises that it is only right that a fair reward should be given them for services rendered. I take it that lawyers, advocates and barristers fix their fees on the basis of what they consider a fair reward for the work they have given to their clients. Then we have the hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford) who certainly introduces into the debate something I did not think he would have brought forward, namely, the suggestion that a person in moving something is influenced by his own point of view. He tells this committee that the hon. member for Langlaagte (Mr. Christie) is an employing chemist, and then he says &#x201C;Of course, I don&#x2019;t want to say anything about that.&#x201D; Very clever of the hon. member. Then he goes further and says that assistants are not in agreement with what I said. Well, let me say this, every chemist&#x2019;s assistant is in favour of my amendment. Every member of the Pharmaceutical Society is behind me in this amendment, and the great majority of them are employees, and not employing chemists. There is no question of me speaking for the employing chemists. I speak for every chemist in the country, and the Minister knows that. With regard to the suggestion by the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger) following upon the suggestion of the hon. member for Newla.nds (Mr. Stuttaford) that by having the Minister&#x2019;s alternative titles we should encourage a further spread of chemist businesses in the country, I want to point out to the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) and to the Minister that when you put these titles, managing director, general manager or principal executive officer, they would only choose the least title of the three, namely general manager. Where would the public be protected by that? The type of man who would be engaged as general manager would be one who is to-day a derelict. I can give you chapter and verse for that. We have to-day an increasing number of people who are endeavouring to exploit the chemist and druggist business, and you would find the type of man who is engaged as manager is one who would have no responsibilities at all, and for ten out of the eleven hours he is supposed to be there, he would not be there at all. Under this Act we are going to administer the habit-forming Drugs Act, the Dangerous Drugs Act, and there is a question then that every person placed in a position of responsibility, whether he himself is in business or he is general manager, would find it quite easy to abuse the law dealing with the importation and the sale of cocaine, opium and morphia, which every Government in the civilized world is trying to keep down as much as it possibly can. It is only by having the chemists in such a position where they can control companies and have responsibility, and where a firm would only take a, man of honour as manager, that they would find it would not pay them to play the fool with regard to dangerous drugs and make money out of them by breaking the law. In the chemists we have a body of men to-day which is an honourable body, men who take a pride in their profession and men who have assisted the department in regard to the sale of drugs. The Union Medical Officer, Dr. Mitchell, will tell the department he has had a great deal of assistance from the chemists in the country. The carrying out of the law would not have been so easy for the department but for the chemists throughout the country. I ask hon. members to vote for my amendment. The Transvaal chemists are not asking for anything more than they have at <span class="col_709-710" refersTo="page_0421"/>present. In the Transvaal a limited liability company has to appoint as managing director a man who is a chemist and druggist, and if he resigns they must appoint another as managing director. With regard to this &#x00A3;12 10s. registration, which the Minister has now amended, when the general manager or principal executive officer is appointed he has to be registered with the Pharmacy Board and pay &#x00A3;12 10s. The hon. member for Cape Town (Central) says that if they have to pay that they would not make a change every month. Let me say that it would be easy to change the general manager, and it would be a considerable time before we knew he had disappeared from that firm. If the general manager was in the position the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) desired him to be, he could be picked up from the streets to-day on a payment of &#x00A3;12 10s., and it might be months afterwards before you knew he had disappeared. The managing director has to be registered under the Companies Act and with the South African Pharmacy Board, and we then have a double check. I submit there is every justification for the chemists asking for this, not only in the public interest but in carrying out the law itself. I would say further that I think the biggest justification of the whole lot for this committee is the fact that the opposition has come from the two members I have mentioned, the hon. member for Newlands and the hon. member for Cape Town (Central).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>And the hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Duncan).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#christie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHRISTIE</person>:</from>

<p>I say that that should be sufficient justification. [Time limit.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rockey">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROCKEY</person>:</from>

<p>I never thought at any time I should rise in agreement with anything which comes from the hon. member for Langlaagte (Mr. Christie). I do rise to support him to-day. I have been inundated with circulars from every chemist in the Transva.al asking me to support this amendment. I do not for a moment say that chemists are greater altruists than the lawyers. I do say the chemists fulfil the laws of humanity, whilst the lawyers only bleed them. I would point out that the chemist and druggist of this country is not an ordinary artisan, but somebody who has to spend a good many years of his life in being educated and who has to pass very difficult examinations. I would like you to consider the people in the wayside villages and the backveld, the platteland. It is quite possible under this clause, as it now stands, for anybody to start a chemist and druggist business. As the hon. member for Langlaagte (Mr. Christie) pointed out, the chemist has in his power the handling of very dangerous drugs. The managing director is apparently the person with responsibility, the person with power, the person whom you can get at, but it would be perfectly easy, if you wanted to get at him for him to discharge his manager, and there would be no recourse against the managing director. You would have no hold upon the company. I trust that the Minister will accept the amendment of the hon. member for Langlaagte, and let it be made clear that it is the managing director or somebody whom you can get at if you want to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ANDERSON</person>:</from>

<p>I intend to support this amendment because I think it is essential that responsibility should attach in carrying on the responsible calling of a chemist and druggist to a qualified registered person. As the clause stands at present it will be difficult to fix responsibility where it should rest. Another reason why I think this amendment is advisable is that it would prevent unqualified persons exploiting the services of qualified persons, and all those in professions know very well that that is a safeguard which has been set up in nearly every profession. I think the chemist and druggist is entitled to the same protection. At the present time, it seems to me, it is competent for a merchant or general dealer to set up a pharmaceutical business by merely employing a qualified and registered chemist, and in that way be able to exploit the services of a professional man for his own personal benefit. In the public interest I think the amendment is a precaution which should be taken not merely as a protection to the chemist himself, but also as a protection to the public. For that reason I intend to support the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#papenfus">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PAPENFUS</person>:</from>

<p>I have received communications from every chemist in my own constituency to support the amendment of the hon. member for Langlaagte, and, provided such amendment is reasonable, I am prepared to do so. The sine qua non of the whole clause is that the person must be a chemist. The difference between the Minister and the hon. member for Langlaagte is that the chemist the hon. member wants must be the managing director. The chemist that the Minister wants may be either a managing director or general manager, or principal executive officer. Now, why not? I can conceive cases where a managing director may have even less power than a general manager. The great point is that the man must be a chemist. Whether you call him the managing director or general manager or principal executive officer, what does it matter?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_public_health">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH</person>:</from>

<p>Some of the amendments which have been moved have been withdrawn, and that simplifies matters very considerably, but still the cause, as it stands, is, I think, not quite so clear to everybody in the House, and, therefore, it is necessary perhaps that I should add a few remarks to what has already been said. The general principle underlying this section is that the public generally shall be protected against incompetence or unreliability on the part of a chemist and druggist. Everybody, of course, understands that it is very vital that, when a doctor treats a patient and gives a prescription, that prescription should be made up correctly. Therefore, the chemist and druggist, who is the responsible man, must be competent arid he must be reliable. Now this clause proposes to ensure that, and therefore, <span class="col_711-712" refersTo="page_0422"/>in the first instance it is laid down that when there is a chemist and druggist&#x2019;s business having various pharmacies in the country then for that business generally there must be a responsible man who is responsible to the Pharmacy Board, and whom you can get at under the law. Another safeguard is that the control of every individual pharmacy must be under a competent and reliable chemist and druggist, so that that man, as far as that individual pharmacy is concerned, can be got at by the Pharmacy Board and by the law. That is the general principle underlying this clause. Now I must explain how the provisions of this Bill have come to stand as they do. Originally, as this Bill emerged from the select committee to which it was referred, the provision was, as far as bodies corporate are concerned only, that the managing director shall be a qualified chemist and druggist. Afterwards it was represented that there are some firms, for instance Burroughs, Wellcome, where the company is registered abroad, where they are doing a business not only in South Africa, but in a large number of countries throughout the world, and that company being registered in Great Britain the managing director has certain statutory duties to perform and for that reason he has to remain in Great Britain; he cannot be resident here, and it is impossible, or very difficult, for such a company to have two managing directors, and it was represented that to make it possible for such a company to continue business in South Africa, some wider provision must be made in the Bill to cover their case. For that reason it was made possible in such a case that not only the managing director shall be a chemist and druggist&#x2014;he must be in England&#x2014;but that as far as South Africa is concerned it may be the principal executive officer who has the supervision of the whole of the business throughout the Union of that particular firm. That is the history of this alteration that has been effected in the Bill since it emerged from the select committee. I undertook when a deputation from the chemists met me to take up this general attitude in Parliament, that I would certainly not make it a party matter. It is a matter which I would rather leave to the judgment of the House. Of course, we have heard the one side; we have heard members who represent the view of the chemist stating that we ought to favour purely South African concerns by making it impossible for a firm registered overseas, like Burroughs, Wellcome, for instance, to operate in South Africa under existing conditions as they do now. They contend also that if in South Africa you have only the principal executive officer of the business, you cannot get at the really responsible person who is at the head of the concern. These gentlemen have explained the matter better than I can do. On the other side it can be said that if we accept the amendment of the hon. member for Langlaagte (Mr. Christie) we are, to a large extent, going to restrict trade, and that we are cutting out competition.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Quite correct too.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_public_health">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH</person>:</from>

<p>Already there is little competition in South Africa between chemists&#x2019; businesses.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#christie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHRISTIE</person>:</from>

<p>That has never been said.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_public_health">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH</person>:</from>

<p>No, I am saying that, that we shall be restricting and cutting out competition, and that will not be in the interests of the general public. As I said, the House can judge about these two points of view. I certainly will not accept that amendment and personally I am going to vote against it, but in any case, I think we can safely leave it to the judgment of the House generally to come to a conclusion on that point.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rockey">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROCKEY</person>:</from>

<p>I want to put the Minister right on one point. It would be quite easy to register companies in this country, so that point falls by the way. There is another point in regard to cocaine. You are putting in the hands of unprincipled people a very dangerous weapon. Under the clause as it stands a man with a parcel of cocaine can go to another man and say, &#x201C;We will open a store and you must sell the cocaine.&#x201D; That is the difficulty with liquor in the Transvaal; you can get at the man who sells it, but not at the man who supplies it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>The last speaker has made some extraordinary statements. As I understand him we have to be dreadfully careful about this question of habit-forming drugs. We all agree with him, but this is another of these funk ideas constantly being put up in the Bill. In the case of these gentlemen who are supposed to be suborned by someone else to sell habit-forming drugs, will it make any difference whether you call the man managing director or principal executive officer? People who come along and get other people to sell habit-forming drugs will do exactly the same thing under the amendment of the hon. member for Langlaagte (Mr. Christie), but they will call him managing director. The whole question of these habit-forming drugs does not come into the scope of this clause at all. If a man wants to be crooked and sell habit-forming drugs they will call the man who sells them anything they like and anything the law likes. I do hope the House will accept the Minister&#x2019;s amendment, which lays the matter down perfectly clearly and reasonably satisfactorily.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#christie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHRISTIE</person>:</from>

<p>I just want to clear up this point the Minister has made. He has shown his solicitude for Burroughs Wellcome. The hon. member for Parktown (Mr. Rockey) has shown how they can meet the law as it exists to-day in the Transvaal, and that is by forming South African companies. They have only a little depot, but their goods are handled by every chemist in the country. They would not lose any sale whatever. They could still have, instead of the depot, more representatives in this country keeping their products before the doctors and chemists. In regard to the other question of restriction of trade I was very disappointed to hear the Minister. I think it would have been right for the Minister <span class="col_713-714" refersTo="page_0423"/>to have waited for the other side to raise these objections. The other side had not raised them. There is no sign of restriction of trade. There is no suggestion except made by the Minister that my amendment will cause restriction of trade. In accepting my amendment you will be doing what the Minister claims and said he intended to do&#x2014;taking no rights away from any person or body of people who have those rights to-day. Messrs. Burroughs, Wellcome &amp; Co. are the people the Minister is standing up for, who have not bought a cork or a label in this country.</p>

<p>With leave of committee, amendments proposed by Mr. Stuttaford and Maj. G. B. van Zyl withdrawn.</p>

<p>Question put: That the words &#x201C;or general manager or principal executive officer&#x201D; in lines 34 and 35, proposed to be omitted by Mr. Christie, stand part of the clause,</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;44.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Malan, C. W.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg. J. J.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Pienaar, B. J.; Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;59.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Anderson. H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Chaplin, F. D. P.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p>Deane. W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Madeley, W. B.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Oost, R.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R.; Robinson, C. P.</p>

<p>Question accordingly negatived and the words omitted.</p>

<p>With leave of committee amendment proposed by the Minister of Public Health in line 35 withdrawn.</p>

<p>Remaining amendments proposed by the Minister of Public Health put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>The title having been agreed to.</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Bill reported with amendments; to be considered on 9th February.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#liquor_bill">

<heading>LIQUOR BILL.</heading>

<p>Second Order read: House to go into committee on the Liquor Bill.</p>

<p>House in Committee:</p>

<p>On Clause 2,</p>

<speech by="#payn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PAYN</person>:</from>

<p>What is the reason for the omission of the Transkeian territories from the operation of the Bill? Is it because that the conditions in the Transkei are so excellent that it is unnecessary to change them? There are many native territories in the Union which are in the same position as in the Transkei; why is provision not made for the extension of the principle obtaining in the Transkei to the other native territories by proclamation?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It largely follows from what the hon. member has said. We made provision for government of the Transkei by proclamation, and it is better that anything necessary for the Transkei should be imposed by proclamation. It is a question largely for the Native Affairs Department. I think we should not depart from that system of government by proclamation. The Native Affairs Department is strongly in favour of this course which was approved by the House under the Act the hon. member referred to.</p>

<p>Clause put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 3,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I have an amendment that does not affect the merits of this, but makes it clearer. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In paragraph (b) of sub-section (1), lines 22 and 23, to omit &#x201C;, any body elected or constituted and any office established&#x201D; in <span class="col_715-716" refersTo="page_0424"/>line 25, to omit &#x201C;election, constitution or establishment&#x201D; in lines 26 and 27 to omit &#x201C;elected, constituted or established, as the case may be&#x201D; and to add the following new sub-section to follow sub-section (2):</block>

<ol>

<li>(3) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to repeal, or affect the operation of, any provision of the Native Administration Act, 1927 (Act No. 38 of 1927).</li>

</ol>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I do not know whether the Minister proposes to introduce many amendments to the Bill. We have his assurance in this case that they are not important. Will the Minister table the amendments, and give us a chance to study them?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>All the amendments I shall deal with will be drafting amendments, and will not deal with the merits of the case. I shall not reach any amendments on the merits of the Bill to-day.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>In the Cape, especially the country districts, the practice has grown up to issue a licence after the erection of a hotel upon a proper plan agreed to by the licensing court. The proviso is that as soon as the building is complete in terms of the plan, the licence is issued. The licensing courts in the Cape Province meet in a few weeks&#x2019; time, and there may be such licences as appear on the application form every year. The issue is dependent upon the completion of the building in the terms of the plan, but before the building is completed, the new law will come into operation. It comes into force in October, and the applicant would come before the new licensing court and the grant of the previous licensing court would fall through. Is there no way of protecting such issue of a licence? The practice is very prevalent in the Cape Province. I may have an opportunity of moving an amendment later on, but I do not think such a case is protected in Clause 3.</p>

<p>*I think my amendment comes in para. (a), and if the Minister&#x2019;s amendment is adopted in a subsequent paragraph I shall not be able to put mine.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I will read out what the Minister proposes. I am not yet putting the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>The difficulty raised by the hon. member was not put before me, and I should like to discuss it with him. If it is necessary we can make the amendment at the report stage. It is a difficulty which we do not have in the Transvaal, and I should like first of all to discuss it with the hon. member.</p>

<p>Amendments put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 4,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In lines 65 and 66, to omit &#x201C;or the licence in respect of which the application is made&#x201D; to insert the following new paragraph to follow paragraph (a):</block>

<block name="#quote">&#x201C;(b) if the applicant is not qualified under this Act to hold the licence in respect of which the application is made; or&#x201D;</block>

<block name="#quote">and to omit all the words after &#x201C;for&#x201D; in line 70 and to substitute &#x201C;Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to an application made to the first annual meeting of any licensing board under this Act by any person who, at the date of such application, was the holder of a licence under any law repealed by this Act and actually carried on business under such licence&#x201D;.</block>

<p>It changes the thing somewhat, and makes it clearer. I don&#x2019;t think there is any change in principle. It is a drafting amendment made by the draughtsman.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to draw the Minister&#x2019;s attention to the use of the singular instead of the plural in this clause. I know that under the Interpretation Act, unless the context otherwise declares, the singular includes the plural. A very important question arises under Clause 4, where the singular is used throughout. It has been in the minds of some that it might be a possible interpretation of Clause 4 that if a man, for instance, holds two licences of the same class he will be compelled to make a choice only of one of them. I do not think that is the intention for one moment, but it is possible that some question may be raised. For that reason I hope the Minister will consent to an amendment which I now move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In lines 52, 55, 56, 58 and 60 after &#x201C;licence&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;or licences&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I have no objection to that amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I would like the Minister to consider the advisability in line 59 after the word &#x201C;may&#x201D; where it occurs for the first time, to insert &#x201C;in such application,&#x201D; otherwise one of these applicants may first elect to take an hotel licence and then in six months&#x2019; time he may change his mind and say that what he wanted was a restaurant licence. I submit the intention is that he must choose once for all at the meeting of the licensing board. I therefore move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 59, after &#x201C;may&#x201D; where it occurs for the first time, to insert &#x201C;in such application&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I have no objection to the amendment.</p>

<p>Amendments put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause as amended put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 5,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from><span class="col_717-718" refersTo="page_0425"/>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Hon. members will see that I have an amendment on the paper to omit sub-sections (2) and (3). To explain the effect of this I must ask the committee to allow me to refer to Clausa 6 as well. The two clauses go together. Clause 5 is the clause which exempts from the operation of the whole Act certain classes of business and certain classes of transactions. Clause 6 merely exempts from licensing provisions, that is, from the necessity of going to the licensing court and getting a licence. Now the commission, after very carefully going into this matter, came to the conclusion that there was no reason on earth why, if the Government started an hotel or the railway started an hotel, or if the railway runs, as it does run, a refreshment room or a dining car, those institutions should not conform to precisely the same restrictions as any private institution. We believe that it would be quite impossible to defend any proposition under which you would say to the trade: &#x201C;You must not open before 10 o&#x2019;clock in the morning or keep open after 10 o&#x2019;clock at night,&#x201D; and, at the same time, to allow railway dining cars and railway refreshment rooms to be a law unto themselves. We handed the Bill over to the Minister in that form. We did not stop, but actually permitted the establishment of a State hotel if any Government was foolish enough ever to start one; we did not stop the establishment of a railway hotel, if the railway found it necessary. We merely said that all of them, including the refreshment rooms and dining cars, must observe the same restrictions as any other institution. If Clause 104 is passed&#x2014;and I do not think it will be&#x2014;the restrictions as to the employment of labour which must be observed by the ordinary hotel, must be observed by railway refreshment rooms. I regret to say that the Minister, for what I believe to be insufficient reasons, has, to some extent, gone back on the broad principle which we laid down, and has allowed the railway concerns to be entirely exempt from the provisions of this Act, except certain classes which he lays down here by number. That is wrong, and I ask him to go back to what we originally decided. Let me put this view to the Minister and to hon. members, there is no doubt that if we are going to pass the Bill in anything like the form in which it appears, we are going to tread on the corns of a good many vested interests in this country. We say to them in effect: &#x201C;You may have done so-and-so in the past, but in the interests of temperance and the general good, we are going to ask you to submit to a certain measure of sacrifice; we are going to ask wine farmers and others to submit to certain regulations.&#x201D; It stultifies the whole of that object if we say at the same time: &#x201C;You have to submit to these restrictions, but we, the State, when we start a concern, shall be exempted from all these restrictions.&#x201D; This is unfair. It is not right. Let there be a certain amount of State trading if you like, but let the State trade on fair and equal terms with the rest of the liquor trade. On this one point the liquor trade and the temperance alliance are in complete unanimity. According to the Minister of Railways the profits last year in the bars in the Cape Town station were &#x00A3;18,000. That was the ordinary trading profit. Surely you are not going to be allowed to make that profit by getting privileges which the ordinary tradesman will not get. The matter seems so plain that I will ask the Minister whether he will not be good enough to accept that principle and if he accepts it, to restore this portion to that as recommended by the commission. The commission&#x2019;s proposal will be found on page 199 in my amendment, which involves the deletion of sub-sections (2) and (3), and also sub-section (d) of the next clause. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit sub-sections (2) and (3).</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>The railway authorities themselves are very anxious to have it in this form. That by no means proves it is right that they should have it. My idea is this&#x2014;that it is a difficult thing to know for certain that we are not doing an injury to a thing like a refreshment car, a travelling car, which is in quite a different position from something situated in one place. As far as refreshment rooms are concerned, I have no objection whatever to accepting the amendment. There is no reason why they should not be liable to the same hours of opening and closing as the rest of the licensees. Even as far as the refreshment cars are concerned, I have no great feeling on that, but I think it should be dealt with in a rather different way.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will agree to the amendment. In principle he does agree. He has exempted railway restaurants and refreshment cars from 11 of the clauses. The hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) wants another 8 or 9 exceptions. That makes about 20&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I give in, yes.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will not agree to waive this provision, because the catering service of the railway and harbours is put on an entirely different formula than the licensing matters in towns and villages. The catering service on the railways provides for the needs of the travelling public, and, although other people also use it, it is primarily meant for travellers. The Minister allowed the principle of this important sale of liquor, and I hope he will not accept anything in conflict with it. There is no force in the argument of the hon. member. If there is danger of abuse in railway carriages, then the danger is removed by paragraph (2). A person running danger is excluded by the exceptions. Why should the refreshment rooms be referred to? Where has abuse taken place? Let hon. members quote instances of abuse in refreshment rooms. I am very sorry that the Minister has already more or less said that he is in favour of it. I hope he was not in earnest.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from><span class="col_719-720" refersTo="page_0426"/>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I just want to say that the position is indicated by the amendment which the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) will move to Clause 6. That will put the railway service in such a position that dining saloons are not affected.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I just want to point out that, if we look at the section of the Railways and Harbours Act No. 25 of 1916, we shall see that there is particular reason to emphasize that the railway refreshments shall also come under the provision. I am not speaking so much about railway carriages, but of other ordinary licensed premises on the railway. In a scheme to put up more railway hotels, or for the railway to run hotels, there is great danger if the licensing boards are not consulted. Why should they not come under these provisions? The Minister will simply be able to consult the magistrate, and then grant a licence. What is more alarming is that, according to Chapter 25 of Act 25 of 1916, there is the right of letting refreshment rooms to members of the public. Persons will be able to hire them without having to obtain the ordinary licence. The refreshment rooms in railway hotels must come under the licensing board to prevent abuse. I, personally, would like to see the provision regarding sub letting deleted, but it is possibly a matter that concerns the Railway Regulation Act.</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 6,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the following be a new paragraph to follow paragraph (f):</block>

<block name="#quote">(g) any European owner or lawful occupier of land selling to a licensee in terms of any permit granted under section 91 liquor from fruit or other produce grown on such land.</block>

<block name="#quote">and in line 49 to omit &#x201C;owner&#x2019;s cellar&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;land or cellar of the owner or occupier.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The first is a necessary thing to add, and we can cut down 91 as much as we like when we come to the clause. As far as the second is concerned, it is only making the language clearer.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit sub-section (d) and to substitute the following new sub-section:</block>

<ol>

<li>(d) to any person selling liquor in any hotel or other premises established and maintained by any department of state, including the Railways and Harbours Administration, or in any refreshment room or refreshment car in which liquor is sold or supplied under the authority of Chapter V of the Railways and Harbours Regulations, Control and Management Act, 1916 (Act No. 22 of 1916), or any amendment thereof: Provided that&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(i) nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed to affect any provision of the said Chapter V of Act No. 22 of 1916; and</li>

<li>(ii) for all purposes of this Act the manager or person in charge of such hotel, premises, refreshment room or refreshment car shall be deemed to be a licensee in respect thereof, and such hotel, premises, refreshment room or refreshment car shall be deemed to be licensed premises of the particular class to which they would belong if licensed under this Act.</li></ol></li>

</ol>

<block name="#quote">and in line 46, to omit &#x201C;two&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;four&#x201D;.</block>

<p>This sub-section is one inserted by the select committee to which the Minister has now agreed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I would like the Minister to explain what the amendment means. It is very difficult to follow what the meaning is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the following be a new paragraph to follow paragraph (f):</block>

<ol>

<li>(g) Any person who, or combination of persons, which, is bona fide engaged in viticulture.</li>

</ol>

<p>I move this because I think that the farmer should be exempted from licences. A wine farmer, and an association of persons who make wine, or have to do with viticulture, should not be included amongst persons who have to take out a licence. Viticulture has been going on for centuries, and the wine farmers have never been asked to take out a licence. Any farmer who sells wool, or fruit, or what not, is exempted from a licence. A few years ago it was laid down that the tobacco farmers should take out a licence, but it was so unpopular that the Government had to withdraw that licence. This is a case where the interests of the wine farmers apparently do not coincide with those of the licensed wine dealers. There is a slight conflict because the wine merchants want the monopoly. They grudge the farmers, who are the source of their wealth, being also allowed to sell wine, and, therefore, as many privileges as possible must be taken away from the farmers, and limitations put on them. I think that is unfair. The farmer should not be obliged to take out a licence, nor do I see any object in it, except that the wine merchant will be assisted a little. If my amendment is passed the obligation on the farmers to keep books, contained in the same clause, will also lapse. The clause wants the farmers to keep books for every little sale that takes place. There are many illiterate persons among the farmers, and now they are expected to note the time of day when anything is sold; they must further state what sort of drink they sold, and to whom. How on earth is a farmer to give a description of the particular kind of liquor he sells? I shall not go further into other provisions. It is a wilful obstruction be the farmers. At the second reading the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. <span class="col_721-722" refersTo="page_0427"/>Blackwell) stated that the object of the Bill was to take facilities as much as possible out of the hands of the trade; in other words, to make it unnecessarily difficult to sell drink. If that policy is to be followed, it will have an injurious, instead of a beneficial, effect. The farmers, of course, want to stop drunkenness as much as possible. A man who wants to drink will get as much of it as he wants. This provision will not alter that one bit. I hope the Minister will accept my amendment. There is no reason why wine farmers should take out a licence, and not other people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I hope that the Minister will, in this case, accept my advice, and not agree with the amendment. I cannot see that the farmers have any grievance, they are free to sell as much brandy or wine to a licensee as they want to, and if they want to deal directly with the public they will have to pay a licence of &#x00A3;1 per annum. If they had the right of selling to the public without a licence, it would be an unfair competition with the dealers, and we want to be fair to the dealers also.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>We think there is no reason why a wine farmer should be required to have a licence so long as he sells his product to licensees, but the minute he sells it direct to the public, he should take out a wine farmer&#x2019;s licence and be subject to regulations in the same way as other people are. To argue that is unfair goes beyond my comprehension. Very strong pressure was brought to bear on the select committee and the commission to lay it down that wine farmers may not sell direct to the public at all. There are large numbers of people who object to wine farmers sending hampers of wine to the Transvaal, and in this way competing with licensees who have to pay licences. With regard to my amendment to substitute &#x201C;four gallons&#x201D; for &#x201C;two gallons&#x201D; in line 46, surely the Minister should accept it, for no wine farmer would sell as little as four gallons to a licensed holder.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>The wine farmers recommended years ago that these private sales should be tightened up. No reputable wine farmer wants to turn his place into a canteen, but that is really what has been happening under the Cloete Act. Where a farmer wants to sell to private parties he must do so under rigid restrictions. There has been no more fruitful source of supplying liquor to shebeens than farmers selling in small quantities round about the Cape Peninsula. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">in line 43 to insert &#x201C;to a licensed manufacturer of vinegar or.&#x201D;</block>

<p>It Would be a distinct hardship to a vinegar manufacturer if he had to buy his requirements second-hand. I also move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit paragraph (iii) of the proviso to sub-section (2) and to substitute the following new paragraph:</block>

<ol>

<li>(iii) if such wine or brandy has been sold to, or ordered by, a licensee other than the holder of a wholesale liquor licence it shall have been so sold or ordered before being removed from the land or cellar of the owner or occupier;</li>

</ol>

<p>The amendment means that where a producer delivers direct to the wholesaler and distiller he need not keep any of these records. My amendment frees the wine farmer from keeping a record where he sells to a wholesaler and I think it should be accepted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hugo">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HUGO</person>:</from>

<p>I support the amendment of the hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal). The licensing of farmers is a new principle, the thin end of the wedge. It is said that it is necessary for control, but whether there is a licence or not the farmer will be able to sell just as much as he wishes to the licensed dealer, the &#x00A3;1 will not create control over the sale. If the wine farmers once have to take out a licence, it may, possibly, subsequently be made obligatory for a grain farmer or wool grower to have one. The principle is wrong. It will not be confined to wine. If we vote for this the farmers will subsequently say that we voted for their having to pay a licence, and we shall be blamed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to know if the hon. member for Wepener (Mr. Hugo) is prepared to see wine and brandy sold by the wine farmer, without a licence, to anyone who comes along. If that is his policy I am surprised, because usually hon. members from the Transvaal take a more sensible view than that. What would be the position in the Western Province, if the wine farmers could sell liquor to anyone who came along without licence? The hon. member&#x2019;s amendment does not say even that it shall be for his own products but for anything he likes to sell. He may even start a bar in a barn. Even with regard to his own products this Bill goes as far as we should reasonably go in the interests of the wine farmer himself. Nothing will do more harm to the wine farmer than a continuance of the policy of selling wine, and strongly fortified wine, to the people in the country round about. A good deal of the scandal of intemperance in the Cape comes from the farmer having this privilege of selling freely to the people in the country. The wine farmers should welcome these restrictions which are being put on.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I want to draw the attention of the Minister to one or two points which are not in the Bill and which I hope he will take steps to meet. I mention one on this clause because the provisions of the Wines, Spirits and Vinegar Act of 1913 are referred to. I am informed under that Act you cannot import wine from outside if it contains more than a certain quantity of free sulphur or spirits below a certain strength. I am told the provision is so drastic that very few wines conform to it, which is all the better perhaps for South African wines. If wines are landed and can be certified as for the private consumption of the importer or his friends, they need not be analyzed or tested, but if they come in for the wholesale merchant they must be tested and if they contain more than a certain quantity of free sulphur they are not <span class="col_723-724" refersTo="page_0428"/>allowed in. Surely that is unfair to those engaged in the trade. I think this is the proper place to put it right. The other point is it provides in Section 6 that certain sales can take place in the defence department, police department and prison department without it being necessary to apply for licence. I think there you should say after &#x201C;consumption&#x201D; &#x201C;on the premises.&#x201D; We should not encourage these Government departments to compete with people who are paying heavy licences. It may happen that the liquor is being bought for the consumption of friends and in that way it would compete in unfair circumstances. In order to have it as it is intended to be, a canteen under proper supervision on the premises for the benefit of employees, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In lines 64 and 68, page 8, and in line 3, on page 10, after &#x201C;consumption&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;on the premises.&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will not be induced to accept the amendment of the hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal), nor do I believe that the hon. member is actually doing a service to the wine farmers. The Minister has already met the farmers to the extent of reducing the licence to &#x00A3;2 for a new licence, and &#x00A3;1 for a renewal. We surely want to control the liquor traffic. To compare it to wool farming and butter farming is, I think, so absurd that we need not reply to it. The whole Bill proceeds from the supposition that liquor must be sold under proper control, and for such control the seller must pay the State. Everybody should not be allowed to sell, but there must be control. On the whole, we think a great deal of the wine farmers as a class; they will not be guilty of abuse, but the responsibility upon the police, if the right is given of selling liquor on a farm to anyone, without a licence, will anyhow be very great. We remember the paraffin-tin system. I think the wine farmers should be grateful for the concession. Only when they sell by retail to private individuals, will they have to pay an insignificant amount for a licence. Then I should like to call the Minister&#x2019;s attention to para. (d) which provides that the Licensing Act does not apply to any person selling liquor in any hotel established and maintained by any department of State including the Railways and Harbours administration. I do not know why special mention is made of other public departments besides the railway. The people at present respect the principle that the Railway and Harbour Administration can sell drink to a certain extent. Why, however, should other State Departments also have the right of establishing canteens? Is the Minister thinking of hotels that other departments may erect? If it becomes necessary later on for other State departments to have canteens and hotels, let them come and bring their own Bill before Parliament, and convince Parliament that it is desirable. I therefore move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 6, on page 10, to omit &#x201C;any department of state, including.&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>What about the defence force?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>That comes under quite a different clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_broekhuizen">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN BROEKHUIZEN</person>:</from>

<p>After the speech of the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander), I should like to move to delete (b) and (c) of Clause 6. We had evidence in the select committee of police officers who said that it was quite unnecessary and undesirable to continue to allow the sale of liquor in police barracks and in the warders&#x2019; quarters. I should like to see it deleted. I have had experience in this matter, and know that the wives of police officials in Pretoria often complain that the officials remain so long at the shebeen. I do not see why we should permit it. The policemen are congregated in barracks, they play billiards and only frequent the bar, with the result that their pay is much diminished, and the wives and children suffer. I therefore move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit paragraphs (b) and (c).</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I will reply at once on a few points. If there is one place where there is no abuse it is in the bars of the police and of the warders. Very little liquor is sold, and the men usually take tea. It is possible that in some cases they do not get home early enough, but that is the fault of the billiards more than anything else. There is very little money taken for drink in the bar. What would be the position if they were closed? At present they are all together, and drink is consumed under the supervision of the officers. If we close the bars they will go to the usual bars of the village. That will unavoidably be the result. It will be wrong to take away all temptations from the police. This is the small temptation in contradistinction to the big temptation to go into the town if there is no bar in the barracks. Drunkenness amongst the police has in recent years been less than ever. The old hard fighting policemen of the past are gradually disappearing from the service, and new fellows are not of the drinking kind. Then the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) spoke of making vinegar; a licence is only necessary for that in the Cape Province, not in the other provinces. His amendment only affects the vinegar makers in the Cape Province, and he would only be able to give a licence there, and nowhere else in South Africa. I would suggest his so altering his amendment as to read &#x201C;Persons who lawfully manufacture vinegar.&#x201D; It is immaterial to me whether we fix two or four gallons in the law as the smallest quantity which may be sold to a licensee. I fear that the farmers do not consider the point of much importance. As for the licences to wine farmers, I can see no great objection to it. Hon. members opposite who are concerned in wine making do not seem to have any objection to it either. It is only a licence for the direct sale to the public. <span class="col_725-726" refersTo="page_0429"/>A licence will entirely justify such a sale. That licence is necessary for better control, so that nothing wrong shall take place. It was first proposed to make the licence money &#x00A3;20 and &#x00A3;10. In order to avoid trouble, I reduced it to &#x00A3;2 and &#x00A3;1 to notify that it was only registration fees. It is becoming necessary for the farmer to keep books so that we can investigate that everything is in order. I hope the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) will not insist on his point regarding State hotels. If there can be railway hotels, I do not see why the other departments cannot have the same power. The provision is intended for the distant future. If, later on, such hotels should be built, it will not be necessary to pass fresh legislation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I move my amendment as amended according to the Minister&#x2019;s recommendation. I may tell the Minister that the wine fanners are not particularly anxious to sell these small quantities of two gallons. If any wine farmer wants to sell such a small quantity as two gallons he can avail himself of the wine farmers&#x2019; licence and sell under that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I think the Minister is right in refusing the amendment of the hon. member opposite. In regard to the amendment by the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander)&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I am prepared to accept that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#du_toit">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DU TOIT</person>:</from>

<p>I agree with the amendment of the hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal), exempting wine farmers from licences. The wine farmers have sold liquor for years to the wheat farmers, and no licence was necessary. It is only a small amount, but it is not so much the amount, as the obligation to keep books. We have to fill in all the complicated income-tax forms, and this new bookkeeping will only cause trouble. The wine farmers will be very grateful if the Minister accepts the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>In sub-section (2) it is possible there for any native or coloured person to manufacture wine or brandy. I take it the object of this Bill is to limit the consumption by natives. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 31, on page 10, before &#x201C;person&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;European&#x201D; and in the same line before &#x201C;persons&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;European&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister says that he has already been good enough to reduce licence fees from &#x00A3;20 to &#x00A3;2. I appreciate it heartily, but the farmers are not yet satisfied. They want to know why they have to pay &#x00A3;1. It is said that the object is to exercise more control. In what respect? Every farmer has the right to sell just as much wine as he likes. It is not said that some wine farmers, and not others, shall have the right. The licence cannot be refused to a single wine farmer, and anyone can ask for it. The only difference from the existing conditions is that the Government will once more get &#x00A3;1 from all the wine farmers in the Western Province and elsewhere. It is partly a making of money, and for the rest silent pressure is again being put on the farmers by that side of the House. It does not come from the Minister, but from the other side. The hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Duncan) said that if they did not have to pay the licence, all the farmers would open bars. How many farmers have opened bars up to to-day? Bars are regulated under the law. Half the persons in a ward must sign a petition in favour of a bar licence. The hon. member need not therefore be afraid of any change in the position. The farmers have not had to pay licences for hundreds of years, and no bars have been opened. Just as little will it occur if the provision regarding the licence is dropped. It has been said here that they can sell to the licensees without restriction. Is there any other class of farmer who has to have a licence? What about the sheep farmer who sells his wool, or sheep, or a farmer who sells an ox? If he does not sell his produce to a licensed butcher, he does not have to take out a licence. If the fruit farmer does not sell his fruit to a market agent, has he to take out a licence? Now it is said that they can exercise control better. Every farmer will be able to sell drink, and I cannot see what is being attained. I cannot understand the argument. I should like to know what difference it will make. Strong pressure which was exercised on the commission has been mentioned. It did not come from the wine farmers, but from the people who established associations to get hold of the liquor business, as a monopoly, and from the licence holders, but not from the farmers. I persist in my amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>We appreciate the attempt of the hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal), but possibly other hon. members here, and I, who represent wine districts, have a little more experience of the sale of wine without a licence. The class of people, of which the hon. member speaks, always consist of the black sheep of the district. As far as I know there is one in the district of Stellenbosch, and one in Constantia, and, owing to this one black sheep in Stellenbosch, the wine farmers there are being smirched. The licence is so insignificant, namely, &#x00A3;2 for a new licence and &#x00A3;1 for a renewal, and it is only to give the Government an opportunity to send its policemen and inspectors to see to whom the drink is sold.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>They can control it today.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>We are also in favour of drink not being supplied to persons who should not have it. We must get rid of the black sheep. I do not think that there is much objection to this licence scheme. We <span class="col_727-728" refersTo="page_0430"/>know that large consignments of liquor have sometimes gone to the Flats for the low class of people, and that it has led to abuse. We are opposed to drunkenness.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I trust the Minister will not accept the amendment of the hon. member for Pretoria (East) (Mr. Giovanetti) which is intended to confine the privileges of this clause only to persons who are European, considering that it applies only to persons who are bona fide engaged in viticulture. I fail to see why one should have protection under the Act and not another.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I am very glad that the hon. member has raised this point; I was going to do the same. Surely if a man is bona fide engaged in viticulture, he should not be deprived of privileges because he is not a European. The hon. member is seeking to deprive every coloured man of these privileges by his amendment. There is no total prohibition of liquor with regard to coloured men here.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I am afraid that my hon. friend (Mr. Giovanetti) is not acquainted with the conditions of the districts hereabouts. In the district of Stellenbosch there are a few, but not many, coloured farmers who run excellent farms and keep them in excellent condition; I think the hon. member for Stellenbosch (Mr. J. P. Louw) will bear that out. Some grow fruit and others grow grapes also. Why such a farmer should be debarred from a privilege a European possesses, I cannot, for the life of me, understand. What the hon. member proposes would be an injustice to some very respectable people. If my hon. friend will use his motor car and go to the Stellenbosch district and over Helshoogte to Pniel, he will pass some excellent farms run by coloured people. Some are in the most sound position and live most respectable lives. To agree to the amendment would be carrying this colour prejudice extremely far indeed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I think the hon. member has lost sight of Clauses 95 and 96, which say that no natives or coloured people may be in possession of intoxicating liquor.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_broekhuizen">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN BROEKHUIZEN</person>:</from>

<p>I just want to remark that I admit that Col. Truter is in favour of bars in police barracks, but against that I have Majors Grey and du Toit on my side, who desire the bars to be taken away. I hope that the Minister will reconsider the matter and accept my amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>I do not see the objection to bars in the police barracks. A policeman cannot, like any other person, go into any hotel to quench his thirst. When his duty is over he is still in uniform, and he cannot go everywhere. When a man has finished duty, and takes a glass of beer in the barracks there can be no objection to it. Things are very orderly in the police bars. With regard to my farmer friends opposite as to wine farmers licence, there is surely a large difference between the sale of drink, and of other products. We want to control the sale of drink in the interests of the people, and the wine farmers also want to assist us. The wine farmers here are satisfied with the measure. I hope the Minister will not accept the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz) jumped in rather hastily to point out that Clauses 95 and 96 were quite inconsistent. He forgets, however, that this clause says that any person or association of persons engaged bona fide in viticulture may sell wine or brandy without obtaining a licence under this Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_broekhuizen">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN BROEKHUIZEN</person>:</from>

<p>I just want to reply to the hon. member for Witwaterberg (Lt.-Col. N. J. Pretorius). He is only occasionally in touch with conditions in Pretoria, and on occasion shows his colours like a swallow in summer. We are in daily touch, and know the position. If the hon. member would go with me once, and see what the wives and children of some policemen think, then he would also favour the abolition of the bars in police barracks, and warders&#x2019; quarters. Young Afrikanders come from the countryside to the town, and do not know the conditions. They are not popular unless they go along to the bar. Young fellows have told me that they are jeered and laughed at if they do not go to have a drink. I know from experience what the position is, and so I am very anxious to have the sub-sections deleted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#giovanetti">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GIOVANETTI</person>:</from>

<p>In view of the representations which have been made I will withdraw my amendment.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by Mr. Alexander put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Dr. van Broekhuizen put and negatived.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister a question before the amendment is put? What is his object in this provision? My amendment referred to hotels and bars of State Departments other than the Railway Department. I want to point out to the Minister that it will possibly create more suspicion than exists already, and if it is a matter of the distant future, why is it necessary to include it now and make still more trouble?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot see why other departments should not be treated on the same basis as the Railway Department. As far as I know there is not the least intention to build hotels or anything of the kind, but it may possibly be necessary later, and of course such a thing would then have to come before Parliament in the same way as if it were in a new law. We do not only legislate for the present, but we also try as much as possible to avoid the necessity of introducing in a few years an amending Bill. The Select Committee went into the matter fully, and I do not see why it should be allowed to the railways, and not to other departments if it is necessary.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I believe the Select Committee was not so unanimous, but <span class="col_729-730" refersTo="page_0431"/>with regard to Act 16 of 1922 on railway administration specific restrictions are laid down for the railways and harbours which do not apply to the other departments. If there is any need for such a thing later, a Bill can be introduced.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The commission was unanimous. We discussed it a little, and the total abstainers agreed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>I am very sorry that the Minister will not accept the amendment. I feel that further powers are being given to the Minister in this way. Why is it necessary to lightly give the other departments the right of establishing bars and hotels.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Is the amendment of the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) moved to my amendment or to the question as it stands?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>To the question as it stands.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) has moved the omission of certain words. They appear in the original clause and in the substituted clause of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell). What will happen if they are carried in the one and thrown out in the other?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>It will be better, I think, to decide whether the amendment of mine should be accepted and then the amendment of the hon. member for Winburg could be put to that, because the words are similar.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>But the amendment of the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) is a very important matter. It is a question of whether the State shall be allowed to open hotels, and I think the matter should be allowed to stand over for members to appreciate the amendment of the hon. member. If the amendment of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) is accepted, the principle of State hotels is accepted. Some of us object to State hotels. There seems to be a considerable amount of misunderstanding about this. I am opposed to the State opening hotels wherever it pleases. I think the State has quite enough on its fork, and should not be allowed to compete any further with private industry. We have it that the railways can open hotels, and the hon. member for Winburg by his amendment wants the State to open hotels. I think that is not appreciated by the committee, and I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the further consideration of this clause stand over.</block>

<p>Motion put and negatived.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Dr. van der Merwe put, and a division called for.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>May I ask you, Mr. Chairman, whether the result of voting in favour of the retention of these words will be that we shall exclude the amendment of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell)?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>So to obtain that amendment, it is necessary for us to vote &#x201C;no&#x201D;?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>That is right.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>Will you kindly explain the position? It is quite apparent that a large number of members, by the way they are running away, do not understand the intent of the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I think it is quite clear. The proposal is to omit certain words from the sub-section and to insert other words of which notice has been given in the amendment of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell). The amendment has been put as it has always been put, and there is no difference in the procedure. Does the committee still insist upon the division? Who asked for the division?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>It was asked for by the hon. member for Ceres (Mr. Roux), and he is voting on this side with the &#x201C;noes.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Does the hon. member for Ceres (Mr. Roux) still ask for the division?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>In view of the confusion which has just arisen when members did not seem to know exactly what they were voting for, am I in order in moving again that this stand over?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>No, I cannot take that. There is no confusion if hon. members will remain quiet.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Blackwell in sub-section (1) put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by the Rev. Dr. van der Merwe put and negatived.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Are we to have an opportunity of voting on the amendment of the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe)?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>That amendment has fallen by omitting paragraph (d). The sub-section was put in part and then as a whole in accordance with the procedure which has been carried on in this House for years and years.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>Would it not be possible for the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) to move in addition to the amendment which we have just carried, because I think there are some members of the committee who agree with him?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>He cannot do it now. He can do it at the report stage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I understand that this amendment by the hon. member for Bezuidenhout <span class="col_731-732" refersTo="page_0432"/>(Mr. Blackwell) takes the place of Clause (d) in the Bill. That, I understand, falls. In these circumstances is it not possible for the hon. member for Winburg to move an amendment to the amendment by the hon. member for Bezuidenhout?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>If the hon. member moves it now he will be too late. He should have moved it before, but he can move it at the report stage.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by the Minister of Justice to insert a new paragraph to follow paragraph (f) on page 10 put.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>In the amendment moved by the Minister it states definitely &#x201C;European.&#x201D; I take it that coloured farmers in the Stellenbosch division would be prevented from selling their products; is that so? Would the Minister not explain the definition of &#x201C;Europeon&#x201D; in that sense?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>&#x201C;European&#x201D; is always as a red rag to a bull. I have no objection to the word &#x201C;European&#x201D; going out. I move, as an amendment, that&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">The word &#x201C;European&#x201D; be deleted.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>Will the Minister kindly explain to us?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>This amendment is only of value to arrange your Bill properly if Clause 91 is passed. The House has still to decide whether we will allow anything of that sort. When the House decides not to allow it, that will also drop out. The draftsman wishes to have the arrangement put straight.</p>

<p>Amendment agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. de Waal put, and the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;30.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Conradie, D. G.; Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;57.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pienaar, B. J.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Tellers: Alexander, M.; de Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Amendment accordingly negatived.</p>

<p>On the amendment proposed by Mr. Heatlie</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit paragraph (4) of sub-section (2).</block>

<p>The paragraph provides that the farmer must keep books of the wine which he sells to a licensed victualler. The farmer will now have to make a note of the date and the quantity and quality, and of some other details of the wine which he sells to the licensed victualler, i.e., the wholesale dealer. If the provision is scrapped, then there can be no abuse because he may not sell less than two gallons. I do not see the necessity for the provision. Why should we compel the farmer to do his bookkeeping? The farmer who sells wine is already under strict control by the State, and therefore, I cannot see the use of this provision.</p>

<p>Business suspended at 6 p.m. and resumed at 8.7 p.m.</p>

</speech>

<debateSection name="#evening_sitting">

<heading>Evening Sitting.</heading>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I want to support strongly the amendment of the hon. member for Waterberg (Mr. van Niekerk). The Bill provides that wine farmers shall keep books about the sale of liquor. Most people concerned in viticulture are to-day members of the Co-operative Wine Farmers&#x2019; Association. I think that at least three-fourths of all the produce goes, as the result of it, to that society. Everything, therefore, that the State thinks necessary can be found out from the book of that association in order to exercise control. Then, of the other one-third, there are many of the farmers who make good wine, who sell it wholesale to licensed dealers. There, therefore, remains a very small part which ought to be controlled. It is the people who are not licensed who do not belong to the co-operative society, who do not sell to the wholesale dealer, but direct to private people. Would it not be unfair if, for the <span class="col_733-734" refersTo="page_0433"/>sake of those people, the burden of keeping books should be laid on all the farmers? Everyone understands that it is a good thing for the farmers to keep books, but the majority do not find it necessary to-day and, therefore, it will throw a special burden on the wine farmers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I sincerely hope the Minister and this committee will not accept the amendment by the hon. member for Waterberg (Mr. van Niekerk). The whole scheme of this Bill is that there should be a tightening up of the control of the liquor trade. If hon. members turn to Section 108 they will see in regard to every &#x201C;off&#x201D; consumption licence complete records have to be kept so that the transactions in liquor in this country may be checked in every possible way. Is there any good reason why a person who manufactures wine and brandy should not keep a record of what he manufactures and what he sells? Surely the curse of this country, as we all know, is the large illicit sale of liquor, and until you have some effective means of finding out what liquor is produced and to whom it is sold, how can you at the very source check this illicit supply? I submit that wine farmers in common with the rest of the community who handle and deal in liquor, must submit to a certain amount of control in the interests of the general community. I know that many of the wine farmers&#x2019; representatives in this House realize it is right that should be so. The right hon. the member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) told us this afternoon that in his district there are a large number of small growers, some of them coloured, and if this clause were deleted, they would be free from any form of control. We must be able to check the sale of liquor in this country, and it is quite useless imposing this check on bottle stores and wholesale houses if we are not going to check also the liquor at its source.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) says that there should be control of the production and sale of wine, but that will not be attained at all. The wine farmers will be entitled to make as much wine as they wish. If I could make as much wine as I wished, and I declared that I had made 100 leaguers, while in reality it was 120, why should I be liable to a penalty of &#x00A3;25 for the first conviction, and &#x00A3;50 for the next? I may sell my wine on any day, on Monday, Thursday, or Friday. If, however, I record that I have sold the wine on Saturday, when it was on Friday, I have to pay a fine of &#x00A3;25, yet I am fully entitled to sell on Saturday. I can sell on any day, and make just as much as I wish, but yet I must keep books, and if I keep them wrongly I must pay a fine of &#x00A3;25 or &#x00A3;50. Is this fair, is this right? The object of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout in the Bill seems to be a kind of silent pressure on the farmers. He says himself surely that the object is to short-circuit the liquor traffic, in other words it must be so dealt with that the farmers in future will be less disposed to make wine.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Nonsense.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>What else is it? Will the hon. member be so kind as to make it clear what difference it will make whether the police know whether I have manufactured 100, or 200, or 600 leaguers of wine. There is no restriction on the quantity, and no definite day of sale. Why must I, as a wine farmer, record it all? And why must I describe whether it was pontac or hanepoot wine, and why, if I make a mistake, have I to pay &#x00A3;25? It is too bad. It is wilful obstruction of the wine farmers. If the Minister has the interests of the wine farmers at heart, he must see that such a provision is not made. I hope he will accept the amendment of the hon. member for Waterberg.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I think the amendment goes too far. The Bill is not altogether a good one, but this amendment goes too far. As the hon. member for Hopetown (Dr. Stals) said, the people who deliver to wholesalers must be exempt, and it is not necessary for them to keep books, but the hon. member for Waterberg (Mr. van Niekerk) goes much further. He wants the sale to retailers, to private persons, out of hand, also to be exempt. If we do that, and do not provide that only the sale to wholesale licence-holders will be exempt, we shall again have smuggling, and bring liquor into the hands of the smugglers. The wine farmer wants to be released from that stain, they do not want to tolerate smuggling. My amendment meets that, because it provides that, if the wine is sold to wholesalers, it shall be exempt, and the intention is to have control also over the sale to private persons. There are respectable retailers, but there are also some who do any business, and who sell by a measure and do not keep books. How easily will not that wine go to the smugglers? The wine farmer wants to be rid of it. Hon. members opposite want to be good friends of the wine farmers, but they do not understand the position.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>I am surprised that hon. members are opposing the sub-section. If it is admitted that the liquor trade is to be controlled, surely no hon. member but should allow a provision to stand for controlling that trade. If other sections of the trade have to provide the necessary returns so that the authorities know what is going on, there is no reason why differentiation should be made between one section of the trade and another. I am sure that every member of the committee is and I am satisfied, that the wine farmers are just as anxious as any other section of the community to carry out the law satisfactorily and do not want to evade it. Why should they object to the provisions of this clause? The principle has already been accepted by this House on many other occasions in regard to other industries that the private manufacturer and other people have to furnish returns to the authorities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from><span class="col_735-736" refersTo="page_0434"/>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>I should also like to appeal to the Minister to accept the amendment. What does it mean? As the Bill reads it says, sell&#x2014;if the wine is sold to people who have licences&#x2014;but then follows the provision that he must also record what he sells. If the wine is sold to persons who have licences, there is surely sufficient control of the licence holder. They are retail or wholesale dealers. The hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) is, I think, particularly friendly with the wholesalers, but he must not forget the retailer. What is the difference between the two? The Minister wants the farmers who do not keep proper books to be prosecuted. Recently there was a farmer prosecuted and sent to gaol because he did not keep proper books. The Minister ordered his release after a few weeks. He was then asked why he did so, and the answer was that it was well known that the farmers were bad bookkeepers. We know that unfortunately it is so, and as one who knows something of farming I know that it is very difficult for a farmer to keep proper record of all his transactions. People in business have bookkeepers who record everything, but the farmer cannot possibly keep pace with it. If wine is sold to licensed persons there is surely proper control.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) wants to see complete control of the liquor traffic, but if the farmer keeps books, and, for instance, records that he has sold 5 leaguers of wine to James Clarke&#x2019;s bottle store, what control is that? That liquor shop sells it again in individual bottles, or even by the glass. The State can never trace where the wine stops. The licence holders are the persons to keep books, they have a record kept of what they buy and sell, but the farmers must not be burdened with it. They have sufficient trouble with the income-tax. Why should they now, when they sell 5 leaguers to Green and Co., say what colour it is, of what kind, the day of sale, etc.? The provision is unnecessary. As the hon. member for Ceres (Mr. Roux) has said, the farmers are poor bookkeepers, and must not be burdened with that intensive bookkeeping. The Minister of Finance has met the farmers, and laid down that they do not need to keep books in regard to their income-tax. They merely have to state what their income and expenditure have been, and in this matter the farmers should also be met.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I do not appreciate the farmers&#x2019; difficulties. As far as I know, the Cape Province wine farmers are very well-educated men, they have enough knowledge to keep books; what is demanded here can be done by a child in Standard 3. They only have to report the quantity, the kind of wine, and the address of the buyer. A child in Standard Sub A can do it. I think the farmers will be indignant if it is said that they are not able to record that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>It causes all kinds of trouble.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I also believe that they are all honourable people, and if they are competent and honourable they can keep the record. Hon. members must also not forget that, according to Clause 108, the licensees are also obliged to keep books, and the record of the farmers is the further control of that of the licensees.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conroy">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CONROY</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for North-East Rand (Dr. Reitz) admits that he does not understand the farmers&#x2019; difficulties. He knows about as much of the farmer, as a crow of religion. The hon. member must not forget that the farmers, unlike him, have no bookkeepers in their offices. How can it be expected that the farmer will go to his house every time to record the sale of a little liquor? He ought rather to leave it to the discretion of the farmer as to what is in the interests of their business. The hon. member sarcastically asked if the farmers are so illiterate that they cannot keep books; no, they are so enlightened that they can give many points to those learned gentlemen with regard to daily life, but the farmers have so many difficulties that they cannot make entries every minute.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>If hon. members say that the farmers cannot keep books, they are entirely in the wrong. The wine farmers keep books to-day, and systematic records. I have been in the offices of wine farmers, and they have even had clerks who recorded everything. I think it is a shame to say that the wine farmers cannot keep books. We must see that such records are necessary for the control of liquor. The farmers can keep books, and are prepared to do so, so that they can give the necessary information to the police and inspectors to fight the illicit drink traffic.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mostert">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOSTERT</person>:</from>

<p>That may be the position in the Western Province, but what about Namaqualand?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>How does this stand in the case of diamonds?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mostert">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOSTERT</person>:</from>

<p>We may not now speak about diamonds, but we have other things in Namaqualand. It is an unwritten law that at harvest time the labourers get a tot in the lands, and the wheat farmers have to buy the wine from the wine farmers. If every farmer is to keep records of every tot he sells, he will be busy all the day. Many people can read and write and yet not keep books. Then the police can come and say that their books are not in order. The farmers have very little time, they have no time to keep books. The Minister can keep books well, but he is unacquainted with the conditions on the farms. That is the misfortune. I want to ask the Minister in a friendly way to accept the amendment of the hon. member for Waterberg (Mr. van Niekerk). For generations the farmers <span class="col_737-738" refersTo="page_0435"/>have sold as much as they wish&#x2014;I am not talking of brandy. Wine does not cause the drunkenness. The wine farmers as a rule never drink. Where is there more control than in Cape Town, and where is there less drunkenness than in the large villages? The farmers must be protected, and the Minister must help us.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>We have now wasted 35 minutes, and I do not think that it is worth while. The last speaker said that I know how to keep books. I have not the least knowledge of bookkeeping, but I could keep those books. The farmer can do it just as well as I, and even better. I have always said that the farmers are not less capable than the townsmen, but more capable. What is required is very easy. The farmer must just say how much wine he has made, and how much he has sold, and record the address of the buyer. That is not bookkeeping, but the recording of a few data. Any farmer can do it in five minutes. Hon. members seem to be afraid that we will later also compel other farmers to keep books. That is not the intention. Brandy and wine are things of an entirely different nature, which cause trouble. I only want the House to vote, and not to talk any longer. I said at the beginning that I wanted a free vote, but I did not think that the time would be wasted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>Not one per cent. of the total wine crop will be sold in this way, for most of it will be turned into brandy, and so far as that is concerned the farmers have to keep a book for excise purposes.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) said that, since the introduction of the excise it has anyhow been necessary to keep books. The hon. member argues, I think, that only 1 per cent. of the wine farmers sells to private persons. Is that not so? Is it necessary then, for the sake of that 1 per cent., for all the farmers to keep books? We know what the object is. The hon. member for Worcester is of course a great supporter of co-operation. The wine dealer, the licence holders, and the co-operative societies must be protected. The farmer must have difficulties. The hon. member for Worcester says that I possibly think I have a good object, but that the farmers do not want it. I can assure him that at many meetings I have repeatedly been asked that the farmers should be exempted from bookkeeping. The Minister says it is not bookkeeping. Read the first line&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Such person or association shall keep proper books, which shall be open to the inspection of any member of the police.</block>

<p>That is the first line. The police can at any time come to a farm, and inspect the book to see what has been reported. The Minister has dug a grave for himself by allowing the words &#x201C;keep books&#x201D; to remain there. If the books are not in proper order the farmer is liable for &#x00A3;25 or &#x00A3;50. Does not the hon. member for Worcester know that? The Minister is not consistent. There is the high fine, and he says that the provision which we are fighting is not worth the trouble. It affects thousands of farmers. I should like to see the books of the hon. member for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz); the attorneys and advocates often preach what they do not practice themselves. What will be the use of this provision to the police in exercising control. The object is to meet the wholesalers, and the co-operative societies, but the farmers are being handicapped.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>Let me say that I do not feel less for the wine farmer, than the hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal), and that I do not any less understand their interests, but I am astonished at the unnecessary attack which the hon. member has made on the Wine Farmers&#x2019; Co-operative Society.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>It was not an attack.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>You said that the interests of the co-operative society were the same as those of the wine dealer, and that the co-operative society, of which the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) is a member, was a kind of wine dealer. Let me say that if there had been no co-operative society then the position of the wine farmers to-day would have been a sad one. I believe in co-operation, and cooperative action by the wine farmers, but the hon. member is attacking it. I am willing to follow the lead of the co-operative society which has stood by the wine farmers. The society has done an endless amount of good. As amended by the hon. member for Worcester the proposal only means that the sale to private persons shall come under proper control. As the hon. member himself knows the number is very small.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>Why then must the farmers keep books?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>If it is only such a small business, it is much easier to keep books. The hon. member for Piquetberg said that the farmers did not keep books. We have had to do so since the imposition of the excise, and in this connection, I am ready to follow the lead of the Co-operative Society of Wine Farmers, who actually represent the interests of the wine farmers. There is one point to which I want to direct the attention of the Minister. It is in para. 2. The English text reads&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">The sale, delivery or disposal shall be in quantities of not less than four gallons contained in one receptacle securely corked or stoppered.</block>

<p>If, therefore, a farmer sells more than three gallons, he must put it into a vat, but he can only sell it in one vat. Should it not be one or more receptacles, or containers? I just want to ask the Minister, so that it shall not be interpreted that he may not sell more than one container or receptacle per day. That is the only difficulty I have about this clause, otherwise I support the amendment of the hon. member for Worcester</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from><span class="col_739-740" refersTo="page_0436"/>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>This clause is not as innocent as members opposite want to make out. It expressly says that the farmer shall keep proper books. What does that mean? If the farmer keeps an ordinary record of his sales, it may be said that he is not keeping proper books. When the policeman comes along he will say that it is not proper bookkeeping. He will summon him before the magistrate, who will possibly agree that the books have not been kept properly. No, it is a dangerous clause. If the amendment of the hon. member for Worcester is defeated, I shall propose that, instead of keeping books, the words &#x201C;keeping a record&#x201D; shall be put into the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>Our attention has been drawn to Clause 108, of which the provisions are somewhat similar to the clause of this section now under consideration. I am surprised that no objection has been taken to the stipulation here that the books shall be open to the inspection of any policeman. I think the Minister would be well advised if he inserted &#x201C;of the rank of sergeant or above.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>We have not got sergeants patrolling all over the country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>That is true, but if one allows a clause like this to go through, when we reach Clause 108&#x2014;and I draw attention to the fact that a policeman can in Johannesburg go into any bottle store and ask to inspect the books&#x2014;I shall be told: &#x201C;Why didn&#x2019;t you object to it in this particular clause?&#x201D; I think this provision will be resented very much. With regard to the rest of the clause, I do not know why my friends opposite should be so anxious about the wine farmers so long as the present occupant is the Minister of Justice. All they have to do, in case of conviction, is to go and knock at his door and he will say: &#x201C;I will give you an order for release.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige) reproached me with being opposed to co-operation, but there is such a thing as conflict of interests. The co-operative societies, and the wine farmers are separate bodies. The farmers sell in their individual capacity while the societies sell in their cooperative capacity, and there is a conflict of interests. I can understand that the co-operative societies want to get as much as possible into their own hands, and the farmers want to retain the right of sale to private individuals. The co-operative societies will, on a conflict of interests, first look to their own interests, and not to the individual interests of the farmers. Finally, I represent wine farmers, and I am standing up for them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I want to support the amendment of the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie), but I should like to see it altered to provide that the excise officials can examine the books. I do not think the farmers&#x2019; books should be open to the police, so that any policeman, any private individual, can examine the books of the farmers. I move, therefore&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 52, to omit &#x201C;police&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;Excise Department&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#mostert">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOSTERT</person>:</from>

<p>I want to call attention to the fact that the farmers keep their books at home, and anyone buying wine from a farmer usually finds him at work in the lands. He accompanies the man to the cellar. Does the Minister want the farmer to keep his books in the cellar? The Minister acts as if the farmers had plenty of time. From the sellars the farmer returns to the lands to look after his workmen and he cannot go to the house first of all to record the transaction. Then by chance a policeman may be on his rounds, and meet the man who has bought the wine. He goes to the farm, asks to see the books, and finds that the farmer has not made a note. No, the farmers have not much time. They work hard, and cannot keep pace with all those things.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In lines 50 and 51, to omit &#x201C;proper books&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;a record&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I have no objection to accepting &#x201C;record or records&#x201D; instead of &#x201C;books.&#x201D; It makes no difference. Nobody wants a man to go and buy a big ledger or anything of that kind. I am quite prepared to accept that amendment, with the very sincere hope that it is going to put an end to this discussion. I want also to say that I wish to withdraw the amendment I have moved in regard to sub-section (2) (iii) in favour of the amendment moved by the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>Shall I have the right, if my first amendment is rejected, to move another amendment?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>No.</p>

<p>With leave of committee, amendment proposed by the Minister of Justice, in line 49, was withdrawn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 52, after &#x201C;police&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;duly authorized&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Heatlie in line 43, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Question put: That the word &#x201C;two&#x201D; in line 46, proposed to be omitted by Mr. Blackwell, stand part of the clause, and Dr. Stals called for a division.</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;43.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Grobler. P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p><span class="col_741-742" refersTo="page_0437"/>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Madeley, W. B.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S F.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Pienaar, B. J.; Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;46.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R.; de Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Question accordingly negatived and the word omitted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>Now the word &#x201C;two&#x201D; has been deleted, and we are in a position to move another figure in its place. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To insert &#x201C;one-and-a-half&#x201D;.</block>

<p>The select committee proposed to retain two gallons, and now they come here with a suggestion of four gallons. That is breach of faith. The wine farmer has always had the right to sell two gallons to private persons; that right always existed, and the Minister did not intend to take it away. All he has added is that the farmer must keep books of what he sells to private persons. Now the members bring up a new argument to add 100 per cent., so that the farmer may not sell less than 24 bottles to private persons. It is a new principle, which is supported by the hon. members for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) and Stellenbosch (Mr. J. P. Louw).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>We have now wasted ten minutes. I shall express myself clearly. We are wasting time in preparing for the next election, instead of putting our heads together to make the Bill as good as possible, we are indulging in party politics. I am dealing with the subject in such a way that I cannot be accused of making party political capital. I do not intend to allow myself to be made a fool of in connection with the Bill, and to sit here for days in this way. If these methods are continued I shall withdraw the Bill, and, as sure as I am sitting here, I say that a Bill on local option will follow.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>On a point of order, Mr. Chairman, I would like you to consider whether Rule 76 applies to the case before the committee. The amendment moved by the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) is a simple and direct one, but for the purpose of the machinery of the House you put it in the way in which you did, to enquire in the first instance whether the committee desired (2) to stand or to be deleted. [Rule 76 read.] I would like to ask you where you put the question whether (2) should stand as part of the clause, is it competent now in the middle of an amendment to introduce a further amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>What would the hon. member do if later on (4) is negatived?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>That might be the subject-matter of an entirely different amendment. You are dealing with the amendment of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member is quite in order. A blank has been created, and the hon. member moved something in its place.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal) mentioned breach of faith, but he has not read the report of the select committee. That says four gallons, and it was altered to two.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mostert">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOSTERT</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister is now becoming angry and says it makes no difference to him, but it does make a difference to the farmer. The wine farmer has always had the right of selling twelve bottles, and now it must be altered to 24 bottles. The Minister talked about the Transvaal where no grapes are grown. We want to prevent drunkenness, but now we are going to compel people to sell 24 bottles at once instead of nine, as proposed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the Chairman report progress and ask leave to sit again.</block>

<p>I am not going on.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will not press that, because it is giving in to the recalcitrant people over there. The Minister has been meeting criticism in such a fair manner that it is not fair to other hon. members, who are quite prepared to deal with the Bill in a non-party spirit, that they should be overruled.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from><span class="col_743-744" refersTo="page_0438"/>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I only want to draw attention to the fact that we have wasted one and a quarter hours this evening, and we are going to waste another hour and a quarter, and I am not going to allow that to happen as far as I am concerned.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Move the closure.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not like the closure at this stage. It is not a wise thing to do. It is a difficult matter, of course, not to assent to what I am asked to do. I withdraw the motion at this stage, with the hope that we will be able to make some progress in this matter.</p>

<p>With leave of committee, motion to report progress withdrawn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will not blame us. We want the Bill, but we are the only people who are defending the interests of the wine farmers. We have to contend here with prohibitionists represented by the hon. members for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz) and Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell). They are opposed to the wine farmer. The hon. member for Bezuidenhout is causing all the trouble. If he had not proposed &#x201C;four&#x201D; instead of &#x201C;two,&#x201D; the clause would already have been passed. The amendment is only camouflage for the prohibitionists.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>It does not mean the sale of wine to private persons, but to licensed persons.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>It also applies to sale of wine to private persons. I hope I shall have no opposition from the hon. member for Stellenbosch (Mr. J. P. Louw) so far as the wine farmers are concerned</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. de Waal to substitute &#x201C;one-and-a-half&#x201D; put and negatived.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Blackwell to substitute &#x201C;four&#x201D; put, and the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;57.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys. L.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rider. W. W.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins. W. R.; de Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;24</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Boshoff. L. J.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;,. A. S.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Tellers: Hugo, D.; Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Amendment accordingly agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Heatlie to omit paragraph (iii) and to substitute a new paragraph (iii) put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Question put: That the words &#x201C;such person or association of persons shall keep&#x201D;, in line 50, on page 10, proposed to be omitted, stand part of the clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Chairman, must you not first put all the amendments, and then the whole clause?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member knows, better probably than anybody else in the House, that it is better for me to put the amendments in parts like this, just as he puts amendments himself.</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;53.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Close R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter C. W. A.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers W. B.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Fick M. L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti C. W.</p>

<p>Heatlie C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger J. W.</p>

<p>Kemp J. C. G.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Krige C. J.</p>

<p>Lennox F. J.</p>

<p>Louw J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9; J. F. T.</p>

<p>Nicholls G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien W. J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Papenfus H. B.</p>

<p>Payn A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Richards G. R.</p>

<p>Rider W. W.</p>

<p>Roos T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Smartt T. W.</p>

<p>Snow W. J.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p><span class="col_745-746" refersTo="page_0439"/>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden G. C.</p>

<p>Van Zyl G. B.</p>

<p>Weasels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R.; de Jager A. L.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;26.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Beyers F. W.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Cilliers A. A.</p>

<p>Conradie D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Waal J. H. H.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Du Toit F. J.</p>

<p>Grobler P. G. W.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Malan M. L.</p>

<p>Mostert J. P.</p>

<p>Munnik J. H.</p>

<p>Pretorius J. S. F.</p>

<p>Roux J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Stals A. J.</p>

<p>Terreblanche P. J.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Zyl J. J. M.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Tellers: Hugo, D.; Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Question accordingly affirmed and the amendment proposed by Mr. van Niekerk dropped.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. J. H. Conradie put and agreed to.</p>

<p>With leave of committee, amendment proposed by Mr. J. P. Louw withdrawn.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Dr. Stals put and negatived.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 7,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 7, to omit &#x201C;foreign&#x201D; and substitute &#x201C;other&#x201D;.</block>

<p>It may be necessary that accredited agents from some part of the British dominions would fall under that section. It is better, therefore, to alter the word &#x201C;foreign&#x201D; to &#x201C;other.&#x201D;</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause as amended put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 9,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 53 to omit &#x201C;1928&#x201D; and substitute &#x201C;1929&#x201D; in line 54 to delete &#x201C;1927&#x201D; and substitute &#x201C;1928&#x201D; and in line 57 to delete &#x201C;1928&#x201D; and substitute &#x201C;1929&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 10,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In lines 69 and 70, to omit &#x201C;and any privilege granted to,&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Those words were inserted at a time when there were privileges granted to licensees, what are called midnight privileges. There is no need now for those words, as there are no privileges like that granted.</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 11,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 11, after &#x201C;temporary&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;liquor&#x201D;.</block>

<p>This is just in order to make the matter clear.</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>In line 31, the phrase &#x201C;senior officer of police of the district&#x201D; occurs. We understood from the police that the correct phrasing is &#x201C;senior officer in police charge of the district.&#x201D; In every case except this and one other instance that is the phrase used, and I would therefore move, in order to secure uniformity&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 31, to omit &#x201C;of police in&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;in police charge of&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 12,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To add the following new sub-section to follow sub section (4):</block>

<ol>

<li>(5) The Governor-General may from time to time proclaim any area to be one in which no bottle liquor licence shall be issued by a receiver of revenue save upon payment, in addition to the fees payable in terms of sub-sections (1) and (2), of a sum to be specified by the Governor-General in such proclamation, and which shall not exceed five thousand pounds.</li>

</ol>

<p>The object of this clause is to enable the Minister in any district to fix a price for a bottle-store licence. The commission originally thought of putting these bottle-store licences up for auction, but there were too many practical difficulties, and ultimately the commission thought the best way of doing it would be to enable the Minister to fix any price up to &#x00A3;5,000. In Johannesburg these bottle-store licences are worth anything over &#x00A3;3,000. It does seem absurd that a present like that should be given to an applicant. I do not wish to go into the other phase of the matter, the question of the temptation to the members of the liquor licensing court. I do not wish to mention any names or any licensing court. I could not prove it if I did, but I am convinced that bribery has taken place, and one way to stop that would be this method of fixing a price. The Minister is not obliged to do it; but he can in any case where he has suspicions fix a price for the licence of a bottle-store. He might say, for instance, that in Piquetberg no bottle-store licence shall be granted except the applicant is prepared to pay &#x00A3;100 or &#x00A3;200 up to &#x00A3;5,000. At present in Johannesburg a man gets a licence and gets <span class="col_747-748" refersTo="page_0440"/>it for nothing, or we hope he gets it for nothing; and it is worth &#x00A3;3,000 or more. If anybody is to get paid for the value of such a licence, the State should get it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>As the hon. member has mentioned Piquetberg, I must reply.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I withdraw Piquetberg.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>I think it wrong to give the Minister so much power. I have sufficient confidence in the discretion of the Minister of Justice, even if he is a little bit annoyed to-night, to give him the power, but the Lord save the poor districts if the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) should become the Minister. We have rejected local option year after year; if we do not wish to give the people the power, why should we then put it into the hands of one man? Why should we give such great power to one member of the Government, when he will not give it to the people? I hope the committee will unanimously reject the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>When some of us get up and talk about what the wine farmers should do, we are told that we know nothing about the wine farmer. This is a matter that the hon. member for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz) and I do know something about, because we come from the Transvaal. This section is not directed against Piquetberg.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for North-East Rand mentioned Piquetberg.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>That is one of the little jests of the hon. member for North-East Rand. This amendment is intended to apply to the larger centres of population. This is what has happened for the last fifteen or twenty years. An applicant will come among a hundred others before the licensing court and apply for a bottle-store licence, and for some reason or other, it may be the colour of his hair or it may be race, I do not know what it is, but one man out of the hundred&#x2014;the other day three men out of a hundred&#x2014;get a bottle-store licence and immediately he gets this, he has something in his pocket which he can and does sell for anything from &#x00A3;3,000 upwards. I had a case the other day in court where a man sued another for five or six thousand pounds in these circumstances. He said he went to the liquor licensing court and got a bottle store licence. He found there was a prohibition against a bottle-store on the stand. Another man had promised to pay him five or six thousand pounds for the licence, and he said he wanted damages for loss of the money. As much as eight or ten thousand pounds has been paid for a bottle-store licence in Johannesburg. It is not a question of temperance at all. It is a question of seeing that the State which gives an individual an asset of such great value, should get some return for it. That is all. The restriction of bottle store licences will be done by the quota clauses. This is not an insidious attempt to prohibit bottle stores. It is merely an attempt to see that when the State parts with an asset of that value it gets some return. If such a clause had been in previous liquor laws our revenue on the Rand alone would have benefited to the extent of at least &#x00A3;100,000.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>If the case rested entirely upon the statement of the last speaker there would be some force in a clause of this nature, but in introducing the matter the hon. member in charge of it said no licence shall be issued. His amendment does not refer to new licences. It refers to licences in existence. If it is going to apply to any licence the result will be that the State will be able to stipulate for A one thing, for B another and so on, and so the Minister will be besieged by different people wanting different treatment. The position will become impossible and the clauses would be most unjust.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The intention was obviously &#x201C;new.&#x201D; I do not know how it slipped out. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To insert the word &#x201C;new.&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I think it is a very good thing that the hon. member for Von Brandis (Mr. Nathan) drew attention to this, because if we had passed it in this form certainly the troubles to which he referred would have followed. The section itself is, of course, permissive. It aims at making the man who obtains this monopoly pay a portion, at all events, of the value of what he obtains, the value that is made for him. There is hardly any case in which one can say that one applicant is so much better than all the others that he should obtain a licence. So it can be said it is a matter of chance. That chance is made by the gift by the State of an asset to a person and the point is that for that gift something should be paid.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What about transfers to different localities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I think that is watched fairly closely by the licensing court. This section is inserted on account of the great value of liquor licences in places like Johannesburg. I do not want to base anything on suspicion, because if a Minister of Justice had to be hampered by suspicions it would be placing a great burden on his shoulders. What your Minister should do is to place a certain value upon it which would be paid over to the State. I do not think subject to what may still be said, that is an unfair burden to place upon a man who obtains a valuable asset, nor do I think it is a burden upon the man who obtains a bottle store licence in parts of the country not catered for properly in that respect. But in large areas where you find a valuable asset given to a private individual, it does seem a fair provision that some part of that value should come back to the State. Speaking for myself I am prepared to support that clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#allen">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALLEN</person>:</from>

<p>I do not know whether it is intended that &#x00A3;5,000 is the maximum which should be payable.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from><span class="col_749-750" refersTo="page_0441"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>That is the maximum.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#allen">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALLEN</person>:</from>

<p>The tendency of fixing a large sum like that is that you are going to drive the trade still further into the hands of the monopolies. Such a sum will only be offered where they enjoy a monopoly, not where there is going to be a competitive chance in an area. I do not like the idea at all. I sympathize with the intention of this amendment, because I have knowledge of many transactions not at all creditable to anyone concerned. The only alternative which suggests itself to me is that where the trade warrants the payment of such a sum then the Minister would be justified in granting more than one licence, and instead of paying, say, &#x00A3;5,000 for one licence the case would be equally well served by granting five licences; then the licensee who conducted his business best would get the trade, the others would go out of business. I know the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) does not agree with that. He wants to see licences cut down as much as possible, but I do not think there is going to be any more drinking in an area because you increase the number of licences. Only a certain proportion of money earned in an area will under any circumstances be spent on liquor, and restricting the number of shops will not reduce that sum. If this figure is set upon a licence the small man will have a very poor chance.</p>

<p>Amendment, as revised, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 13,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. M. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 19, after &#x201C;appointment&#x201D; to insert: &#x201C;Provided that in the Province of the Cape of Good Hope one of those two members shall be a member of the divisional council of the district concerned.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Divisional Councils are excellent bodies, which have rendered many services to the country, and have always had representatives on the licensing courts, as representatives of the countryside.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To add the following new sub-section to follow sub-section (3):</block>

<ol>

<li>(4) At the commencement of this Act the term of office of every person who at such commencement was a member of any body constituted for the consideration or determination of applications for licences for the sale or supply of liquor shall expire.</li>

</ol>

<p>In connection with the proposal of my friend I wish to say that he well knows that there are no divisional councils in the other provinces. If we therefore pass his amendment, it will dislocate the numbers. I take it that we must not prefer any special class from which to select members of the licensing court. In view of the fact that it was the Cape practice to appoint representatives of local bodies on the licensing courts, we thought it proper to provide in the Bill that there should be members representing the local managements. The representation of divisional councils in the licensing court serves the countryside, but the result under the new proposal will be the same as before, and the countryside will also be represented. It is a pity, but we cannot now get uniformity everywhere.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>The reason why this clause is put in as it is that the whole policy of the Act is that there shall be no licences except within the areas of a local authority, no new country licences are to be granted, and existing country licences are to be put to an end, and, therefore, I cannot see how it is an intimate concern of a divisional council. The control of the licences should he in the hands of those residing at the seat of the magistracy, and two out of the four should be members of the local authority, or authorities if there are more than one.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>In the old Cape Colony one member from every municipality could be elected. Now it is proposed that two such members may be elected. The municipalities are usually very much opposed to the wine farmers, and because this is known it was proposed, on the recommendation of the members of the commission, to put in the Bill that the municipalities should have the right of electing two members instead of one. I however move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 16, after &#x201C;Governor-General&#x201D; to omit &#x201C;two&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;one&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. B. DE VILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>I move as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit all the words after &#x201C;Governor-General&#x201D; in line 16, to the end of paragraph (b) of sub-section (1).</block>

<p>This means that we leave everything to the Governor-General regarding the appointment of members of the licensing court. I wish, in fact, to prevent that, at the election of members of divisional councils, the liquor question should be dragged in.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit paragraph (b) of sub-section (1) and to substitute the following new paragraph:</block>

<ol>

<li>(b) at least four members, two of whom shall be appointed by the Governor-General and the remainder by the urban local authorities, if there be such authorities in the district: Provided that each urban local authority shall be entitled to appoint at least one member of the board and that the number of members representing urban local authorities, if there be more than two such authorities in <span class="col_751-752" refersTo="page_0442"/>the district, shall be increased so as to comply with the provisions of this paragraph.</li>

</ol>

<p>I hope the Minister will notice the pressure which is being exercised on him to give the local authorities a say in the licensing court. It is a grievance to-day in the Free State. There are sometimes two or more villages in a district, and neither of the villages is represented on the licensing board. I think it will be difficult to give any satisfaction if the local authorities are not allowed at least one member on the licensing board. I think the Minister will cause great dissatisfaction if he centralizes the authority too much. I propose that, where it is necessary, the number of members of the licensing court shall be increased, so as to give each local authority at least one representative.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#munnik">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MUNNIK</person>:</from>

<p>I support the amendment of the hon. member for Barkly (Mr. W. B. de Villiers). The last speaker had already pointed out that the local authorities are not considered in the Free State. I have experience of it in my constituency. It is quite unsound that two or more members of the local authorities shall be assured of their being members of the licensing boards in large towns. The difficulty on the Rand, and in the large towns, is caused, as a matter of fact, by the appointment of representatives of the local bodies on the licensing board.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will stick to the clause as printed. The reason we must have local representation on the licensing boards is because the Bill does away with memorials, and you must give the local people the chance of having some form of indirect representation. The system of having mayors on the boards has existed in the Cape from the earliest days, and we have not heard of any scandal here. Under the amendment, the Minister may ignore the local authorities altogether. I would like people to have more direct representation than the clause gives them. Members of local authorities who may be members of the licensing courts will have the sword of Damocles hanging over them, as sooner or later they will have to be re-elected members of the local body concerned, and if they have not done their duty, they would be called to account by their electors.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 19, after &#x201C;appointment&#x201D; to insert and during their membership of the board&#x201D;.</block>

<p>The obvious intention is that members of the board shall be members of the local authority.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I don&#x2019;t think the latter amendment is necessary because Clause 17 provides that members of the board are appointed only for twelve months. I agree with the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander) that we should retain the clause as printed. It is right that local authorities should be represented on the boards. Hitherto the Transvaal has not had that representation, and this clause is a compromise between the Transvaal and the Cape systems. We need not go as far as the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) suggests, as complications, might then ensue. You might have a magisterial district in which there are four or five local authorities, and you might have a board of ten, which would be unwieldly. This matter was very carefully discussed by the commission which, after consultation with the Department of Justice, came to the conclusion that the fairest way would be to allow the appointments to be made by the Governor-General, but at least two members of the board should be members of local authorities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit paragraph (b) of sub-section (1) and to substitute the following new paragraphs:</block>

<ol>

<li>(b) a member of every municipality and a member of every divisional council in the district;</li>

<li>(c) two other members.<br/>

The members mentioned in (b) and (c) shall be appointed by the Governor-General.</li>

</ol>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The amendment of the hon. member for Ceres (Mr. Roux) ignored the farmers, and put all the power into the hands of the municipalities. It is a pity that the hon. member has not made a study of the matter. The Cape law says that one member of a municipality can serve on the licensing board, and usually it is the person who is opposed to the interests of the wine farmers, because he was born in a town, and he has not the necessary sympathy for the farmer. I have been instructed, from various sides, that there should be two members representing the farmers, and not one. The fact that the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) presses so strongly for the alteration is in itself a proof that it is wrong. I sympathize with the intention of the hon. member for Barkly (Mr. W. B. de Villiers), but what he proposes will react dangerously. I ask him to withdraw his amendment in favour of mine.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. A. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think that the amendment of the hon. member for Ceres (Mr. Roux) will do. There are no divisional councils in the other provinces. The amendment will, therefore, not apply there. I should be glad if the Minister would accept the amendment of the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe). I think, formerly, the divisional councils used to appoint three members, and the municipalities one, but now all four will be appointed by the Governor-General. The Governor-General will, of course, do it on the recommendation of the magistrate, and the magistrate will then be in the unpleasant position of being chairman of the board of which he has himself recommended four members. This will make the position difficult. I hope the Minister will give his serious attention to it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from><span class="col_753-754" refersTo="page_0443"/>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I think if we look at the number of this clause we are not likely to get beyond that number to-night.</p>

<p>On the motion of the Minister of Justice it was agreed to report progress and ask leave to sit again.</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Progress reported; House to resume in Committee on 8th February.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1928-02-06T22:24:00">10.24 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

