---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol10 - TUESDAY 20 MARCH 1928'
layout: debate
year: 1928
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>TUESDAY, 20th MARCH, 1928.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1928-03-20T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#select_committe_on_internal_arrangements">

<heading>SELECT COMMITTE ON INTERNAL ARRANGEMENTS.</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>,</from>

<p>as chairman, brought up the first report of the Select Committee on Internal Arrangements as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Your committee has had under consideration the question of the pressing and imperative necessity of provision being made for additional accommodation in the Debating Chamber in view of the increases which have taken place in the membership of the House since Union, the further increase that will occur in the near future, and the congestion in the Chamber when a Joint Sitting of both Houses of Parliament is held, and also in view of the inconvenience experienced by members on account of the existing seating arrangements in certain parts of the House. The further fact that the seats throughout the Chamber urgently require re-springing and re-upholstering has also been borne in mind.</block>

<block name="#quote">Your committee has discussed and approved of plans prepared by the Public Works Department which in addition to making provision for the above requirements will also provide a better system of ventilation and admit more daylight to the Chamber. The plans are submitted herewith, together with an estimate of the cost of the structural alterations involved, and your committee recommends the adoption of the proposed scheme and that the work be proceeded with during the ensuing recess.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>stated that unless notice of objection was given on or before Friday, the 23rd March, the report would be considered a adopted.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#select_committee_on_port_beaufort_grant_amendment_private_bill">

<heading>SELECT COMMITTEE ON PORT BEAUFORT GRANT AMENDMENT (PRIVATE) BILL.</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>My attention has been drawn to the fact that after having adjourned from 21st February last the Select Committee on the Port Beaufort Grant Amendment (Private) Bill was to have met this morning. At the appointed time only one member put in an appearance with the result that no meeting could be held although counsel and the parliamentary agent were in attendance, together with the promoter who had specially come a long distance in order to attend the meeting. It is the duty of hon. members who are appointed to serve on a select committee to see that the work of that committee is completed as expeditiously as possible and that no unnecessary inconvenience is caused to the members of the public who have to attend the meetings of the committee. This rule ought to be observed with regard to all select committees and specially with regard to select committees on private bills. I am drawing attention to this matter in the hope that it will not be necessary to refer to such matters again in future.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: W. HECKROODT&#x2019;S PROMOTION.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether Mr. W. Heckroodt, a second grade clerk from the station master&#x2019;s office, Kroonstad, has been promoted to a position in the office of the assistant manager at Durban; if so,</li>

<li>(2) upon what date did he receive promotion;</li>

<li>(3) how many persons who were his seniors in the service did he supersede;</li>

<li><span class="col_2307-2308" refersTo="page_1220"/>(4) what is his present grade and rate of pay; and</li>

<li>(5) upon what date was he appointed as second grade clerk?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Heckroodt was promoted from the position of grade II clerk at Kroonstad to that of welfare officer, grade I at Bloemfontein on the 4th July, 1927. He was transferred to Durban in same capacity on the 1st January, 1928.</li>

<li>(2) 4th July, 1927.</li>

<li>(3) The hon. member will be aware that promotions in the railways and harbours service are, in terms of section 9 (1) of the Railways and Harbours Service Act No. 23 of 1925, governed by efficiency and not seniority. Nominations for the position to which Heckroodt was promoted were called for from all departments of the Railway Service. Heckroodt was nominated by the head of his department, and all the nominations were examined by a committee of officers who considered he was the most efficient and suitable officer for the vacant post.</li>

<li>(4) Welfare officer, grade 1, &#x00A3;434 per annum, plus Durban cost of living allowance.</li>

<li>(5) 12th July, 1920.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister tell us how many officers were superseded? I think that question has been overlooked.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I have given a reply on (3). I have informed the hon. member that promotions are made on the ground of efficiency and not seniority, so the question of how many officers were superseded does not really arise.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>Is Mr. Heckroodt&#x2019;s unexampled promotion a reward for the work he put in in securing the return of the hon. member for Kroonstad (Lt.-Col. Terreblanche) at the by-election?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>That is an expression of opinion by the hon. member to which he is entitled, but there is no truth in it. That is all I can say.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>PHILIP R. NEL ON CROWN LAND.</heading>

<question by="#thomas_watt" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Sir THOMAS WATT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) In what capacity does Mr. Philip R. Nel occupy a piece of Crown land near Malonjeni, Dundee district, which was formerly occupied by Mr. W. W. Havemann;</li>

<li>(2) whether the Government has approved of Mr. Nel taking Mr. Havemann&#x2019;s place; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government is aware that Mr. Nel is owner of a farm named Single Tree, near Malonjeni, which he has let to a Mr. Stead for &#x00A3;100 a year, and that he also owns a farm named Zeekoefontein, near Vereeniging, Transvaal?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#thomas_watt">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1), (2) and (3) On the 2nd December, 1927, the Inspector of Lands reported to this department&#x2019;s office at Maritzburg, that he found a certain Mr. Nel occupying and working the holding Hazeldene, Dundee district, in conjunction with the registered lessee, Mr. W. W. Havemann. The inspector advised them to inform the Lands Department of this fact, The inspector also reported that Mr. Nel was the owner of land&#x2014;no particulars being given as to size and situation&#x2014;which he had let, the rental from which fell due on 1st July, 1928, and would be paid to the department in reduction of Mr. Havemann&#x2019;s arrears on the holding. The inspector further reported that Mr. Nel intended selling his land and utilising the proceeds towards payment for Mr. Havemann&#x2019;s holding. On the 28th December, 1927, the department&#x2019;s office at Maritzburg drew Mr. Havemann&#x2019;s attention to the fact that his action in permitting Mr. Nel to reside on his holding, was a contravention of the terms of his lease. Mr. Havemann was also advised of the procedure to be adopted if he desired to cede a share of his interests to Mr. Nel, but so far no reply has been received. If an application for cession is received the application form will disclose Mr. Nel&#x2019;s assets and such application will be submitted for the consideration of the Land Board and a recommendation to me as to whether or not the application should be approved.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_watt" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Sir THOMAS WATT:</from>

<p>May I ask whether the recommendation has been approved?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#thomas_watt">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>My department wrote to the office at Maritzburg and they wrote him informing him he was contravening the law, and if he desired to cede an interest in the lease he should make application in the ordinary way.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Maj. RICHARDS:</from>

<p>Is this the same Mr. Nel who is chairman of the Nationalist party, or is it another Mr. Nel of the same name?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>I do not know.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>P. R. KOK OX LAND BOARD.</heading>

<question by="#pretorius" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Lt.-Col. N. J. PRETORIUS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) When the Land Board for the Western Transvaal was established;</li>

<li>(2) of how many members does the said board consist and what did the expenses of the board in respect of salaries, travelling expenses and allowances amount to for the period ending the 1st January, 1928; and</li>

<li>(3) (a) when was P. R. Kok appointed a member of the board, (b) what amount was paid to him up to the 1st January, 1928, as allowances and travelling expenses, and (c) what is the highest sum paid to him during any one month in respect of allowances and travelling expenses?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#pretorius">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 1st October, 1925.</li>

<li><span class="col_2309-2310" refersTo="page_1221"/>(2) Five. The expenses for the period 1st October, 1925, to 1st January, 1928, were: fees, &#x00A3;4,633 7s.; subsistence, &#x00A3;1,925 1s. 6d.; travelling, &#x00A3;2,260 14s. 10d.; total, &#x00A3;8,819 3s. 4d.</li>

<li>(3) (a) 1st October, 1925; (b) The amounts paid to Mr. Kok during the period 1st October, 1925, to 1st January, 1928, were: fees, &#x00A3;913 10s.; subsistence, &#x00A3;405 3s. 8d.; travelling, &#x00A3;181 18s. 3d.; total, &#x00A3;1,500 11s. 11d.; (c) fees, &#x00A3;56 14s.; subsistence, &#x00A3;24 12s. 6d.; travelling, &#x00A3;27 4s. 9d.; total, &#x00A3;108 11s. 3d. I may add that travelling expenses are not paid to members of the board but to the motor car contractors, Railway Administration, etc.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. STRUBEN:</from>

<p>I should like to ask whether that expense for a land board is exceptional, or whether it is a proportionate ratio of expense of the land boards generally?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>No, that is quite wrong. That is for a period of two years and three months. There is nothing exceptional in that.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>I should like to ask the Minister why it is necessary to have two land boards in the Transvaal and only one in the other provinces?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>That is not so. The hon. member is wrong. There are only three districts of the Transvaal included in the area of the Western Land Board. The rest is the Cape, and the reason why this board was appointed is that at the time the 1925 Act was passed, the work under section 11 increased to such an extent that the boards could not possibly cope with the work, and I had to appoint another board in order to get the work done.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>Mr. GILSON:</from>

<p>Could the Minister tell us how many miles they travelled?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>I cannot tell you the mileage. The law lays down that members must inspect the holdings. The travelling expenses are according to the regulations, and an agreement with the motor contractors.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_lands">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Can the Minister tell us whether Mr. P. R. Kok, the subject of this question, is the same gentleman who, whilst an officer of the Union Defence Force, did so much in the Potchefstroom training camp in 1914 with the present Minister of Agriculture to promote rebellion?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>I do, not know whether he was the same gentleman&#x2014;I was not in Potchefstroom.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>PUBLIC SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.</heading>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the total establishment of public servants, distinguishing between Europeans and others, (a) under the Union Government, inclusive of railways and harbours servants, and (b) under the Provincial Administrations; and</li>

<li>(2) what is the total number of the other Government employees, casual labourers, etc., distinguishing between Europeans and others, (a) under the Union Government, exclusive of railways and harbours servants, and (b) under the Provincial Administrations?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The total establishment of public servants inclusive of railways and harbours servants is: (a) under the Union Government, European, 80,126; other, 44,217; (b) under the Provincial Administrations, European, 2,156; other, 300.</li>

<li>(2) The total number of other Government employees, casual labourers, etc., exclusive of railways and harbours servants is: (a) under the Union Government, European, 12,133; other, 8,234; (b) under the Provincial Administrations, European, 16,924; other, 23,803.</li>

</ol>

<p>Note: The figures under (2) (b) include the following teachers: European, 15,316; other,</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>AGRICULTURAL DISTILLERS&#x2019; LICENCES.</heading>

<question by="#papenfus" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. PAPENFUS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether correspondence has passed between the Graaff-Reinet Chamber of Commerce and the Minister in regard to the alleged indiscriminate granting of agricultural distillers&#x2019; licences under the Excise Duties Amendment Act of 1909 (Cape), and the growing demoralization among the natives and coloured persons caused by the illicit liquor traffic;</li>

<li>(2) how many such licences were issued during the years 1925, 1926 and 1927, respectively;</li>

<li>(3) whether any such distillers have been convicted for contravention of the liquor or excise laws during the years mentioned; if so,</li>

<li>(4) whether the Minister will furnish the names of the convicted persons and the sentence imposed in each case;</li>

<li>(5) whether there has been any remission of such sentences, and, if so, what has the remission been in each case and what was the reason for such remission;</li>

<li>(6) whether the Minister has issued instructions to stop &#x201C;trapping&#x201D; in cases of the nature referred to what was the reason for such instructions: and</li>

<li>(7) whether licences to distil brandy have, inter alia, been granted to a youth of 17 years of age and to an individual who has been &#x201C;black listed&#x201D; under the liquor laws?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#papenfus">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) There is no record in my office of such correspondence. The Act referred to is administered by the Customs and Excise Department and correspondence on that subject would therefore ordinarily not be addressed to the Department of Justice.</li>

<li><span class="col_2311-2312" refersTo="page_1222"/>(2) In the year 1925, seventy-six such licences were issued; in the year 1926, sixty-six, and in 1927, seventy-five.</li>

<li>(3) and</li>

<li>(4) The only conviction that can be traced is one of G. F. Basson on the 9th July, 1926, for contravening section 22 of Act No. 28 of 1883, on two counts, and he was sentenced on each count to pay a fine of &#x00A3;20 or to serve one month&#x2019;s imprisonment with hard labour. The fines were made payable in monthly instalments of &#x00A3;10. There probably have been more cases of distillers who have been convicted under the liquor laws, but as the fact that the accused was the holder of a distiller&#x2019;s licence would be immaterial, no record of the fact would be made.</li>

<li>(5) No remission of sentence was granted in the case mentioned in paragraph (4).</li>

<li>(6) Yes. I discovered in a case which was brought to my notice that an individual with a bad record had been employed as a trap and as I do not regard trapping as absolutely necessary in Graaff-Reinet, I decided to stop the practice. I have since then authorised the police to employ traps in specific instances in which application was made by them to me for such permission.</li>

<li>(7) I have not been able to get information to confirm this. These licences are issued upon application by the excise receiver of the district or other officer duly authorized, and the law provides no restrictions. When the police tell me there is a certain specific case where there is difficulty in securing a conviction, I give permission to use a trap.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>BOOT AND SHOE INDUSTRY.</heading>

<question by="#stals" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Dr. STALS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What approximately is the proportion of South Africa&#x2019;s requirements in the matter of footwear which is supplied by factories in the Union;</li>

<li>(2) (a) what was the value of footwear imported from overseas during the last two years, and (b) from which countries was footwear imported during the same period and what were the respective values;</li>

<li>(3) how many Europeans and non-Europeans, respectively, are employed in the boot and shoe industry in the Union; and</li>

<li>(4) what are the average wages of the different classes of employees engaged in the said industry?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#stals">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) For the year 1927 the footwear factories in the Union supplied approximately two-thirds of the Union&#x2019;s requirements in respect of leather footwear, and approximately half in respect of all kinds of footwear (viz., leather, canvas, rubber and felt footwear), as regards quantity.</li>

</ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>1926.</p></td>

<td><p>1927.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>(2) (a) Value of all kinds of footwear imported into the Union&#x2026;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;1,102,707</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;948,709</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Value of leather footwear imported into the Union&#x2026;</p></td>

<td><p>985,952</p></td>

<td><p>820,488</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<ol>

<li>(b)</li>

</ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td colspan="4"><p>Value of Footwear imported into the Union (&#x00A3;).</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td colspan="2"><p>1926.</p></td>

<td colspan="2"><p>1927.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Leather Footwear.</p></td>

<td><p>All kinds of Footwear.</p></td>

<td><p>Leather Footwear.</p></td>

<td><p>All kinds of Footwear</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>United Kingdom</p></td>

<td><p>875,997</p></td>

<td><p>934,472</p></td>

<td><p>722,286</p></td>

<td><p>779,678</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Canada</p></td>

<td><p>2,494</p></td>

<td><p>34,557</p></td>

<td><p>702</p></td>

<td><p>34,467</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>India</p></td>

<td><p>68</p></td>

<td><p>125</p></td>

<td><p>116</p></td>

<td><p>179</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Australia</p></td>

<td><p>57</p></td>

<td><p>172</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>New Zealand</p></td>

<td><p>118</p></td>

<td><p>118</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Hong Kong</p></td>

<td><p>13</p></td>

<td><p>66</p></td>

<td><p>40</p></td>

<td><p>79</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Czecho-Slovakia</p></td>

<td><p>14,859</p></td>

<td><p>15,659</p></td>

<td><p>28,620</p></td>

<td><p>30,840</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Jugo-Slavia</p></td>

<td><p>26</p></td>

<td><p>26</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Austria</p></td>

<td><p>3,316</p></td>

<td><p>3,956</p></td>

<td><p>2,943</p></td>

<td><p>3,445</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Belgium</p></td>

<td><p>6,469</p></td>

<td><p>6,520</p></td>

<td><p>13,553</p></td>

<td><p>14,741</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Denmark</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>6</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>6</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>France</p></td>

<td><p>4,562</p></td>

<td><p>6,121</p></td>

<td><p>5,796</p></td>

<td><p>7,475</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Germany</p></td>

<td><p>4,971</p></td>

<td><p>6,285</p></td>

<td><p>6,025</p></td>

<td><p>10,304</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Holland</p></td>

<td><p>274</p></td>

<td><p>309</p></td>

<td><p>263</p></td>

<td><p>282</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Italy</p></td>

<td><p>608</p></td>

<td><p>654</p></td>

<td><p>932</p></td>

<td><p>940</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Norway</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>90</p></td>

<td><p>149</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Madeira</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>3</p></td>

<td><p>3</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Sweden</p></td>

<td><p>121</p></td>

<td><p>469</p></td>

<td><p>13</p></td>

<td><p>92</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Switzerland</p></td>

<td><p>61,199</p></td>

<td><p>61,409</p></td>

<td><p>26,286</p></td>

<td><p>26,777</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p><span class="col_2313-2314" refersTo="page_1223"/>Turkey</p></td>

<td><p>95</p></td>

<td><p>159</p></td>

<td><p>64</p></td>

<td><p>400</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>China</p></td>

<td><p>552</p></td>

<td><p>657</p></td>

<td><p>149</p></td>

<td><p>406</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Argentine</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>104</p></td>

<td><p>104</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>United States of America</p></td>

<td><p>10,094</p></td>

<td><p>30,860</p></td>

<td><p>12,467</p></td>

<td><p>38,198</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Portugal</p></td>

<td><p>5</p></td>

<td><p>5</p></td>

<td><p>8</p></td>

<td><p>8</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Portuguese East Africa</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>5</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Japan</p></td>

<td><p>54</p></td>

<td><p>102</p></td>

<td><p>26</p></td>

<td><p>129</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Agypt</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Spain</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>&#x2014;</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

<td><p>1</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;985,952</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;1,102,707</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;820,488</p></td>

<td><p>&#x00A3;948,709</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<ol>

<li>(3) Europeans 3,108 (estimated). Non-Europeans 1,633 (estimated).</li>

<li>(4) It is not possible to state the average wages of the different classes of employees engaged in the footwear industry as a whole, but the following are the present rates of wages paid to the different classes of employees in the two sections divided for this purpose:&#x2014;</li>

</ol>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>Port Elizabeth and Wit water stand Areas.</p></td>

<td><p>Rest of the Union.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Clickers</p></td>

<td><p>110s. 0d. per week.</p></td>

<td><p>90s. 0d. per week.</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Cutters</p></td>

<td><p>97s. 6d. &#x201E;</p></td>

<td><p>80s. 9d. &#x201E;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Lasters (welted)</p></td>

<td><p>100s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

<td><p>100s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>&#x201E; (machine sewn)</p></td>

<td><p>75s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

<td><p>75s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Blake sewers</p></td>

<td><p>102s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

<td><p>92s. 6d. &#x201E;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Finishers, 1st Grade</p></td>

<td><p>95s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

<td><p>95s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>&#x201E; 2nd Grade</p></td>

<td><p>75s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

<td><p>75s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Female Machinists (Best Work)</p></td>

<td><p>55s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

<td><p>49s. 6d. &#x201E;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Semi-skilled Operators</p></td>

<td><p>40s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

<td><p>36s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Unskilled Operators</p></td>

<td><p>25s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

<td><p>25s. 0d. &#x201E;</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td colspan="2"><p>Apprentices commence at 15s. and rise to 65s. per week in five years.</p></td>

<td><p></p></td>

</tr>

</table>

</answer>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>Maj. RICHARDS:</from>

<p>What was the total? amount paid to the customs on footwear?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#stals">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I cannot say on the face of it.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>FORT NAPIER MENTAL HOSPITAL.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_public_works">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Public Works:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is correct that the children&#x2019;s block at the Fort Napier Mental Hospital has been condemned and is being pulled down;</li>

<li>(2) what was the reason for this action;</li>

<li>(3) what amount had been expended on the building before it was condemned;</li>

<li>(4) who is responsible for the mistake, if any;</li>

<li>(5) whether the work was being done departmentally, and whether the pulling down is to be similarly carried out; and, if so,</li>

<li>(6) what is the total loss to the Union in consequence?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_works" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No.</li>

<li>(2), (3), (4), (5) and (6). In view of the reply to (1), these questions fall away. I may explain to the hon. member that the children&#x2019;s block at the Fort Napier mental hospital about which he enquires, is a portion of the old cantonment buildings in brick, which has been altered to accommodate the children patients at this institution. I am informed that Dr. Dunston, commissioner of mental hygiene, has recommended to his Minister that there should be a concentration of all children patients at the Potchefstroom Institution. If this recommendation is accepted the building at Fort Napier, which was intended for the children&#x2019;s block, will be available for other classes of patients with practically no alteration. If the recommendation is not accepted the block will be occupied by the children patients as originally intended.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_public_works">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister tell us what amount was spent in adapting this building for the purpose of a children&#x2019;s hospital?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_public_works" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS:</from>

<p>No, it was part of the general scheme, of adaptation; and if the hon. member desires <span class="col_2315-2316" refersTo="page_1224"/>particular information I will be only too happy to furnish it, if he asks it in the proper form.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>IMPRISONMENT FOR DEBT.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether civil imprisonment of debtors is a loss or a profit to the Government; if the former, what is approximately the estimated yearly cost to the Prisons Department;</li>

<li>(2) whether persons imprisoned for debt are locked up in cells or otherwise treated as criminals; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table the prison rules and regulations governing the treatment of debtors under civil imprisonment orders?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#hay">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The presence of the comparatively small number of civil debtors admitted to gaols makes no difference in the administration costs. The maintenance fee paid by the creditor covers the cost of rations issued, which varies slightly in different localities. There is no loss and there is no ascertainable profit.</li>

<li>(2) All inmates of gaols are technically &#x201C;prisoners&#x201D; and their sleeping accommodation falls under the general heading &#x201C;cells.&#x201D; Civil debtors are accorded the same treatment as is given to unconvicted prisoners. At the larger centres where the numbers received are appreciable, separate sections are set aside for civil debtors.</li>

<li>(3) The treatment of civil debtors is regulated by sections 14 to 19 of Act No. 13 of 1911, and the prison regulations framed under that Act Nos. 601 to 614 published under Government Notice No. 1551 of 1911, which has been laid on the Table of the House. There are no separate rules affecting the treatment of civil debtors in gaols.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>LOANS IN BRITAIN.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether all loans raised by the Union Government in London enjoy the advantage of being termed Trustee Security Loans by virtue of British legislation specially favourable to the dominions?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>In order that trustees may invest in Union Government securities the requirements of the Colonial Stock Acts, 1877-1900, have been complied with in regard to all loans raised in London by the passing of Act No. 6 of 1913 (Union), the Trustee Investment in Union Government Securities Act.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS:</from>

<p>If it were not for this special advantage in raising loans on the London market, should we not have to float our loans on the same footing as other nations have to?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I do not think it would make the slightest difference to the success of Union loans.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS:</from>

<p>Is this of no value to the Union?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I don&#x2019;t think it would make the slightest difference. The Union would have to pass a special Act laying it down that in the event of the interest not being paid the Minister of Finance would have to pay funds to the High Commissioner&#x2019;s office direct. The question of the success or non-success of floating loans in any market depends mostly on the strength of the credit of the country concerned. Even if this legislation to which the hon. member refers did not exist I doubt whether it would have made any difference to our loans.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware that special legislation has been passed by the Imperial Parliament allowing trustees to invest in Union loans, and, but for that special Act of Parliament, they could not otherwise invest in them?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I have already replied to the question which is the original question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>You must be very badly informed and your department also.</p>

</question>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. GILSON:</from>

<p>Has the Minister endeavoured to float loans on any other than the London market?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>We have not tried any other market.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: AMERICAN ENGINE REPAIRS.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What has been the cost of renewal of boilers and other repairs to the American 14 C. type of engine which came into the country in 1918 to 1919; and</li>

<li>(2) whether some of these engines shortly after arrival underwent heavy repairs to fire boxes, and, if so, how many and at what cost per engine?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I presume the question of the hon. member has reference to the early performance of these engines, the facts of which are recorded in detail in the reports of the Controller and Auditor-General for the years: 1918-&#x2019;19 (pages 124 and 125); 1919-&#x2019;20 (page 156); 1920-&#x2019;21 (pages 26 and 27). The engines had to be withdrawn temporarily from service not long after they were received, owing to the stays in the fire boxes developing serious faults. The engines were put right and the Administration was fully compensated by the suppliers for the cost and inconvenience involved, as will be seen on reference to Resolution No. 11, third report of the Select Committee on Railways and Harbours, 1922 session (S.C. 3a-&#x2019;22), which report was before this House on the 19th July, 1922.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_2317-2318" refersTo="page_1225"/>RAILWAYS: MAFFEI ENGINES.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether one of the Maffei engines (187.5 ton) bought in Germany has been found too heavy to negotiate some of the bridges on the South African railway lines;</li>

<li>(2) whether any difficulty is being experienced with the lubrication system of this engine; if so, what is the precise difficulty;</li>

<li>(3) whether the bridge engineers of the Administration were consulted as to the carrying capacity of the bridges before this monster engine was ordered from Germany, and, if so, what was their report; and</li>

<li>(4) whether the engine mentioned in (1) fouled the Woodstock platform when travelling from Salt River to Cape Town?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The reply is in the negative.</li>

<li>(2) There has been slight difficulty experienced in lubricating the back engine side bearers, but this can be overcome.</li>

<li>(3) The chief civil engineer, under whose direction the bridge engineers work, was consulted, and he concurred.</li>

<li>(4) The engine fouled the platform at Wood-stock on its initial trial trip. It was returned to Salt River workshops, and, after an alteration was effected to the foot steps and blow down pipe, the engine was released and no further trouble has been experienced in this connection.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: MINISTER&#x2019;S VISITS TO GERMAN FACTORIES.</heading>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XIV.</num>

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours how many German locomotive factories did the Minister visit during his recent trip in Europe, and how many British locomotive factories did he inspect on the same occasion?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The visit was entirely a private one and I see no necessity to furnish an account of my movements to the hon. member.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>Who paid the expenses of the hon. Minister?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I have replied to that. The reply is included in my original answer.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>You must not let your hair get ruffled.</p>

</question>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>Was the senior member of the Railway Board who accompanied the Minister of Railways, also on a private visit?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nicholls">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>It was likewise a private visit.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: DR. WERNER SELL&#x2019;S LECTURE.</heading>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XV.</num>

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Minister has seen a report in the South African press of a lecture delivered last month by Dr. Werner Sell, of Berlin, a German engineer, who expressed gratification at the British settlers leaving South Africa and the securing of Government contracts by Germany; and</li>

<li>(2) whether this engineer, Dr. Werner Sell, was one of those whom the Minister met during his stay in Germany?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nicholls">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) I would refer the hon. member to the reply given to Question XIV.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Did the Minister give Dr. Sell reason for his statement that the Union Government was &#x201C;showering orders on Germany, much to London&#x2019;s disgust&#x201D;?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>That is included in my reply.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: GERMAN ENGINE, THE &#x201C;MAN KILLER.&#x201D;</heading>

<question by="#arnott" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XVI.</num>

<from>Brig.-Gen. ARNOTT</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Which of the engines imported from Germany is now known among engine men at Germiston as the &#x201C;Man Killer&#x201D; and</li>

<li>(2) whether its name has been given because the heat generated in the cab is found by the crew to be beyond physical endurance?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#arnott">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No engine imported from Germany is known amongst engine men at Germiston as the &#x201C;man killer.&#x201D;</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Was it a German engine that was responsible for scalding a fireman to death at New Hanover last week?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>That does not arise out of this question</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>DISTRESSED SAILORS (UNION NATIONALS).</heading>

<question by="#drummond_chaplin" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XVII.</num>

<from>Sir DRUMMOND CHAPLIN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether the office of the High Commissioner for the Union in London is in possession of information in regard to the provisions which exist for the return to the Union of distressed British sailors who are Union nationals and who are stranded in non-Union ports?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#drummond_chaplin">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The answer is in the affirmative.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>CRUELTY TO DOGS AT MESSINA.</heading>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XVIII.</num>

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) About how many dogs were killed in the compound of the Messina Copper Company on or about the 30th August, 1927;</li>

<li><span class="col_2319-2320" refersTo="page_1226"/>(2) how many police were present and about how many natives;</li>

<li>(3) what instruments of destruction were used by the police and by the natives, respectively;</li>

<li>(4) what was the nature and date of the enquiry said to have been held on the subject by the Commissioner of Police; and</li>

<li>(5) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table all papers connected with that enquiry?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#byron">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) About sixty.</li>

<li>(2) Two European and five native police officers, assisted by about half a dozen native mine police boys and between twenty-five and thirty native youths. Some hundreds of native mine labourers were also present in the compound, but they had no authority to take any part in the proceedings.</li>

<li>(3) Each of the dogs collected by the police was destroyed by a blow on the head with a pick-handle. This work was carried out under the supervision of a European police officer. In view of the nature of the locality the use of firearms was out of the question. A number of the other dogs were killed by the native mine labourers by means of stones and sticks, before the police could stop them.</li>

<li>(4) Written statements were obtained from the European police officers referred to in answer No. 2, from an official of the Messina (Transvaal) Development Co., Ltd., and from a sanitary inspector. The Commissioner of Police commenced his enquiries on the 6th September, 1927.</li>

<li>(5) I shall lay upon the Table of the House a copy of a statement signed by the police officers in question, and also copy of a letter from the general manager of the Messina (Transvaal) Development Co., Ltd. It would entail too much labour to copy and translate all the other papers in this case for the purpose of laying them upon the Table of the House. These papers are available for inspection in my office by any interested hon. member.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Did I understand the Minister to say that a further inquiry is being held?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I will see that further inquiries are made and will communicate the result.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. GILSON</from>

<p>What was the reason for this wholesale slaughter? Was it in a sporting spirit or was it from necessity?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#gilson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>They were dogs it was necessary to destroy. They were roving curs, and not dogs in the proper sense of the word. The only question was whether they were destroyed in the best way or not and with as little cruelty as possible. There was no question of sport.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#stuttaford" to="#minister_of_justice">

<from>Mr. STUTTAFORD</from>

<p>Why could not these dogs have been destroyed by poison?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>I personally do not know what is the proper way to destroy dogs, but as far as the police are concerned, they are of the opinion that they did it in the best possible way. I will make a further inquiry into the matter.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>DEFENCE: POTCHEFSTROOM COMMANDO.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_defence">

<num>XIX.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the officers of the Potchefstroom Defence Force Commando were not asked to nominate a commandant and accordingly selected Col. Grimbeek, D.S.O., who had previously held the position; and</li>

<li>(2) upon what grounds and upon whose recommendation did the Minister, in the face of this, appoint a Mr. Alberts, a burgher of the local commando, who had only recently come to reside in that district?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The officers of the Potchefstroom commando were consulted and asked to submit the names of not less than three suitable candidates for appointment to the position of commandant of the commando. The name of Lt.-Col. Grimbeek was included in the list of those submitted by the officers of the commando. The majority of officers favoured the appointment of Lt.-Col. Grimbeek.</li>

<li>(2) Due to local political and other differences in the commando, I was of opinion, after careful consideration, that it would not be in the best interests of the service to appoint any of the officers nominated as this would doubtless have tended to prolong the unsatisfactory state of affairs that existed. I, therefore, considered it desirable to make an entirely fresh appointment and after making several enquiries, I selected Burgher Alberts for the appointment.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>Has Mr. Alberts got any political predilection or not?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>He was a newcomer to the district. There was a great deal of jangling in the district, and I acted for the best.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Mr. GILSON</from>

<p>Whose advice did the Minister take in appointing Mr. Alberts. He did not know him personally. How was the appointment made?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#gilson">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>I made inquiries, and I took my own advice.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>LOANS IN LONDON AND PURCHASES IN GERMANY.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XX.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is the policy of the Government to take the fullest advantage of the most favoured conditions in London for raising loans and to spend the money so raised in the cheapest available markets; if not,</li>

<li>(2) what were the Government&#x2019;s reasons for purchasing so largely in Germany, where <span class="col_2321-2322" refersTo="page_1227"/>labour is working under low wage and other depressed conditions?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) It is the policy of the Government to raise its external loans in the cheapest market. There is no connection between borrowing and spending, but, broadly, buying is also effected in the cheapest market.</li>

<li>(2) This is a matter for the Minister of Railways.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Arising out of the answer, is the Minister aware that the United States of America only consented to lend money to the allies during the war, on the condition that the proceeds of the loan were spent in the United States of America?</p>

</question>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Mr. GILSON</from>

<p>In view of the Minister&#x2019;s reply to a previous question that there was no advantage in raising loans in London, will he take steps to test the market in New York?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#gilson">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>That was not my reply. I said the particular Act, referred to by the hon. member, to my mind had nothing to do with the success or otherwise of the loan. The hon. member is misquoting. The Union Government&#x2019;s policy is to raise external loans in the cheapest market.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: GERMAN ENGINES.</heading>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXI.</num>

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours what special inducements were offered by him to the German manufacturers to tender for the supply of engines at little more than cost price?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>None.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways: &#x201C;Pacific&#x201D; Engines.</heading>

<question by="#deane" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXIII.</num>

<from>Mr. DEANE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours how often the &#x201C;Pacific&#x201D; and &#x201C;Mountain&#x201D; types of lomotives have been in the workshops since their arrival, about eighteen months ago, for repairs and other adjustments, and what has been the cost of such work?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#deane">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>There are in service seven &#x201C;Pacific&#x201D; (now called &#x201C;Karroo&#x201D; type), and thirty-five &#x201C;Mountain&#x201D; types of locomotive. These engines were placed in service between July, 1925, and December, 1926. Since they were erected the &#x201C;Mountain&#x201D; type engines received attention in the mechanical workshops altogether on fifty occasions and the &#x201C;Pacific&#x201D; type on eight occasions at a cost to the Administration to the end of December last of &#x00A3;9,301 for the &#x201C;Mountain&#x201D; type, and &#x00A3;2,191 for the &#x201C;Pacific&#x201D; type.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: STEEL SLEEPERS.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXVII.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether steel sleepers are to be used in future instead of wood, and, if so, where and for what reasons?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>It is not the policy of the Administration to introduce steel sleepers exclusively, in place of wooden sleepers, and, as far as can be foreseen at present, both steel and wooden sleepers will continue to be used for years to come. Steel sleepers have been adopted for reasons of economy on light branch lines and on certain sections of the main line.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: PURCHASES IN GERMANY.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_railway_and_harbours">

<num>XXVIII.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether he will lay upon the Table copies of all correspondence which has passed between him and the High Commissioner relative to his or the Government&#x2019;s decision to purchase railway materials largely in Germany?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>As no decision was taken either by the Government or by myself to purchase railway materials largely in Germany, the hon. member&#x2019;s question falls away.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: FOREIGN PURCHASES.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_railway_and_harbours">

<num>XXIX.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours what other materials for railway purposes, apart from locomotives, have been purchased in America, Germany, Belgium and Italy since the present Government came into office, and at what total cost?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The preparation of particulars in detail for each country and for each commodity would take some time and involve a large amount of clerical labour. The following figures, covering complete years and giving the value of orders for goods other than locomotives placed overseas, may, however, suffice for the hon. member&#x2019;s purposes:&#x2014;1925, Great Britain and dominions, &#x00A3;3,167,998; other countries, &#x00A3;1,558,287. 1926, Great Britain and dominions, &#x00A3;2,306,286; other countries, &#x00A3;1,336,717. 1927, Great Britain and dominions, &#x00A3;2,369,576; other countries, &#x00A3;1,859,257. The principal commodities purchased may be taken as wagons and coaches (mainly British); bridge material and steel structural work (mainly British); water tanks (mainly British); springs, automatic couplers, vacuum brake gear and other fittings for engines and rolling stock (British and Continental); boiler tubes (British and Continental); and permanent way material (British, Continental and American). The purchases made on the Continent were principally in Germany, France and Belgium; purchases in Italy were negligible.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>H. S. PRETORIUS ON LAND BOARD.</heading>

<question by="#de_villiers" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>XXX.</num>

<from>Mr. P. C. DE VILLIERS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) When was Mr. H. S. Pretorius appointed a member of the Land Board and when did he resign as such;</li>

<li>(2) what amount was paid to him for his services during the last two years and three months by way of allowances and travelling expenses; and</li>

<li><span class="col_2323-2324" refersTo="page_1228"/>(3) what is the largest amount paid to him during any month in respect of allowances and travelling expenses?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#de_villiers">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Mr. Pretorius was appointed in April, 1913. On the expiration of his last period of office in October, 1925, he was not re-appointed.</li>

<li>(2) For the period July, 1923, to October, 1925, his expenses were: Fees, &#x00A3;1,350 10s.; subsistence, &#x00A3;595 17s. 8d.; travelling, &#x00A3;507 7s. 10d.; total, &#x00A3;2,453 16s. 6d.</li>

<li>(3) Fees, &#x00A3;58 16s.; subsistence, &#x00A3;24 8s. 4d.; travelling, &#x00A3;35 11s.; total, &#x00A3;118 15s. 4d. The travelling expenses were not paid to Mr. Pretorius, but to the motor car contractors, the Railway Administration, etc.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>DIAMOND BOARD, SOUTH-WEST AFRICA.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_external_affairs">

<num>XXXI.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of External Affairs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Who is the Chairman of the Diamond Board of South-West Africa;</li>

<li>(2) what pay, fees or emoluments, if any, are connected with the appointment;</li>

<li>(3) when was the appointment made; and</li>

<li>(4) what are the duties of the position?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_external_affairs" to="#hay">

<from>The MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Mr. G. E. B. Frood, formerly inspector of Mines in South-West Africa.</li>

<li>(2) None, but reasonable travelling expenses and such subsistence allowance as board may think fit may be paid under section 2 (8) of Proclamation No. 4 of 1921. As the chairman resides on a farm in the Stellenbosch district, the amount drawn by him has been fixed at &#x00A3;120 per annum.</li>

<li>(3) March 17th, 1927.</li>

<li>(4) The functions of the board are as laid down in section 3 of the above-mentioned proclamation. The chairman is the nominee of the South-West Administration, and attends regularly at the offices of the board and keeps in touch with the working of the various departments of the board and with matters of importance to the South-West Africa Administration connected with the diamond industry.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>PUBLIC SERVICE: DE WAAL MEYER.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXXII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) On what date was Mr. de Waal Meyer first appointed to the public service, and at what rate of pay;</li>

<li>(2) what is his present appointment and rate of remuneration, inclusive of allowance;</li>

<li>(3) what is the explanation of his rapid advancement;</li>

<li>(4) how many officials were superseded by Mr. de Waal Meyer when he was promoted to his present appointment; and</li>

<li>(5) whether such promotion was recommended by the Public Service Commission?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Mr. de Waal Meyer is not an officer of the public service. He was first appointed as private secretary to the hon. the Minister of Mines and Industries on the 16th July, 1924, at a salary of &#x00A3;370 per annum, plus &#x00A3;30 10s. per annum local allowance (total &#x00A3;400 10s. per annum). His remuneration was increased to &#x00A3;420 per annum salary, plus &#x00A3;32 10s. per annum local allowance (total &#x00A3;452 10s. per annum) from the 1st June, 1925.</li>

<li>(2) His present appointment is that of intelligence officer to the Board of Trade, to which post he was appointed on a three years contract from the 6th January, 1926, at an inclusive salary of &#x00A3;700 per annum.</li>

<li>(3) As Mr. de Waal Meyer is not and never has been a public servant, he cannot be said to have been advanced in the public service.</li>

<li>(4) For the reason given in (3), no officials were superseded by him on his appointment. The question of promotion in his case has not arisen.</li>

<li>(5) His appointment to his present post was recommended by the Public Service Commission.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. GILSON</from>

<p>Can the Minister tell us what the duties are of this intelligence officer?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#gilson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>The hon. member had better ask the Minister of the Interior.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Is the paucity of brains in the public service so great that you could not find an officer in the public service of this country to fill that important post?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I presume he was appointed because he was considered suitable for the post.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is Mr. de Waal Meyer a relative or connection of the Minister of Mines and Industries?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I have not the faintest idea.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#hon_member" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>An HON. MEMBER:</from>

<p>You might enquire.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#hon_member">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>It is merely a case of throwing mud. It is not true.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>PUBLIC SERVICE: F. V. ASHPOLE.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXXIII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) On what date was Mr. F. V. Ashpole appointed to the Government service, in what capacity, and at what salary;</li>

<li>(2) what office does Mr. Ashpole hold in the service to-day, and what remuneration is he receiving, inclusive of personal allowance;</li>

<li>(3) upon what date was he promoted to a first-grade clerkship;</li>

<li>(4) what is the reason for his rapid promotion;</li>

<li>(5) how many officials who were senior to him were superseded on his last appointment; and</li>

<li><span class="col_2325-2326" refersTo="page_1229"/>(6) whether his promotion to his present grade was recommended by the Public Service Commission, and, if so, why?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) With effect from 1st August, 1920, as a third-grade clerk in the Department of Justice, at a salary of &#x00A3;160 per annum on the scale &#x00A3;160-30-190-15-&#x00A3;235 plus a local allowance at the rate of &#x00A3;9 per annum;</li>

<li>(2) Private secretary to the hon. the Minister of Finance, graded as a first-grade clerk, with salary at the rate of &#x00A3;390 per annum, plus &#x00A3;31 10s. per annum local allowance, and a personal non-pensionable (secretarial) allowance of &#x00A3;30 per annum.</li>

<li>(3) 1st October, 1926.</li>

<li>(4) His selection to fill the post of private secretary graded as a first-grade clerkship;</li>

<li>(5) 740 second-grade clerks.</li>

<li>(6) Yes, for the reason given in (4).</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is Mr. Ashpole a relative or connection of the Minister of Finance?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I cannot say, but I think it is very unwise of the hon. member to put questions of that personal nature.</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I may be permitted to say that this shows the mentality of the hon. member (Mr. Marwick). It is a case of throwing mud. Why does the hon. member make those insinuations without the least ground?</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>May I raise a point of order? Is the Minister of Finance entitled under any circumstances to stand up and abuse any other hon. member?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I do not think that the hon. member abused anybody.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>He did, I think, sir. He said I was throwing mud.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I am prepared to repeat that.</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>That can hardly be regarded as abuse.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>It would be more to the point if the Minister would answer my question. Is my question not true? Nepotism is rife.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>Is it a sin to be a relative?</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>J.VAN NIEKERK ON BOARD OF TRADE.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXXIV.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What appointment is held by Mr. J. van Niekerk, of the Board of Trade and Industries, and what was the date of his first appointment in the service;</li>

<li>(2) whether his appointment was recommended by the Public Service Commission; and</li>

<li>(3) whether there was no official in the service capable of carrying out the duties of the post?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Mr. J. van Niekerk was appointed to the post of cost accountant to the Board of Trade and Industries, on a three years&#x2019; contract, with effect from the 1st December, 1925, at an inclusive salary of &#x00A3;700 per annum. He resigned on the 30th June, 1927.</li>

<li>(2) Yes.</li>

<li>(3) Officers of the public service were not considered for the post for the reason that it was deemed expedient at the time to appoint an incumbent on a non-permanent basis.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>PUBLIC SERVICE: DR. BODENSTEIN.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XXXV.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What appointment is held by Dr. Bodenstein;</li>

<li>(2) what was his previous experience in his present sphere of work or in the journalistic or scholastic professions; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Public Service Commission recommended his appointment?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Secretary for External Affairs and secretary to the Prime Minister;</li>

<li>(2) He has always been interested in international politics; his experience in administrative matters was limited to membership of the council of the Stellenbosch university and the executive committee of the Senate of that university. Was assistant chief editor of &#x201C;Die Burger&#x201D; for the total period of 2 years and 2 months (1920-&#x2019;21 and January-February, 1922). Was professor in law of the university of Amsterdam (Holland) for seven years (1912-&#x2019;19), and of the University of Stellenbosch for over six years (March 1922-June 1927).</li>

<li>(3) Yes.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>I do not wish to be accused of throwing mud, but in addition to all these qualifications which the Minister has just described, can he tell the House, in confidence, whether this gentleman is a relation of any of the Ministers?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#richards">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Not that I am aware of. Is the hon. member smelling out?</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is there any special department in &#x201C;Die Burger&#x201D; office, or in the Stellenbosch university devoted to diplomatic training?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I do not think that is a proper question.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>PUBLIC SERVICE: J. C. BODENSTEIN.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>XXXVI.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) When was Mr. J. C. Bodenstein first appointed to the Government service, and at what rate of pay; and</li>

<li>(2) what is his present remuneration, in clusive of allowances?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from><span class="col_2327-2328" refersTo="page_1230"/>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Mr. J. C. Bodenstein was appointed on 10th November, 1924, at 27s. 6d. per diem.</li>

<li>(2) &#x00A3;675 per annum, plus local allowance at the rate of &#x00A3;77 per annum.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>I think this gentleman serves in the Minister&#x2019;s department. Can he tell us whether he is a brother-in-law to the Minister of Agriculture?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I am not dealing with personal questions.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#ministers_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister stand up, please, when he replies?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>PUBLIC SERVICE: C. G. BODENSTEIN.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XXXVII.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What appointment in the Government service does one C. G. Bodenstein hold, and what salary does he receive;</li>

<li>(2) when was he appointed to a position in the service and what were the reasons for selecting him for the position; and</li>

<li>(3) whether his appointment was recommended, and, if so, by whom?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Mr. C. G. Bodenstein is a farm inspector in the service of the Land Bank, and draws a salary of &#x00A3;475 per annun.</li>

<li>(2) He was appointed on probation on the 1st October, 1925, which appointment was confirmed on the 16th August, 1927, and his selection was due to his legal experience and extensive knowledge of land transactions.</li>

<li>(3) He was recommended for the appointment by Messrs. C. L. Cherry, L. M. Wentzel and Gen. Kemp, and the managing director states that he is one of the best men he has ever had.</li>

</ol>

<p>I may add for the information of the hon. member, that these appointments, of course, are not made by me or by my department, but by the board of the Land Bank.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: ROAD MOTORS BOUGHT IN BRITAIN.</heading>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXXVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS (for Mr. Robinson)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What amount has been expended in the purchase of British-made vehicles for the road motor service since its inception; and</li>

<li>(2) from what firms were the vehicles bought, and what amount was expended with each firm?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nicholls">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) &#x00A3;206,809.</li>

<li>(2) Thornycroft, &#x00A3;185,045; Albion, &#x00A3;16,795; Leyland, &#x00A3;3,296; Karrierr, &#x00A3;1,673.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: BARBER&#x2019;S RENT, CAPE TOWN.</heading>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XXXIX.</num>

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What rental is payable to the administration in respect of the barber&#x2019;s premises on Cape Town station;</li>

<li>(2) to what extent had the last tenant of these premises fallen into arrear in the payment of rent at the termination of his tenancy; and</li>

<li>(3) what official was responsible for the non-collection of the rent at the due date?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nicholls">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Present rental, &#x00A3;612 per annum.</li>

<li>(2) &#x00A3;365 11s. 5d., reduced by sums held as security by the Administration and the amount realised by sale in execution of writ. The actual deficiency, after taking into account costs of issuing writ, etc., amounted to &#x00A3;149 2s., exclusive of interest.</li>

<li>(3) Responsibility for the non-collection of the rent at the due date cannot be placed upon any particular official. The tenant attributed his position to the loss of business during the alterations to the premises. These alterations were effected by the Administration with a view to affording increased accommodation for which increased rental was to be paid, and reasonable latitude was allowed in the matter of the payment of rent to enable the lessee to recover his trade. This he apparently failed to do, and legal steps were thereupon taken by the Administration to enforce payment.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: MAFFEI AND BRITISH ENGINES.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XL.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the comparative consumption of lubricants by the Maffei 187.5 ton German locomotive and British locomotives approximating to the same size;</li>

<li>(2) whether the automatic stoking of the Maffei 187.5 ton engine has been proved a success under regular working conditions, and, if so, over what line; and</li>

<li>(3) what is the longest run performed by the engine mentioned in (2), and what was the weight of the load?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>Presumably the hon. member refers to the G.H. type of engine, of which there are two in service</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) As these locomotives were only recently placed in service, a proper comparison is not possible, as the consumption of lubricants has not yet been determined.</li>

<li>(2) These engines which are at present being &#x201C;run in&#x201D; on goods trains working on the Cape Town-Touws River section are fitted with the same type of mechanical stoker as certain other classes elsewhere where entirely satisfactory results have been obtained.</li>

<li>(3) (a) 160 miles; (b) 1,250 tons as far as De Dooms, where load is reduced over the Hex River Mountain section.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>G. M. HARTSENBERG, DIPPING SUPERVISOR.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<num>XLI.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Agriculture:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) For what period was Mr. G. M. Hartsenberg employed as a dipping supervisor in the Department of Agriculture;</li>

<li><span class="col_2329-2330" refersTo="page_1231"/>(2) on whose recommendation was he appointed;</li>

<li>(3) why was he selected and by whom;</li>

<li>(4) whether the Department of Native Affairs was consulted as to his suitability for employment as a dipping supervisor in a native area; and</li>

<li>(5) whether, when Mr. Hartsenberg was employed in Modjadjes location, his salary was paid from taxation contributed by natives for the promotion of the wellbeing of the natives?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Mr. Hartsenberg was employed as dipping inspector (not dipping supervisor), from 22nd April, 1922, to 29th February, 1924, when he was retrenched on account of reduction of staff and re-employed from 12th June, 1926, to 13th December, 1927.</li>

<li>(2) On the occasion of his second period of employment, he was appointed on a certificate of satisfactory service signed by the Government veterinary officer under whom he served previously.</li>

<li>(3) Selected by principal veterinary officer on grounds of previous satisfactory service.</li>

<li>(4) Department of Native Affairs was not consulted. He was transferred to Modjadjes location on 8th June, 1927, where his services were urgently required.</li>

<li>(5) No.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware that this gentleman was convicted at the instance of natives on 23 counts of accepting bribes, seven counts of extortion and two other counts of attempting to accept bribes and extort money?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>That is why he was dismissed.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister agree in future to consult the Native Affairs Department as to the suitability, in view of this occurrence and others, of dipping supervisors before they are appointed to native areas.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE:</from>

<p>I have no further reply.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: MALLET ENGINES, BRITISH AND FOREIGN.</heading>

<question by="#lennox" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XLII.</num>

<from>Mr. LENNOX</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether any of the foreign-manufactured locomotives of the &#x201C;Mallet&#x201D; type have been scrapped, and, if so, how many; and</li>

<li>(2) whether any of the British-built &#x201C;Mallet&#x201D; type locomotives imported a little later than those of foreign manufacture have been scrapped or are they all still running and in good condition?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#lennox">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) and (2) Out of a total of 39 British and 40 non-British Mallet engines imported between the years 1909 and 1921, 11 have been withdrawn from service. Of these 11, 9 were scrapped and 2 were sold. The 9 engines scrapped consist of 3 British and 6 other than British manufacture. None of these engines was withdrawn from service because of inferior material or bad workmanship.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: GERMAN ENGINES, BOUNTIES ON</heading>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XLIII.</num>

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is in a position to inform the House under what circumstances and conditions a bounty is paid to manufacturers of German engines for export; if so,</li>

<li>(2) what is the nature or amount of such bounty; and</li>

<li>(3) whether it is the policy of the Government to buy bounty-fed goods notwithstanding the anti-dumping legislation introduced by the Government?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nicholls">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I am not aware that a bounty is being paid in Germany to manufacturers of locomotives for export.</li>

<li>(2) and (3) Fall away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: BRITISH ENGINES, BOILER ALTERATONS IN</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XLIV.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What boiler alterations have been made in the British-manufactured engines which have been running on the rails for the past 37 years; and</li>

<li>(2) when were these boiler alterations made and for what reason?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) None, except in cases where boilers have been replaced in accordance with the Administration&#x2019;s policy of observing specific age limits.</li>

<li>(2) Falls away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: GERMAN SLEEPERS, PRICES OF.</heading>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XLV.</num>

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is in a position to say if the prices quoted for the German sleepers as stated in the March Bulletin of the General Manager of Railways were lower than the German home prices of such sleepers by reason of the bounty paid on export; if so,</li>

<li>(2) to what extent was the difference in prices between the British and German quotations due to such bounty; and</li>

<li>(3) whether it is the policy of the Government to purchase such subsidised foreign goods notwithstanding the principle of mutual co-operation within the empire agreed upon at the Imperial Conference?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nicholls">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I am not aware that a bounty is paid on sleepers exported from Germany.</li>

<li>(2) and (3) Fall away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#speaker">

<from><span class="col_2331-2332" refersTo="page_1232"/>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister whether he is aware that the &#x201C;Economist&#x201D; of the 4th February, 1928, gives the rebate on the import of steel goods from Germany where 24 marks are paid on bearings, 24 marks on steel bars, 40 marks on light railway metal&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member is now giving information.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#speaker">

<from>Mr. GILSON</from>

<p>May I ask whether the Government is taking the advice of the recognized sleeper expert, the hon. member for Vrededorp (Dr. Visser)?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#gilson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>That is not a proper question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Is it not competent for an hon. member to give information when that information is necessary for asking a question of the Minister? That is what I understood the hon. member was doing.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member can ask a question in order to elucidate the answer of the Minister. The Minister stated he was not aware of certain facts. The hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) asked him if he did not know that these facts were stated in a certain paper. I can hardly see how that can be a suitable question under the circumstances.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#speaker">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>Had the Railway Administration been in possession of these facts would it have altered its policy in any way?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#nicholls">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>That seeks an expression of opinion on a hypothetical question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>Seeing the Minister is not informed, will the Minister of Finance inform him so that he will be in a position to reply next time?</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RELATIVE WAGES IN BRITAIN AND GERMANY.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>XLVI.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether official statistics are in possession of the Government showing the comparative real wages paid in Great Britain and Germany to operatives; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) what do the figures for January, 1927, disclose as to the percentage of wages paid in Great Britain and Germany?</li>

</ol>

<p>The reply to this question is standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: GERMAN STEEL, BOUNTY ON.</heading>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XLVII.</num>

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is in a position to inform the House if a bounty is paid to German manufacturers on steel and iron material manufactured in Germany for export; if so,</li>

<li>(2) what percentage does the bounty bear to the selling price of such material; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the amount of bounty received by German manufacturers was taken into consideration when comparing the price of the material offered by them with that of the material offered by British manufacturers?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nicholls">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I am not aware that a bounty is being paid in Germany to manufacturers of steel and iron material for export.</li>

<li>(2) and (3) Fall away.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: GERMANY, THE POLICY OF BUYING IN.</heading>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XLVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours what special instructions, private or otherwise, were issued to the High Commissioner relative to the Government&#x2019;s policy of purchasing material for railway purposes in Germany?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#nicholls">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>None.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: ENGINES, RELATIVE HAULAGES OF.</heading>

<question by="#bates" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>XLIX.</num>

<from>Mr. BATES</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the heaviest tonnage hauled by any British-manufactured locomotive on any section of the line in South Africa; and</li>

<li>(2) what is the heaviest tonnage hauled by any German-manufactured locomotive on any section of the line in South Africa?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#bates">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 1,800 tons.</li>

<li>(2) 1,800 tons.</li>

</ol>

<p>These figures apply to steam locomotives.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: DIRECTOR OF STORES AND SHIPPING</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railway_and_harbours">

<num>L.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether any recommendation was made to him whilst he was in Europe for the return to the Union of the Director of Stores and Shipping, an official attached to the High Commissioner&#x2019;s Office, London: and, if so, by whom and upon what grounds?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The return to the Union of the officer in question was dictated by circumstances connected with his official duties.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister tell me whether the recommendation was made for his return to the Union by anybody in the High Commissioner&#x2019;s office?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>No, I may inform the hon. member that I was acting for the Minister of Railways and Harbours at the time. It was when the negotiations were being conducted in regard to the shipping contract, and I requested him to come out because I thought his services would be useful here. I am not aware of anything that transpired in the High Commissioner&#x2019;s office, as far as my colleague is concerned, about his return.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_2333-2334" refersTo="page_1233"/>UNION GOVERNMENT PURCHASES COMMITTEE.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>LI.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether a committee to deal with Union Government purchases was formed in the High Commissioner&#x2019;s Office, London, during 1926 or 1927; and, if so, upon whose advice, and under whose chairmanship?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>Neither the Treasury nor the Railway Administration has any knowledge of such a committee.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>DEFENCE: POTCHEFSTROOM COMMANDANT.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_defence">

<num>LII.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What was the date of the birth of the two private burghers recently promoted to the rank of commandant in the Potchefstroom and Vaal River commandos, and who claim to have served during the South African war in 1899-&#x2019;02;</li>

<li>(2) in what commandos during that war did they respectively serve; and</li>

<li>(3) what was their respective length of active service during that war?</li>

</ol>

<p>The reply to this question is standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: PROMOTION APPEALS COMMITTEE.</heading>

<question by="#te_water" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>LIII.</num>

<from>Mr. TE WATER</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many appeals against the decision of the Administration in cases of promotion have (a) been received by the Administration; and (b) been dealt with by Promotion Appeals Committees from the date such committees were established; and</li>

<li>(2) how many appeals have been sustained?</li>

</ol>

<p>The reply to this question is standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: STEEL RAILS FROM GERMANY IN 1923.</heading>

<question by="#strachan" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>LIV.</num>

<from>Mr. STRACHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Union Government early in 1924 received quotations from American, British and Continental firms for the supply of steel rails and fish plates, and whether the then High Commissioner was authorized to negotiate a contract with the German tenderers, as offers from German firms were considerably less than those from other manufacturers; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) to what extent has the policy of the previous Government influenced the action of the present Government in similar circumstances?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#strachan">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes; quotations were received from American, British and Continental firms. The German tender was the lowest for the standard of material required, and authority was given the High Commissioner to place an order for 50 miles at &#x00A3;6 18s. 6d. per ton f.o.b., and for enquiries to be made whether any reduction would be made for 100 miles. Negotiations for the reduction in price were not successful, and it was agreed to place the further 50 miles at the same price.</li>

<li>(2) I presume the policy of accepting the most favourable tender, all things being considered, was followed.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>PLAGUE.</heading>

<question by="#drummond" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>LV.</num>

<from>Sir DRUMMOND CHAPLIN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior whether he will inform the House of the steps which are being taken to prevent the spread of plague in the Cape Province and of the measure of success obtained?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#drummond">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>The Minister of Public Health will make a full statement on the subject of this question at a later date, when the Public Health (Amendment) Bill is under discussion.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: SLEEPERS FROM AUSTRALIA.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>LVI.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What were the number and value of wooden sleepers purchased from Australia during 1924, 1925, 1926 and 1927;</li>

<li>(2) what orders have been approved for further supplies of sleepers from Australia;</li>

<li>(3) what was the number and value of steel sleepers purchased during 1924, 1925. 1926 and 1927, and from what countries were they purchased; and</li>

<li>(4) what orders have been approved for further supplies of steel sleepers, and from what countries?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 1924: Number, 2,451,267; value, &#x00A3;795,738. 1925: Number, 1,241,000; value. &#x00A3;440,618. 1926: Number. 1,503,214; value, &#x00A3;532,818. 1927: Number, 1,278,578; value, &#x00A3;390,840.</li>

<li>(2) No further orders have been placed, but delivery under certain contracts already in operation will not be completed until early in 1929.</li>

<li>(3) 1924: Germany, number, 404,800; value, &#x00A3;84,017. France, number, 150,000; value, &#x00A3;40,875. 1925: Germany, number, 72,600, value, &#x00A3;18,755. France, number, 141,100; value, &#x00A3;31,360. 1926: Germany, number, 193,802; value, &#x00A3;41,279. France, number, 324,160; value, &#x00A3;68,472. Belgium, number, 59,320; value, &#x00A3;19,145. 1927: Germany, number, 1,424,710; value, &#x00A3;270,940.</li>

<li>(4) No further orders have been placed, and deliveries under existing contracts will be completed shortly.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_finance">

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>I presume it is available for publication.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>Oh, yes.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_2335-2336" refersTo="page_1234"/>RAILWAYS: MUDEN ROAD MOTOR DELAYS.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>LVII.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether a consignment of shook arrived in Greytown towards the end of February for delivery at Muden;</li>

<li>(2) how long had the shook to stand in Grey town pending delivery by road motor transport;</li>

<li>(3) whether a portion of the shook was damaged by weather in consequence of being held up pending delivery;</li>

<li>(4) whether a notice of claim for the damage has been submitted to the railway authorities;</li>

<li>(5) whether other claims have been submitted against the road motor service; and, if so, how many;</li>

<li>(6) whether the traffic on this service is less than that carried on many of the branch railway lines in the Union, and whether, owing to the nature of the traffic, the Administration will consider the advisability of constructing a branch line of railway to Muden?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) 132 tons of shook arrived at Greytown station between Saturday, 25th February, and Wednesday, 29th February, for delivery by road motor service to Muden.</li>

<li>(2) Delivery by road commenced on 29th February, and was completed on 14th March.</li>

<li>(3) The shooks were stacked in the open pending delivery, but covered by tarpaulins. Thirty seven bundles were said to have been damaged by wet when delivery effected.</li>

<li>(4) Yes.</li>

<li>(5) Fifteen claims have been preferred in respect of traffic conveyed by the Administration&#x2019;s road motor service between Greytown and Muden since the inception of the service in May, 1926.</li>

<li>(6) The answer to the first portion is in the affirmative, and in regard to the second portion, as the hon. member is aware, no railway for the conveyance of public traffic can be constructed without the authority of Parliament. The position in regard to the construction of further new railways was dealt with by me in the House of Assembly on the 31st January.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>PENSIONS: A. L. M. VAN DER WALT.</heading>

<question by="#giovanetti" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>LVIII.</num>

<from>Mr. GIOVANETTI</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) On what grounds was A. L. M. van der Walt deprived of his pension;</li>

<li>(2) if on the grounds of fraud, whether the papers were submitted to the Attorney-General with a view to prosecution;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Commission on Pensions of which Dr. Reitz was chairman recommended that van der Walt should be prosecuted; if so,</li>

<li>(4) why has he not been prosecuted;</li>

<li>(5) whether steps have been taken to recover the money paid in error to van der Walt; and</li>

<li>(6) whether this is the same man to whom certain lands have been allocated by the Lands Department?</li>

</ol>

<p>The reply to this question is standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: PETRUS STEYN LINE AND WHITE LABOUR.</heading>

<question by="#terreblanche" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>LIX.</num>

<from>Lt.-Col. TERREBLANCHE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether, seeing that a start is being made with the construction of the Lindley Road&#x2014;Petrus Steyn line of railway, he remembers the promise he made last year, viz., that he would seriously consider the question of using local European labour for the said construction; and</li>

<li>(2) whether, in case such labour is not being used, he will forthwith consider the matter and give the necessary instructions?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#terreblanche">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) I have not overlooked the reply given to the question in regard to the Petrus Steyn extension asked by the hon. member on the 13th February, 1927.</li>

<li>(2) It has been the policy in the past to give local applicants preference in connection with railway construction work, and the Administration will get into touch with the Department of Labour in regard to the matter.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: KROONSTAD STATION.</heading>

<question by="#terreblanche" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>LX.</num>

<from>Lt.-Col. TERREBLANCHE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether in his estimates of expenditure on capital and betterment works he has made the necessary provision for entirely roofing-in the railway station at Kroonstad for the convenience of the travelling public; and</li>

<li>(2) whether, in view of the enormous increase in trade and industries and the possibility of Kroonstad becoming a great railway centre, his attention has been drawn to the urgent need of roofing-in the large goods platforms?</li>

</ol>

<p>The reply to this question is standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>DEFENCE: D. PRINSLOO&#x2019;S LETTER TO &#x201C;HET WESTEN.&#x201D;</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE replied to Question V, by Col. D. Reitz, asked on 9th March.</p>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_defence">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to a letter appearing in &#x201C;Het Westen,&#x201D; dated the 14th February, 1928, wherein a defence force officer, D. Prinsloo, writing in his capacity as a lieutenant of the Vaal River commando, makes a strongly-worded attack on his fellow officers and men, and wherein he refers disparagingly to the Free State burghers in the commando; and</li>

<li>(2) whether disciplinary action has been taken against the officer in question?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#reitz">

<heading><span class="col_2337-2338" refersTo="page_1235"/>Reply:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) Suitable disciplinary action is being taken.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister">

<from>Maj. RICHARDS:</from>

<p>Will the Minister tell us what is the &#x201C;suitable disciplinary action&#x201D; which has been taken?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>Suitable disclipinary action in a case of that kind is, first of all, a warning. As the hon. member is aware, the Minister&#x2019;s power on defence force officers when on reserve is somewhat limited, but his attention has been called to the fact that this is not an action any officer should take.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#women&#x2019;s_enfranchisement_bill">

<heading>WOMEN&#x2019;S ENFRANCHISEMENT BILL.</heading>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That Order No. VII, for to-day&#x2014;House to go into committee on Women&#x2019;s Enfranchisement Bill&#x2014;be discharged and set down for Tuesday, the 27th March.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Upon which the House divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;50.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Chaplin, F. D. P.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Gibaud, F.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Tellers: Blackwell, L.; Collins, W. R.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;53.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J: H.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Waal. J. H. H.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Hertzog, J. B. M.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Oost, H</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Hugo, D.; Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly negatived.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#drought_remedies">

<heading>DROUGHT REMEDIES.</heading>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That in view of the long droughts by which large parts of the Union are repeatedly afflicted and which especially in the northern and central districts of the Cape Province are from time to time reducing a large section of the farming community to the verge of pauperism, this House recommends that the Government take into consideration&#x2014;</block>

<ol>

<li>(1) the question of making extensive tests in the matter of collecting during times of plenty various kinds of grass for use as fodder in times of drought;</li>

<li>(2) the desirability of giving special encouragement to all plans for increasing the water supply in those parts where open waters are barely sufficient, beyond reach of the animals and far apart; and</li>

<li>(3) the feasibility of embarking upon a comprehensive scheme whereby the surplus waters of our largest river, the Orange River, may be used for agricultural purposes (a) by forthwith undertaking minor possible schemes for irrigating all alluvial soil in the immediate vicinity of the river and (b) by thoroughly investigating larger schemes which have as their object the conservation of water and the development of the more distant Karroo-vlaktes</li>

</ol>

<p>Hon. members will see that my motion deals with droughts and losses caused through drought. It is not my object to-day to go into the causes of drought. That would take us too far afield, and a few years ago we had a report from the Drought Commission which investigated the causes of drought and which contained more information than can ever be elicited in a debate in this House. Nor is it my purpose to discuss the means of fighting droughts or making them less injurious, because on that also the same report refers to quite a number of ways in which it is possible to lessen the consequences of drought. I want to confine myself to direct losses caused by drought, and then to ask what we can do to neutralise the losses. I know that the hon. member for Graaff-Reinet (Mr. I. P. van Heerden) is usually an expert on statistics. He <span class="col_2339-2340" refersTo="page_1236"/>has them on the tips of his fingers, and as I hear that he intends to speak on this subject, I had better leave it to him, but I know that in the drought year in 1922-&#x2019;23 more than 6,000,000 sheep and goats died, and nearly 800,000 cattle. The drought of that year cannot be mentioned in the same breath with the two years&#x2019; drought which we have just had, and which still continues in a few districts. If the figures were available to us to-day, we should be speechless at the awful loss which is being suffered through the fatal drought, loss which amounts to at least from &#x00A3;10,000,000 to &#x00A3;12,000,000 for the two years. It goes without saying that if such heavy losses are suffered by the people, a large number of farmers have been impoverished during every drought. I well remember how 20 years ago I went for the first time to Kakamas, and met men of intelligence and enterprise among the poor colony people, and when I, in surprise, asked how they got there, the reply in almost two-thirds of the cases was on account of the drought of 1897-&#x2019;99 which had ruined a great part of the farmers in the north-west. If what we hear so often is correct&#x2014;that the farmers are the backbone of the country&#x2014;and when we find that every drought ruins a great part of our farmers, we must be afraid that eventually farming will be doomed in this country, and we must take steps in every possible direction to see what we can do to strengthen the backbone of the country. The first part of my motion, however, asks for extensive experiments for the conserving in times of plenty of various kinds of veld grass for feeding in times of drought. I know that the Agricultural Department is making experiments in that direction and doing excellent work. I know, e.g., that experiments are being made with various kinds of grass that can be planted on various ground that gets little rain. We know that where grass grows on a farm, the power of resistance is increased 10-to 20-fold. I know that the department is also experimenting with hay and all sorts of conserved fodder, as well as with prickly pear. The department is engaged in settling the food value of the grasses and plants. I do not know what the present position in the Transvaal and Free State is, but, in the old days when I was still in the Free State, the farmers were cutting grass that was of great assistance in droughts. When one goes through the Great Karroo and sees ridges everywhere, one thinks it impossible that varieties of grass can exist there to serve as fodder, and yet, I make bold to say that the greatest possibility in the whole Union of collecting excellent kinds of fodder is just in the north-west. If you go from Prieska by train through the whole of Prieska, Kenhardt, Gordonia to Nakop, and further on into south-west, you find thousands of morgen of veld covered in the rainy season with a kind of grass which is known by the name of &#x201C;sour grass&#x201D; or &#x201C;stink grass.&#x201D; It grows luxuriantly, but is regarded by many farmers as of little value because it is not a permanent grass and does not grow very long. It is half sour, and the stock do not eat it when there is other grass. When it is ripe it falls over because the stem is fragile and thin, and it is then usually neglected, but only then do the animals eat it. It is an extraordinary thing that the parts where that grass grows hold out the longest against drought. It happens that after two years without a drop of rain, the stock there are amazingly fat, while that grass is still lying about. It goes without saying that tests with that grass will be very successful. I learn, I do not know if it is correct, that the Agricultural Department is making tests in Upington with reference to the food value of that grass, and that the report is that it is worth quite as much as dry lucerne. The grass is therefore very good. It will be asked why the farmers do not sow that grass on a large scale. We are a strange nation. We are told in the Bible about Joseph and Pharaoh. Joseph looked far ahead. He knew by a dream that there would be seven lean years, and he told Pharaoh to conserve food for the lean years. Pharaoh followed the advice, and when the lean years came they had large stocks in the barns to get through the drought with. That is a great lesson for us to learn, but we do not always profit by such lessons. The question why the farmers do not do so is answered in the first place by their only cutting a few bags of fodder with the sickle for horse-feed, but if they want to do it on a large scale, a mower should be used. The grass grows between the thorn-bushes, and it is valuable food, excellent for the stock, and the farmers do not like to chop them down in order to cut the grass. We must just set the people an example. If the food value thereof is gone into, it will be found to be very great. Let the Government then enclose a few hundred morgen, take out the bushes and let the grass grow there. It grows close together like wheat to a height of 18 inches. Tremendous quantities can be got on a few thousand morgen. If the Government takes ground along the railway, it will be easy to carry in time of drought. It will cost a few hundred pounds, but in a few years the people will themselves learn to collect fodder for time of drought. The days of trekking are irrevocably gone. Formerly when the world was open and cheap veld was obtainable, a farmer could trek with his sheep, but to-day with the fences-even roads are fenced in&#x2014;trekking has become impossible. We must do something else. We can no longer take the stock to the food, but must bring the food to the stock. That is my first proposal, and the effect will be to save thousands of pounds every year. The second deals with parts where water is scarce. There are some parts of the country where water is far apart and very scarce. Take the north-western parts where one still finds farms of 10,000-30,000 morgen, and which often have only one water-hole. They are sometimes 15 miles away from the river&#x2014;the Hartebeest River or the Orange River&#x2014;and the animals <span class="col_2341-2342" refersTo="page_1237"/>then have to walk hours and hours so get to the water and back. In time of water scarcity they walk from morning to night to the river, drink there, and drink so much that they remain lying all day. The next day they trek hack, and the day after they have again to Walk the whole distance to drink water. They walk themselves to death, and if we could only increase the water, the resisting capacity in time of drought will be much greater. I am very glad that the Minister of Agriculture last year made the bores cheaper, and now has made a further reduction. It means a considerable loss to the State, but in places where water is scarce and far apart it will indirectly pay the Government to encourage the people to produce more water. The third head of my motion is not to prevent drought, because we cannot do that, but to somewhat relieve the people in time of drought. It is strange that the Orange River first attracted the attention of the old Cape Government for irrigation purposes. Many hon. members will already have forgotten the old Director of Irrigation, Mr. Gordon. At that time the first irrigation works, the Buchuberg scheme, was started, and to-day after 40 years there are still traces of the work done there. It was surveyed 40 years ago, and about &#x00A3;10,000 spent, but why work was stopped is not clear even to-day. It is remarkable that the first large dam was also made in the north-west, close to Kenhardt. It is the Rooiberg dam, which was built 30 years ago, which was unfortunately badly constructed, so that when the first big floods came the whole embankment gave way, and it is in the same state to-day. It seems that the Irrigation Department got so frightened of irrigation works and dams in the north-west, that thereafter the whole attention was diverted elsewhere. A few years ago we learned that we were again to receive attention. The Minister of Agriculture, with the Secretary of Lands, the Director of Irrigation and members of this House, and even the clerk of the House. We thought we were getting the whole House of Assembly when the clerk came, and that a very big scheme would be started there. We elected irrigation committees, held meetings, passed resolutions&#x2014;I want to say in parentheses that I have not yet got back a penny for my travelling expenses in that connection&#x2014;and schemes were suggested, but when next we heard of it we learnt that they had decided on something else. As a dam was built at a place which surprised everybody, viz., where seven channels run between islands at a place where the river is four miles broad. I went myself, and saw that a cement dam was being built there. I said to the engineer that when the floods came the silt around the islands would be washed away. He said that did not matter, and if it should happen that they would put it right again. I remarked that it would then wash away again, and that in the long run a dam of fully four miles would be necessary. That actually happened. As soon as the water was a bit high, the silt washed away. It cost the country about &#x00A3;75,000 or &#x00A3;80,000. I could never ascertain the exact sum, and the whole affair was a failure. It remains to this day, and the monkeys spend their holidays there. I hate that embankment like the plague, because the natives who worked on it at the time were unfortunately put on the voters&#x2019; roll at an interim registration&#x2014;there were about 80&#x2014;and I lost the seat in 1921 by 18 votes. Namaqualand has a peculiar history. The first explorings by the old East India Company were in the direction of Namaqualand, where the richest diamond fields are now situated. I hope, therefore, that under the present Government the day will come when they will see the great value of the Orange River and understand that in it we have a jewel like the wealth in Namaqualand, and that they will start developments there. Along the river there is alluvial land for a distance of 60 miles from Upington to Kakamas. No less than 25 water furrows have been led out of the river by private persons in that small distance. That shows how the people can lead water there, and they have a superabundance of it, and the ground there is of the best and richest in the country. Much of the ground along the river belongs to the State. Is it not astonishing that beyond the dam costing &#x00A3;75,000, which was a failure, and a loan given to the labour colony at Kakamas to make water furrows&#x2014;but it was a loan&#x2014;the State has done nothing further with regard to that valuable area, except that Minister Grobler has commenced with the Karroo scheme. The best ground there belongs to the State which a few years ago again bought more new farms. There the Crown lands lie, and private people are not permitted to make water furrows, otherwise it would have been done long ago. What is wrong with the Irrigation Department I do not know. It seems to me that the departmental heads must be removed before anything will be done. In 1920 the smaller Buchuberg scheme was surveyed, but to-day one cannot even yet get full particulars. When will they be available? The Buchuberg scheme will mean that 5,000 or 6,000 morgen of splendid ground will be available, and I hope and trust that the Government will immediately develop this small scheme, which will not cost much money. I then come to my last proposal, viz., the big schemes. There are people who talk about two big schemes like the one in connection with Gamagara River. I cannot find any figures about the distance in connection with that, but one can always judge from what the railway time-table says in connection with the height of the places. In any case, it is more than 500 ft. to get to the water level of the Gamagara, and the distance is 50 to 60 miles from the Orange River. Be this as it may, it is very difficult to follow it. Let someone survey it. I, however, want to leave this and call attention to the possibilities along the river, above and below Upington as far as the waterfall. It pains one to see at the Buchuberg scheme how all the water runs past, and a <span class="col_2343-2344" refersTo="page_1238"/>dam there of 50 to 60 ft. high would bring a very big area under irrigation. In some respects the ground which will be irrigable will be better than alluvial ground. It has been proved that if red ground is once cultivated, manured and worked, it is practically better than alluvial silted soil. Thousands and thousands of morgen will be irrigable. I do not want to enlarge on the mass of silt which runs down the river. It will be said that such a dam will silt up completely. We must have a weir that we can shut when the water is clear. We know that at first much silt comes down, and thereafter a river runs for months with clear water. Someone from the Irrigation Department can easily enquire whether such a weir is possible. I saw an article in the &#x201C;Cape Times&#x201D; the other day&#x2014;I do not know if it was inspired&#x2014;which said that it was impossible. I say that that excellent part has never yet been properly surveyed to see what can be done. I see to-day in the &#x201C;Cape Times&#x201D; that Mr. E. G. Bryant, of the Chamber of Commerce of Prieska, says, inter alia&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">The maximum amount of water to be dealt with can be briefly illustrated by saying that in one week of high flood this year the water flowing in the Orange River would have filled a lake 80 to 100 square miles in area and 90 ft. deep!</block>

<p>Such an enormous quantity of water in one week! He goes further&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Government engineers have at various times visited and reported on various portions of the valleys of the Orange and the Vaal, and some areas have been surveyed in detail. On the whole, however, the work has been of a partial and hasty character, and on reading the reports issued one obtains the impression that the officials responsible for them were to some extent overwhelmed by the magnitude of the task confronting them. There is in existence at present nothing like a comprehensive survey of the whole region, and for any scheme proposed it is impossible for any expert to say whether it is practicable or not, or to give any authoritative estimate of its cost or its possibilities.</block>

<p>As against that Mr. Kanthack, the former director of irrigation, said it was nonsense, because the rise will be about 800 feet, but here Mr. Bryant adds&#x2014;</p>

<p>Sir William Willcocks in 1901 suggested the taking out of canals from two points in the Orange, leading them into the Kenhardt district and into Bushmanland respectively, and irrigating vast areas in those regions. Though doubt has been cast on the practicability of doing this, there are South African engineers of repute who consider that it could be done.</p>

<p>I agree with that, and there is much truth in the article. What we want is for the Irrigation Department once and for all to be courageous and to make a proper survey, so that we shall know the possibilities. I know that we cannot compare ourselves with rich America. They have put millions and millions into irrigation and also lost a great deal. If this House gives the Government authority for a comprehensive scheme for the service of the country, even if it costs &#x00A3;10,000,000, so long as it is properly spent, all the people will be glad and something of great importance will be done. The great point is that we cannot be nervous any longer. Forty million pounds was quite easily spent on the war, on which to-day we not only get back no interest, but have, on the contrary, to spend thousands for war pensions Let us tackle a large comprehensive scheme in the north-west to change great flats in our country which are now lying idle into fruitful ground. I heartily hope that the Government will give full attention to the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hattingh">

<from>The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HATTINGH</person></from>

<p>seconded the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fick">

<from>&#x2020;*The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FICK</person>:</from>

<p>I support the motion. In view of the increasing drought in our country, this motion is not too untimely. There have always been unheard of droughts in this country and in others. We read in the Bible of the drought in Egypt which lasted 7 years, because the Nile, the artery of Egypt, no longer brought any water down from the heart of Africa. We read of a drought 3 years in Palestine, that land of promise to the Israelites. If in such a country there can be such drought, then we can also expect them in South Africa. I read about a French explorer, Le Vaillant, who in the 17th century travelled up the south-west coast to the place that is now Port Elizabeth. He says, in his description, that on his return he had two difficulties. He could not again return along the coast because the locusts had eaten everything, and he could not go back through the Karroo because there was no water for man or beast. That was in the 17th century. At that time, therefore, droughts were already bad, but they are still increasing. Weather prophets can now say that we get certain circles of rain and of drought. It may be that we are once more going to have a circle of rain, but one thing is certain, viz., that South Africa is gradually becoming drier. As Professor Schwartz tells us in his book, we find when excavating in the Karoo, bones of water animals, animals which cannot live where there is not perennial water. To-day we look in vain for such perennial water in the Karroo. The Kalahari is always extending further. In the Transvaal, which is thought so much of, the water is becoming less just as in other parts. In the Transvaal we find many farms to-day which have names ending in fontein, such as Kwaggafontein, Springbokfontein, Rietfontein, Blesbokfontein, Braamfontein, etc.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>*An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>And Mooimeisies fontein.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fick">

<from>&#x2020;*The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FICK</person>:</from>

<p>You find traces of fountains on those farms, but there is no <span class="col_2345-2346" refersTo="page_1239"/>longer any water. Old people state that they have not known such a drought for the last 50 years. That may be true or not, but one thing is certain that drought is increasing in South Africa. Are we merely to let it continue? Shall we allow South Africa to dry up so that it can no longer be a white man&#x2019;s country, as is prophesied by certain people? No, we must make provision, and I think we can. When the Minister of Agriculture, some years ago, commenced to exterminate the locusts, many people considered it blasphemy, because they thought that we could do nothing against the plagues of heaven. If we say to-day that we must assist nature in regard to rainfall, then the people will say once more that we are going too far. I want to remind such people of the Scriptures, where it is said that &#x201C;as for the heavens, they belong to the Lord, but the earth he gave to the children of men.&#x201D; If the earth is for the people, then the people must make the best of it, in South Africa also. I mean that we must construct waterworks. Great mistakes were made in the past with reference to waterworks. I do not wish to name the Governments, but the big dams they made have never yet been full of water, and if water did come in, it was more filled with mud than with water.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#munnik">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MUNNIK</person>:</from>

<p>Why is there no water if there is mud?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fick">

<from>&#x2020;*The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FICK</person>:</from>

<p>The answer to the hon. member is that the water disappears and the mud remains. I do not say that the Karroo must have no dams, but those that I saw in the neighbourhood of Graaff-Reinet are quite unpractical. I remember that I saw the Kendrew Settlement, 30 miles from Graaff-Reinet, below the Van Ryneveld Pass dam, and the person who escorted me showed me the plans. They wanted to bring people from Europe and start a splendid settlement. I then asked where the water was coming from. I pointed out to him that that dam would not always be full of water, and that rain did not fall in the Karroo every year. I am not a dam expert, but I can see where a big dam should be built and where not. There are parts of the Karroo where one cannot build big dams. There is also a danger of their silting up, e.g., the dam that one sees when one passes Beaufort West. I say this with every respect for the Karroo.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. C. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>How long has that dam existed?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fick">

<from>&#x2020;*The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FICK</person>:</from>

<p>I don&#x2019;t know, but it is no longer a dam. One finds traces of dams there just as we find traces of fountains in the north. There has been another great fault in constructing dams. I will instance the Haartebeestpoort dam, where &#x00A3;30,000 was wasted in experiments. That shows once more that experts are very useful to the country, but we must not have experts only. The Irrigation Department under the lead of an expert, goes, so to say, on one leg. A commission of practical men should be appointed to assist him. Experience is the best teacher. It is a very good thing that there is an Irrigation commission to-day. I think highly of those people. They have practical experience of conditions in the country. Now we have the Haartebeestpoort dam, on which thousands of pounds were wasted, and when we examine things we find a small village below the dam; they call it the &#x201C;white village&#x201D; like a small white elephant which was left by the people who built the dam, but the houses there are all empty. When the dam was finished, it was found that the ground below it was not so good as was thought. Then it was found that the Government had much less irrigable land below the dam than they thought. Take a case in my constituency, Potchefstroom. I am talking again of a previous Government. Shortly after the second War of Independence in 1902-&#x2019;03, they established a settlement at Vyfhoek and put over 400 families on it and on adjoining farms which they leased along the Mooi river. There is also a settlement of about 40 families of returned or rather surviving soldiers on Mooibank, a portion of the Potchefstroom commonage. There was also a large experimental farm established below the waters of the Mooi river. At that time the old people said they were going too far, because there would never be water for all the schemes. Why was a large part of the water sold by the town council? What could they not have done in those days? It was simply a rule that you must sell it or otherwise it would be taken away. The hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Duncan) knows that the Government in those days was very autocratic. He himself was never autocratic, but we were both in the Transvaal at that time, and he knows that a person, if they wanted it, had to sell the water because otherwise the Government took it. The people below Potchefstroom, on the Mooi river, at once complained that their water was being taken away for the schemes, and the Government said, &#x201C;You must not complain. A large compensating dam will be built.&#x201D; The dam was built, but it was only a small one, and it stands to-day there as a comfort, but not as a help, and the people are to-day suffering from the policy of a former Government. To-day the people there have about one-fifth of the water they need, and then complaints are made that the people on the settlement cannot pay the share they have to give to the Government.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Just as in the Karroo.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fick">

<from>&#x2020;*The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FICK</person>:</from>

<p>No, I am not talking of dry dams, but of wet dams. We have a sympathetic Minister, and we have asked him to get back the water which his predecessor took away with a revolver. The Minister say he is not responsible for the acts of his predecessors. That is a fine comfort. The Government cannot make the excuse to-day that it has to write off so much on the old works, and therefore cannot contemplate new works. Then the country has accordingly to suffer for the faults made by past Governments, and the people have to suffer for the <span class="col_2347-2348" refersTo="page_1240"/>writings down which have to be made, and yet no new good schemes must be gone in for. Gold and diamonds are not the best value the country has, but the best value is the water supply of our country. The poet says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Men may come and men may go, but I flow on for ever.</block>

<p>The Orange river, if it could talk, would say&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Mines may come and mines may go, but I flow on for ever.</block>

<p>Diamonds, gold, parties and governments may go, but South Africa remains. The water today is running just as uselessly through the country and in the end it runs over the water to foreign seas, just like the water of the Orange river runs away to-day. I admit that if an American, a member of a progressive people, came to South Africa and he saw the country, the Orange river and its tributaries, he would say: What are the people of South Africa doing with the river? I repeat that it is not right that the people should suffer for the unsatisfactory water-work schemes of a previous Government. The Government, as successor of those previous governments, and not the people, should suffer the loss. But where are we going to at present? At the Haartebeestpoort dam we see thousands of people trained for intensive farming. There are training schools where the sons are trained for more intensive farming, and where are the people to farm. Provision must be made for them. On the diggings we hear that responsible people say that the diggings are an evil which must be stopped. Others again say that our people are not suited to gold mining. It is said that we should send the people to the factories, but when are the factories starting up? In the meantime, people are dying. I ask again: Where are we heading for? I want again to impress on the Minister that the time has come for us to put our shoulder to the wheel. Large water-works must be commenced as national works, and smaller works must be supported, to get the water out of the bowels of the earth. The people must be encouraged to build dams and make furrows to lead the water, because we can no longer allow the water to run waste to the sea; the sea already has enough water. It is a question of life or death for the South African people in future. We must protect our fatherland against drought. We need not be pessimistic because we have had little rain in recent years. Why need we not be pessimistic? Well, if we conserve the water that falls, and dam up the water that runs away, then the rainfall will improve and bring the water in the earth to the surface and also make our lands more humid by afforestation. I remember that I met a Portuguese in Europe, and he told me that for years in their country they did not know what to do to prevent the drought. They consulted experts, who told them that they had too recklessly rooted up their trees and vegetation and that that had caused the drought. The Portuguese then commenced afresh, planted trees and forests, and now things are much better. It is a great principle of nature that the earth, which is damp, forms liquid which rises and becomes clouds. It then descends again as rain. It is certain that we can much improve our rainfall if we conserve the water and spread it over the earth, and thereby make the crust of the earth damp. Civilization is always coupled with destruction. We allow the stock to recklessly tread down everything on the veld, and get rid of our vegetation in divers ways. If the Government does not take care, this will always continue. I am much in favour of the Schwartz scheme, but I think, nevertheless, that we much first use the water in our country. It is certain that the Government must give its serious attention to the matter. I am glad the Minister of Finance is here, because I want to point out that he must prepare himself for irrigation works costing &#x00A3;30,000,000. The country will feel that less than all the money which has been spent on wars in the past, because it will be an asset.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Who will cultivate the ground.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fick">

<from>&#x2020;*The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FICK</person>:</from>

<p>The country needs a larger white population. The people must themselves see to the increase, because if the Afrikaanse people do not see to its continuation, then in the long run we shall have to hand over the country to inferior occupants. We should also encourage desirable immigrants to come here. Our great country needs a larger population, but it is folly to bring people here until we have assisted our own people. Our own people on the countryside are wandering to the diggings, the gold mines and the big towns. They are people who would do quite well if they were assisted a bit to stop on the land. I have now said a good deal on the subject, but I feel very strongly on it. I am glad to see the Minister&#x2019;s eye sparkling so, because I know that he cherishes a lively interest in farming matters, but he always gets unfriendly when there is a talk of money being required. If there is no money available let us borrow, but let us keep the farmers on the countryside. We want more factories in our country, hut we must first get more water. It is complained that Pretoria has not got enough water to-day for the iron and steel factory which is going to be established there. The Minister of Lands will confirm that, during the last drought in the Transvaal, he received hundreds of letters from people asking for plots below the Haartebeestpoort dam, and he could not give them. We must use the blessings of the country and dam up the big rivers with their tributaries. Then there will be &#x201C;showers of blessings for the length of days.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>It is strange that people who are entirely ignorant of conditions always want to pose as the best experts. I congratulate the reverend gentleman.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Order.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from><span class="col_2349-2350" refersTo="page_1241"/>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Potchefstroom (the Rev. Mr. Fick) on his eloquence, but he has not the vaguest idea of conditions in the Karroo. He says he travelled through the Karroo to Kendrew, and that he does not know where the water there comes from. The hon. member does not actually know where the dam is! He does not know where the water comes from. I can assure the hon. member that astonishing development is taking place there. Unfortunately, the Karroo and the Midlands are at present suffering from a calamity which no one in the world can avoid, hut, in spite of that, I can assure the hon. member that where millions of head of stock have been lost in the Karroo, no loss has occurred where there were dams in the Karroo. I make bold to say that not a single sheep or goat was lost in the Cradock district where there are dams. What right has the hon. member to speak of failure. He spoke about the dam at Beaufort West, but it is half a century old. All the dams in the world, even his Haartebeestpoort dam will silt up, but I say the Government will be well advised if it exercises all its powers and concludes all loans that can be raised to build dams as quickly as possible in the Karroo. It will save millions of stock, it will remove the necessity of people working on the railways to make a living. It will make the relief works superfluous. The hon. member for Gordonia (Mr. J. H. Conradie) was much concerned over the statistics I usually quote. I shall not quote any to-day, and I want to tell him that if the Government spends &#x00A3;40,000,000 in damming up the rivers of South Africa it will render great service to the country. But the hon. member for Potchefstroom is not the only expert. We have Mr. Faure, who is trying to talk in two ways. Now, he says that the dry rivers are a hopeless failure, and then he talks on behalf of the 1820 Settlers&#x2019; Association. He rendered a disservice to South Africa, and especially the Midlands by his remarks. At present we are faced by a terrible calamity, but the dams there, and the people who live there will win through. I think I can unhesitatingly mention the dam of the Smartt syndicate that has made such a great alteration that at present millions of bags of grain are produced there. The dams in the dry rivers in the Midlands will pay. Millions of tons of conserved forage and lucerne can be produced there. The hon. member for Potchefstroom will have to try a little of the fruitful Karroo land below the Haartebeestpoort dam.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fick">

<from>*The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FICK</person>:</from>

<p>Have you been there?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>I would not otherwise talk about it. I should like to move a small amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 2, of paragraph (1), after &#x201C;grass&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;and plants&#x201D;.</block>

<p>We find that grasses generally need much water, but we find that other kinds of plants need very little water. Hon. member will laugh when I speak of the great value of prickly pear. I think the Minister of Agriculture can be heartily congratulated on his experiments on prickly pear. Thorn bushes and prickly pear constitute great foodstuffs for the stock in the dry parts. I want to move a further amendment to the third part of the motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 2, of paragraph (3), to insert &#x201C;and other rivers</block>

<p>There are also other rivers which are perennial.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>*An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Where are they?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Let us, if possible, use the Zambesi. I want to point out to hon. members that tremendously big works are constructed in Australia to take water out of the Wemoror River. Canals, five thousand miles long, are made, and 31 towns are, in this way, supplied with water; nor is the water rate at all high, but only amounts to &#x00A3;1 a morgen. I do not favour experiments. The time for them is past. Dams must be built in the rivers of South Africa and the Karroo, which has been contemptuously referred to, must receive every attention, the sooner the better. The reason for the failure of many large schemes is that the dams were larger than the water supply. There can be no doubt that immediately steps must be taken to save the position. I want to point out to the hon. member for Potchefstroom that irrigation works have been a partial failure in every country. Only recently I read that more than &#x00A3;27,000,000 had been written off in irrigation works in America. Let us give the people who are in great distress an opportunity of existence; the burdens of the dams will be smaller to the country than those it will have to shoulder to support all the people in distress. It is very necessary to bore deep down. If artesian wells can be found in Namaqualand how much more chance is there not to find them in other parts of the Cape Province, especially in the Midlands. Let us make experiments, and we shall be surprised at the results.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pienaar">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. PIENAAR</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment, and would like to add a few remarks about waterworks and the conservation of water. Optimistic pictures have been painted this afternoon about the importance of waterworks. I was always one of those who strongly supported waterworks in our country, and I am still one of those who cannot get on without water. Without water on my farm I can do nothing, and I feel also that much more can be done if we establish large water schemes and encourage more of the small ones, but we have to do with a few hard facts which we must meet frankly in connection with what has already happened in the past. The water schemes were possibly not such a failure as the hon. member for Potchefstroom (the Rev. Mr. Fick) wants to make out, but I think that I can safely say that 60 per cent. of the schemes which the Government has started have actually been failures. We must not forget that the aftermath falls on the taxpayers of the country and, therefore, it is useless making very eloquent <span class="col_2351-2352" refersTo="page_1242"/>speeches in the House and painting every-think as beautifully as possible, and, therefore, it is no use merely encouraging schemes which, subsequently, will hang round the necks of the taxpayers. Order 4 on the Order Paper is the report of the Select Committee on Irrigation Schemes. I do not think that if that order had preceded this motion we should have had so much optimism in the House. I think it is better for the House to meet and suggest something on the basis of our experience in order to assist the Government to arrive at a method whereby our schemes will be a greater success than in the past. Dams were built in the past, and I agree that sufficient attention was not paid to the quantity of water which would flow down and which would be available for the irrigable ground; many of the schemes proved failures, but to come and suggest here that the great cause of failure of irrigation works must be sought in drought, is a bit childish, because droughts are temporary. When droughts have passed, and the ordinary rainfall returns, there will still be dams which will always remain failures Therefore, I should like to suggest something which, in my opinion, will put the initiative on a business footing. When the State undertakes schemes, people are taxed who work with estimates and deficits; if there are deficits the taxpayers must clear them off. If, however, a private person should undertake such a thing he would see that his estimate showed a profit, or otherwise it is not business. I, therefore, feel that if we slightly alter our policy and put it more on a business footing we shall be more successful with our water schemes. There are, of course, undertakings which must he regarded as national schemes which the Government will have to undertake entirely. Then there are smaller schemes, however&#x2014;and by small schemes I mean schemes up to &#x00A3;30,000&#x2014;where I would rather see the system that when those interested apply to the Government for support, the Government would in such a case under legislation for schemes above and below a certain amount contribute 25 per cent., while the other 75 per cent. would have to be got by those interested as business men from the Land Bank, by means of a loan on a business footing, and that they then go and have such a dam built by their own engineers. When I speak of their own engineers. I mean that an advertisement is placed, and that the lowest tender of the most competent man is accepted for completing the contract, so that any loss on it shall not fall on those interested, nor on the Government, but on the contractor. In this way only useful schemes will be carried out, because the people will be very careful. It is not necessary at the moment to go into that further.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mostert">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOSTERT</person>:</from>

<p>We have for years and years seen how much money is spent and wasted on big schemes. Hon. members opposite are responsible for the waste. I have ground below one of the old schemes, and know how heavy the burdens are. We did not ask for the dams, but men built the dams which was a misfortune for us.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. C. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>You yourself urged the people to take land there.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mostert">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOSTERT</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member is wrong again. I only bought ground there later. It is only human to make mistakes, hut South Africa should learn from the mistakes made. Millions have been thrown away on schemes which the engineers carried out. One of the famous engineers built a dam which leaks so badly that 70 per cent. of the water runs out. Then we cannot be surprised if such a scheme is a failure. The first thing that we must learn is how much water a morgen of ground requires for production. We shall find in all the blue books that the head of the Irrigation Department, in regard to all the schemes came to the conclusion that the ground is different before the scheme is carried out and after. The estimates are always wrong, and the cause is that they do not know how many morgen can be served by a dam, or rather, how much water a morgen of ground requires. We have an experimental farm near Middelburg, but they never learnt how much water a morgen requires.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. C. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Excellent work is done at Grootfontein.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mostert">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOSTERT</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, but in this matter it does not answer its purpose. If excellent work is being done there, then they ought to be able to give information for the benefit of South Africa. I have not heard a word from the Opposition during this debate. Do they take no interest in it? Do their constituents take no interest? We shall always go wrong if we do not know the quantity of water required for a morgen. That must be the basis of calculation. Our educational system is wrong. The children are not taught water-leading. Very little, at any rate. 90 per cent. of the people below the big dams cannot lead water.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. C. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>They now have beds.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mostert">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOSTERT</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, because they cannot lead water. If the hon. member were my water leader I should be afraid of the consequences. I should not get much from that ground. We are suffering from a severe drought. Who is suffering? Not the very poor man, because he is assisted; nor the very rich man, but the middle man, the man on the farm who has heavy bonds on it and who cannot leave it. Not one of our big schemes pays, but a small scheme built by an ordinary farmer, Lutz, at Kakamas, pays; there is water enough. The people with splendid diplomas go there, but they cannot build dams. We must learn lessons from the mistakes we have made, and call in the farmers to help. They are practical people. I have heard that an hon. member thinks so highly of the Irrigation Commission. It seems to me that there&#x2019;s only one dominating person. We always hear of the chairman, but never of the other persons, and, unfortunately, the chairman is also an engineer. We have never yet heard of a doctor disapproving of another doctor&#x2019;s work, nor shall we hear an engineer attacking another engineer. Our former director <span class="col_2353-2354" refersTo="page_1243"/>of irrigation cost more money than his weight in gold. But do we ever hear that he was a curse to South Africa? The farmers that are below the irrigation scheme curse him. What Government did that take place under? Not this Government. We now have a sympathetic and a practical Government.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>The debate this afternoon and the motion are very important, and, therefore, I should like to deal with the motion point for point. May I ask the mover what he means in the first part of his motion by the &#x201C;collecting during times of plenty of various sorts of veld grasses?&#x201D; Does he mean that the Government must collect veld grasses in all the districts and save them for times of trouble? Then I fear we shall undermine the feeling of responsibility of our own people, and that they will no longer feel that they are responsible for their animals on the farms which are entrusted to them. We feel that our farmers must learn that farming is like any other business, and that they are responsible for it. My hon. friend, however, probably means that the department, by experiments, must show the people what can be done, and, if so, I am quite prepared to accept the motion. Will my hon. friend alter it in that sense? I want to tell the House that we are making tests. At Fauresmith we are enquiring what various Karroo vegetation can be cultivated. We have an experimental station there. Experiments are also being made with prickly pear as well as with grasses in various parts of the country. At Graaff-Reinet, too, we have an experimental station, and we are trying in every possible way to see what can be done to lessen the tragic consequences in time of drought. The time for trekking on account of drought has gone. I think we almost lose more by moving stock in droughts than by keeping the stock on the farms and feeding them and watering them there. We are experimenting in that connection at Graaff-Reinet, and I am sorry that the experiments were not made 14 of 15 years ago, because then the loss, which is now being suffered through the drought, would probably have been much less. The department made proposals in 1914, but they were always pigeonholed, until, in 1925 and 1926, proposals were made to me, and I felt that we must try to find something to stop the effects of drought, and to reduce the damage to the lowest minimum. The hon. member for Potchefstroom (the Rev. Mr. Fick) spoke of Joseph and Pharaoh, but we do not possess the great supply barns of those days. The people must be taught to act for themselves. We are now prepared to give the necessary advice by means of the extension officers. But we do not only require fodder in the drought-stricken areas, but water as well, and I think it is a very great concession by the Government to assist the people in boring by reducing the price from &#x00A3;5 to &#x00A3;3 10s. a day, which will cost the State &#x00A3;43,000 a year, which means a large sum over a period of 20 years. But we feel the interests of farming, and, therefore, the Government is doing everything possible in future, in time of drought, to reduce the consequences to the lowest minimum. There is another great fault which is made in parts like the Karroo where droughts repeatedly occur. If, after a time of drought, good years come with good rains, then the ground there is once more so good that the people keep too many cattle and with the smallest drought they suffer tremendous damage. There is the old proverb that one learns by experience. But the people want in favourable times to keep as much stock as possible, and then lose frightfully in times of drought. It is better for the people to keep better stock that, if they are to be fed in a drought, will pay to feed. The slogan should be &#x201C;less stock, but good stock.&#x201D; I am, therefore, inclined to accept the first part of the motion with the following amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In paragraph (1) to omit &#x201C;collecting during times of plenty.&#x201D;.</block>

<p>We want to make tests and assist the people with advice. When people trek, it, unfortunately, happens that they go to unknown parts, are not accustomed to the climate and conditions, and we must try to keep the people on the farms in a position to hold out there. I come to the second part of the motion. I have already mentioned what we are doing in the direction of cheap boring. I do not know whether the hon. member is thinking of the building of dams, but the Government is always prepared to lend money at a reasonable interest to people who want to build dams on farms and can give security. It cannot be expected of the Government to build dams for private people, but it is always ready to assist. &#x00A3;50,000 is put on the estimates for that purpose every year, but the year before last, only &#x00A3;21,000 was used because the number of applications was very small. The third point in the motion deals with the building of dams on a large scale. Let me say at once that I have become a little frightened. I have not long been Minister of Irrigation, but it has already quite sufficiently appeared that requests for dams are often made without the financial question being referred to. I believe there is hardly a scheme that pays. We have already written down many, and we have to do so again, and I think that we cannot go to work otherwise than very carefully in building dams in the future. We cannot go on as in the past suffering millions of pounds&#x2019; damage in money which has, subsequently, to be written off. I think that that mistake is made in every young country, and it has also been made here, and now we have the problem of rectifying matters. I want to tell the hon. member for Gordonia (Mr. J. H. Conradie) that we should adopt the slogan: &#x201C;Hasten slowly.&#x201D; I want to remind him that those were his own words when he gave evidence before the Irrigation Commission a few years ago. He then said himself that we ought to go to work slowly, but now he says that we must build large dams in a great hurry. He spoke of the magnificent Orange River. No one disputes it, and we know that the Kakamas scheme, e.g., is a great success, but we <span class="col_2355-2356" refersTo="page_1244"/>must not forget that we run a danger, if we build many dams, of one scheme injuring the other. Schemes higher up on the Vaal River will be much dearer than those lower down and there the canals will have to be much longer. The hon. member asks for different schemes to be investigated. There is, e.g., the proposal for the big scheme called Kromellemboog scheme which has to be carried out on the Vaal River, and which will supply Bloemfontein with water. That itself would cost &#x00A3;5,000,000 to &#x00A3;7,000,000, and we cannot build such big schemes before everything has been properly investigated and before we know precisely what the local people want. From the district of Hoopstad I have received one representative after another in connection with this scheme against the building of the dam, because all the people&#x2019;s ground there would come under water. We must, therefore, bear various things in mind. The scheme, too, would be very costly, like most schemes, like that of the van der Kloof and Buchuberg scheme. The hon. member desires a big scheme to lead the water into the desert. I fear the water would disappear there and would be of no use. The small Buchuberg scheme is also being enquired into, but as I have already said, we must take care that one scheme does not interfere with another. Accordingly, the schemes must be carefully gone into by the Irrigation Commission, and when it has investigated all of them it must make proposals as to the scheme which will pay best. The best scheme for the country must be adopted after careful enquiry. We can no longer build schemes of which it is said to-day they are the best in the world, while to-morrow, if they are built, they will be a failure. That was, unfortunately, the case in the past. The best schemes before construction were, after it, a failure. Last year another individual came to me and said that I should advance him &#x00A3;1,000 through the Irrigation Department as he wanted to carry out a small scheme which would be a great success. I had the matter looked into, and it was found that the security was adequate. The department had certain objections to the scheme, but the security was ample, and I then asked whether the department had any other objections. The reply was &#x201C;No,&#x201D; and that it was possible that it might be a success, but they had not made the necessary enquiry. To-day, not a year later. I get a letter from the person to please allow the interest to stand over this year. That is the case with most schemes. Before they are built, they are the best paying, but when they are built first the interest and then the capital have to he written off. There are large dams which have so much been written down that the debt on them is only a few pounds, but that, too, will still have to be written off. I had an irrigation scheme brought to my notice the other day which cost &#x00A3;800,000, and I said to one of the people below the scheme: &#x201C;If I were now to wipe out the whole debt of &#x00A3;800,000, would you be prepared to continue the development of the scheme?&#x201D; The man I was talking to replied: &#x201C;Oh, no, if the Government is prepared to write off the &#x00A3;800,000, but does not want to put the thing in order, we cannot undertake it.&#x201D; That is one of the schemes which are so frightfully good. My friend here spoke of the Olifants River scheme. That is one of the schemes which cost &#x00A3;800,000, one of the legacies from the other side of the House. Sufficient money was not made available for it, and the furrow was so badly made that the water escapes. The engineers are clever enough, but cannot have the work properly done if they have no money. I do not think it is right to accuse the people of building so badly that the water escapes. If they have not enough money they cannot build properly. The hon. member for Namaqualand (Mr. Mostert) said that we did not know how to lead water yet, nor how much water a morgen of ground required and how much ground can come under a scheme. Let me say that now that I have been in charge of the department for a year it is not possible to say what precisely is required. We are making tests at Grootfontein, and as soon as they have had reasonable time to make them, information will be supplied to the farmers. There is one fault amongst people under irrigation schemes that they very often lead too much water which evaporates and is needlessly wasted. If the ground, after being watered, were harrowed, much less water would evaporate, and much less would be required. Then the Irrigation Commission was attacked on the ground that there appeared to be only one member that counted. We should know that the three members of the commission sometimes work day and night. They certainly belong to the busiest officials we have. They enquire into all the schemes. Almost all the schemes we have to-day in the country are economically unsound, and a proper enquiry must first he made. Then the matter must be referred to this House and writings-down must take place to put them on a sound basis. The country is crying out for irrigation schemes, hut the time has come for us to put the existing schemes on a proper basis. Under the existing schemes there are still 10,000 morgen of ground under irrigation where there are no people. There must therefore be something wrong with the schemes if we still have that quantity today that is unsaleable. I am very glad that the Minister of Lands said that he is going to sell more of the ground to people by virtue of Section 11.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. C. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Where is the mistake?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>The mistake in the schemes is that they are, in the first place, too large, and the tax is too high. The House must prepare itself to make considerable writings-down on the schemes. An hon. member asked who was responsible for the schemes that have failed. Well the present Government is only building a few schemes, and they are not yet finished, therefore it is not responsible for the failures. I am very glad to hear from the hon. member for Graaff-Reinet that where irrigation works existed no loss was suffered in the Karroo during the <span class="col_2357-2358" refersTo="page_1245"/>drought. I am very glad to hear that, because then it is not necessary for those districts to be assisted under the Drought Emergency Loan Act. I do not know whether the hon. member includes Beaufort West in the Karroo, but people suffered very big losses through the Gamka scheme.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>That was a scheme that silted up.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>It has not silted up entirely; when there is a great drought we cannot expect the dams to hold water. Therefore, I cannot admit that no damage will be suffered where there are dams. I admit that less damage is suffered, because they had fodder longer, and the stock could, therefore, hold out longer, but I know that damage was suffered. We must try to get every farmer to prepare himself against the time of trouble. The hon. member for Potchefstroom (the Rev. Mr. Fick) said that proper surveys were not made before the Haartebeestpoort dam was built. That was not my fault, nor that of my department. We did not make the surveys of that scheme. We are no less than 15 years behindhand with the surveys of the ground served by the dams, and it will take years yet before all the ground is properly surveyed. I think the ground must first be carefully surveyed before we start building a dam. Then the hon. member for Potchefstroom again referred to the matter of the Compensation dam which has already been fully discussed previously, but the hon. member can surely not expect us to build another Compensation dam for the water that, as he expresses it, was taken away from them at the point of a revolver. If the people want to build a dam there let them have a careful enquiry made, and, if the scheme is a good one, we will assist them in building it, but we cannot be expected to saddle ourselves with the cost of another Compensation dam. I do not intend detaining the House longer, and I hope that if the hon. member stands on his motion, that the House will pass my amendment, viz.&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#le_roux">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">LE ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>I second the amendment. It appears from the debate that the drought is making us think. Already on a former occasion, the report of the Drought Commission which was appointed to investigate the general drought existing in South Africa, and to make recommendations as to the best ways of fighting drought, was debated. We are all aware of the praiseworthy work which the commission did, and the valuable report they issued. I hope the Minister of Education will take steps to have the report of the committee properly brought to the notice of the youth of South Africa. Possibly extracts from the report of the Drought Commission could be prescribed as one of the set works. The recommendations of the commission are of the greatest importance to our country, and I hope the Government will enlighten the whole country about them as soon as possible. The object of the mover is to draw the attention of the Government to various methods of preventing drought in the country, and I quite agree with him that it is necessary to call serious attention to it. Drought injures a country just as much as war, and as it is the duty of the Government to make every effort to protect the country in case of war, so it is its duty to do everything possible to prevent drought. The recommendations contained in the motion are necessary. In the first place, it says that care must be taken for the planting and the collecting of grasses. I quite agree with that, and we cannot do better than make tests with all kinds of grass and see that we get grasses which can stand against drought as well as possible. I want to heartily thank the Minister of Agriculture and his department for the tests they have made to find out the best grasses, for the information of the farmers, and to advise them about the cultivation of grasses. We made a blunder in building elevators for the export of mealies, and in that way encouraging the export of mealies, instead of creating a system whereby they would be used by the farmers in the drought areas by using the mealies to keep their stock alive. That is also a thing the Government can consider, viz., to put the farmer in a better position to buy mealies in time of drought. The mover further recommends that provision should be made for conserving water in our rivers, and that more boring for water should take place. I am glad the Minister of Agriculture has done the needful in encouraging boring for water, and I hope the farmers win now make liberal use of the bores. Quite a number of farmers are leaving to-day with their stock, and, as a result of the trek, they are losing much stock, while, if water were available on their farms, they would have suffered less losses. The third part of the motion recommends the Government to take steps to embark on irrigation works. I must say that the Minister of Agriculture has not shown himself very optimistic about new works. The poor efforts made in this direction in the past have greatly insured our country. Irrigation has tremendously suffered, and will still suffer in consequence, because such wrong work with regard to irrigation was done in the past. We must not, however, assume that irrigation in South Africa must always be a failure. I am of opinion that we can really make a success of irrigation. As the great works have ended in failure, such as those in the Karroo, I want to suggest that we should for once try small irrigation works in the Karroo. I think that the Government, in the first instance, should start the schemes which are best calculated to succeed. The Orange River is one of the best for irrigation works. At present it is carrying off millions of gallons of water and cubic feet of soil year after year. This river has a permanent flow, and that is just the reason why it can be made a success of irrigation. The river is perennial, and there is good soil. Here then we have the first requisite for the success of an irrigation work, but our other rivers, such as the <span class="col_2359-2360" refersTo="page_1246"/>Vaal River, the Modder River, the Riet River and others, we can also employ usefully. We can apply the system of irrigation there which was used with such success in the Murray River in Australia. In that river the fall is very insignificant, only two inches a mile. The Australians make concrete weirs across the river, and above them the water is collected, and it is then pumped out and distributed over the ground. I think we ought to apply the pumping system of Australia here. The rivers must be dammed up, and a large pumping plant must be erected by which a whole district can be irrigated. Such a system will be much cheaper than big works. Tests should be made of such a system. One finds individual farmers to-day who pump water out of the rivers, but it is difficult for them because the pumping plant is expensive and the area of land irrigated is small. But if we put up a large pump which can serve a whole district, the cost per morgen would be slight. I agree with the mover that the Government should give still more attention to irrigation where possible, and I hope it will now take steps to show the country that they are not frightened by the experience of the past, and that they will let no opportunity slip of developing our land. There is yet another matter that the mover should have added, viz., the prohibition of mountain fires. Instead of our mountains being the best conservators of water, the sponge to hold the water, we are now busily engaged in burning the sponge and in drying up the mountains so that they are nothing more than an iron roof from which the water immediately runs off. I hope the Minister will consider steps to prohibit these mountain fires in future. The farmers living at the foot of a mountain know what it means when the mountains are burnt every year. The Drought Commission report also contained useful suggestions about this matter, and it is not necessary for me to enlarge upon it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#steytler">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STEYTLER</person>:</from>

<p>This is an important motion and many other members want to speak on it.</p>

<p>On the motion of Mr. Steytler, debate adjourned; to be resumed on 27th March.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#higher_education_additional_provision_act_1917">

<heading>HIGHER EDUCATION ADDITIONAL PROVISION ACT, 1917.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_education">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF EDUCATION</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That this House approves of the proposed amendments to the regulations framed under the Higher Education Additional Provision Act, 1917, as published in the &#x201C;Government Gazette&#x201D; of the 18th and 25th November, 1927 (as Government Notice 1994), and laid upon the Table of this House on the 25th January, 1928.</block>

<p>The House is already fully informed about this motion, because it has been discussed repeatedly. The object is to obtain the formal approval of the House to the amendment of the regulation framed under the Higher Education Act. According to the Act, the Minister fixes the basis under which subsidies are granted to universities and colleges. Formerly the universities and colleges had the right to increase their expenditure by 10 per cent., but we are now bringing it down to 5 per cent. If, however, anyone can convince me that it is fair to exceed the 5 per cent., then the Minister still has power, under the regulations, to grant it. I am rather in a hurry with the motion in order to get it approved before the end of the financial year.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_rensburg">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN RENSBURG</person></from>

<p>seconded the motion.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to, and transmitted to the Senate for concurrence.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1928-03-20T17:58:00">5.58 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

