---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol10 - WEDNESDAY 22 FEBRUARY 1928'
layout: debate
year: 1928
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>WEDNESDAY, 22nd FEBRUARY, 1928.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1928-02-22T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#diamond_trade_regulation_natal_bill">

<heading>DIAMOND TRADE REGULATION (NATAL) BILL.</heading>

<p>First Order read: Second reading, Diamond Trade Regulation (Natal) Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>In moving, I may say it is a very simple measure arising out of the unsatisfactory condition of the Natal Act, No. 43 of 1899, which was repealed by the Precious Stones Act which came into operation last November. The position is this, that anybody crossing the border into Natal would be immune even if he is in possession of illicit diamonds.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>Happy country!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>And unfortunately I find that that was the state of the law even before the Precious Stones Bill repealed it, because section 135 says that any person found unlawfully in possession of native gold or precious stones shall be liable to summary arrest, and a penalty is indicated. But there is no section in the law which makes the possession of uncut diamonds an offence, and in fact the law is so absurd that it simply says &#x201C;precious stones.&#x201D; Therefore, apparently, according to this law in Natal it is intended to make it an offence to be in possession even of a cut or polished diamond. Now we have a Diamond Trading Act in the Transvaal, Ordinance No. 63 of 1903, which has answered very well up to now, and the whole object of this Bill is to render any such portions of the Transvaal Ordinance, the Diamond Trading Act, as may be desirable, applicable from time to time to Natal. It is, of course, a very urgent matter, and I hope that the House will pass the second reading to-day.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a second time; House to go into committee on the Bill to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#liquor_bill">

<heading>LIQUOR BILL.</heading>

<p>Second Order read: House to resume in committee on Liquor Bill.</p>

<p>House in Committee:</p>

<p>[Progress reported on 20th February, Clauses 53, 54, 63, 80 and 91 standing over, Clause 96 under consideration, upon which amendments had been moved].</p>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>On Monday night in committee I made certain statements with regard to the state of drunkenness which one sees in the Western Province generally and in Cape Town in particular. The hon. member for Cape Town (Hanover Street) (Mr. Alexander) challenged me to put the figures and proofs before the committee. I have a certain amount of pleasure in doing so, and I would ask hon. members who have the report to turn to page <span class="col_1275-1276" refersTo="page_0704"/>939 and question No. 6672, where some questions were put by Mr. Nicholls to Col. Trew, who gave evidence on behalf of the police as to the state of affairs in the western police district, which includes the Cape Peninsula.</p>

<block name="#quote">Mr. Nicholls: If the same conditions existing in the Transvaal obtained, would they be arrested?&#x2014;In the Transvaal a man has to be drunk and noisy, but they would not tolerate it amongst the natives in the Transvaal.</block>

<block name="#quote">You would not prosecute a native here for obtaining drink?&#x2014;Not if he is a registered voter.</block>

<block name="#quote">On the whole the number of arrests for drunkenness in the Cape is no indication of the amount of drunkenness?&#x2014;It is an indication, but it does not completely reveal the truth of the position.</block>

<block name="#quote">Mr. Blackwell: The figures for drunkenness in the Cape Province do not really reveal the exact position?&#x2014;No, I arrived here from the Transvaal on a New Year&#x2019;s Eve in 1919 after having served in Johannesburg, the East Rand and Pretoria, and I must say I was appalled at the amount of drunkenness</block>

<block name="#quote">They cannot cope with the volume of it here?&#x2014;That is another question. We are under-policed in Cape Town.</block>

<block name="#quote">Mr. Heatlie: Is it not a general thing that the number of convictions does not reflect the number of cases of drunkenness?&#x2014;Yes, it applies all over the Union. The proportion of drunkenness is more here than in any other place.</block>

<p>And then, further down the page, question 6686 reads&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">What is the experience when a native gets drunk? Does he get violent?&#x2014;Yes.</block>

<block name="#quote">And the coloured man?&#x2014;He gets very violent and we have more police injured in the execution of their duty in the Cape than elsewhere.</block>

<p>If hon. members will turn to the schedule given at the end of this report, they will find on page 101 the progressive figures of the increase of drunkenness throughout the Union since 1919. They are as follows (I am reading the convictions for drunkenness): 1921, 19,985; 1922. 17,679; 1923, 22,952; 1924, 25,953; 1925, 26,185; and 1926&#x2014;I got this from the last police report&#x2014;28,504, so that in five years, from 1922 to 1926, there was an increase in the number of actual convictions throughout the Union from 17,000 up to 28,000.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#gilson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GILSON</person>:</from>

<p>What was the increase in population?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>This represents a 50 per cent. increase in five years and I suppose that the increase in population is about 5 per cent., if that. I have the figures for Johannesburg and for the Cape, but let me first read the last annual report of the Commissioner of Police for 1926. He says that in 1921 the number of persons convicted for breaches of the liquor law was 38,000, and in 1926 it was 68,000, He goes on to say that in regard to drunkenness the number of cases of drunkenness coming to the notice of the police during 1926 was 29,356, an increase of 2,215 over the 1925 figures. Yet we had the Minister telling us that drunkenness was on the decrease. The convictions of Europeans show a slight increase compared with the previous year, but the convictions of non-Europeans increased in one month by 10 per cent. He goes on to say&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">With regard to drunkenness, the police have, as a rule, only taken action when a person is found incapable or disorderly in a public place, consequently the number prosecuted is not an exact indication of the extent to which intoxication is indulged in &#x2026; The convictions for drunkenness increased in all police divisions, except Kimberley.</block>

<p>If hon. members will now turn to page 106 of this schedule, they will see the convictions for the different provinces. You will find if you turn to the non-European section that in the Cape Province there were 10,510 convictions and in the Transvaal 7,915. Now turn to the drunkenness figures on the next page: Cape Western Division, 7,689 convictions.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#munnik">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MUNNIK</person>:</from>

<p>We can all get that for ourselves. Why read it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I wonder how many members have read it. I take no notice of interruptions by the hon. member for Vredefort (Mr. Munnik). The Witwatersrand, 7,788 convictions. These two together represent nearly 16,000 convictions for drunkenness out of a total of 26,000. If you want to analyse the figures, you will see that in the Cape the overwhelming majority of convictions is amongst the coloured, but in the Transvaal amongst the natives.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member has discussed figures which by themselves are appalling; but the increased percentage gives no indication amongst which part of the community it has taken place. The figures are of no significance whatsoever; if anything at all, they are misleading. The clause deals with coloured people and Asiatics.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>They are here.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member wants to apply prohibition in the Cape Province when, if there is any conclusion to be drawn from the Transvaal, it must be that prohibition has had no effect there. Why insist on the application to the Cape Province of a measure which has proved useless in the Transvaal, when you can deal with the same problem or disease in a different way? I wish, with the leave of the committee, to withdraw my amendment, and propose another one with a slight alteration of the wording.</p>

<p>With leave of committee, amendment proposed by Dr Stals withdrawn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from><span class="col_1277-1278" refersTo="page_0705"/>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit sub-section (1); and to omit subsection (2) and to substitute the following new sub-section:&#x2014;</block>

<ol>

<li>(1) Subject to any restrictions which a licensing board may impose and to the provisions of section 76 and 94&#x2014;

<ol>

<li>(a) the holder of an on-consumption licence in the Province of the Cape of Good Hope or the Province of Natal may supply liquor in accordance with the terms of his liquor licence to an Asiatic or a coloured person;</li>

<li>(b) the holder of a bottle liquor licence in either of the said provinces may supply liquor to any adult coloured male who possesses the educational qualifications required for registration as a parliamentary voter and who has not been convicted twice or more often under any law relating to the sale or supply of liquor.</li></ol></li>

</ol>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I believe I am precluded by the rules of the House from moving my amendment now, and I can move it only after Clause 96 is deleted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member may discuss it now.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>If Clause 96 is deleted, and I shall vote for its deletion, I will move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To substitute the following new clause&#x2014;</block>

<ol>

<li>96. Save as is otherwise provided in this Act no person shall supply any liquor in the Provinces of the Transvaal or Orange Free State to any person to whom under the law in force in these provinces at the commencement of this Act the supply of liquor is prohibited and no such person shall in these provinces obtain or be in possession of any liquor: Provided that in the Provinces of the Transvaal and Orange Free State an Asiatic or coloured person may be supplied with liquor in a shop established under the provisions of section 143.</li>

</ol>

<p>That will leave the Transvaal and the Orange Free State in exactly the same position as at the moment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) has rather changed his ground. Last time he was attacking Cape Town, and said it was the most drunken city in the world.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>No, I said &#x201C;one of the worst.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member did not say that; he said the most drunken city in the world. The hon. member makes an attack and runs away from it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>On a point of explanation, Mr. Chairman&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Will the hon. member for Cape Town (Hanover Street) (Mr. Alexander) give way to the hon. member?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, if it is on a point of order. This is in committee, and the hon. member can speak as often as he likes, and as long as the committee is willing to listen to him. He is only making his case worse by this silly ebullition of temper. I will take it in its amended form&#x2014;&#x201C;One of the most drunken cities of the world&#x201D;&#x2014;and the only man to support him was the hon. member for Bloemfontein (North) (Mr. Barlow) who repeated the mistake.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person></from>

<p>made an interjection.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>If the hon. member had voted with me on that occasion in connection with the matter of Sunday drinking in clubs it might have been different, but he was away. He makes a serious attack on the parliamentary capital of the Union, and he should have something more than frothy interjection to support the attack. The statistics annexed to the report of the select committee blow the hon. member&#x2019;s arguments out of the water. He carefully avoided referring to white drunkenness. Let me compare the figures for Cape Town with those for that very sober community in the Transvaal which my hon. friend represents. As a matter of fact the statistics show that the Transvaal is very much worse than the Cape. The figures are given on page cxi, and for the year 1924 show that per thousand of the European population over 15 years the convictions were: The Cape, 3.72; the Transvaal, 5.36; Natal, 8.46, while the Free State comes out best. Why does not the hon. member sweep his own doorstep?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>It is the peach brandy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I will now give the figures for the non-European population: Cape, 7.66 per thousand; Transvaal, 8.10; Natal, 3.18: the Free State again coming out best of the lot. On page cvi the figures are given for 1925 and show that the convictions for drunkenness per thousand Europeans over 15 were: Cape, 3.68; Transvaal, 5.02; Natal, 9.35; and for non-Europeans, Cape, 7.84; Transvaal, 7.88; Natal, 3.12.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deane">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEANE</person>:</from>

<p>They are importations.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>If they are importations Natal is very glad to have their services.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deane">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEANE</person>:</from>

<p>Importations by the Pact Government.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>Most of us originally were importations. The Free State figures are very low. What I have quoted shows that this charge against the Cape is absolutely inconsistent with the facts&#x2014;which are that drunkenness among both Europeans and non-Europeans is less in the Cape than it is in the Transvaal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot compliment the hon. member (Mr. Alexander) on his controversial methods. He attributes to me a statement which I told him I did not make. <span class="col_1279-1280" refersTo="page_0706"/>I desired him to give me an opportunity of explaining, but with extreme discourtesy he refused to allow me the opportunity. What I did say was that Cape Town in particular, and the Western Province in general, is one of the most drunken places in the whole world. No amount of diatribe will divert me from my purpose. He said he was accused by the hon. member for Bloemfontein (North) (Mr. Barlow) of never having made a suggestion in this committee to promote the cause of temperance. That was a true accusation, and the only way in which the hon. member could refute it was to point to a suggestion he made that when liquor was served in clubs the hours should be cut down to the same as those which obtained in hotels. That, however, was not suggested in the interests of temperance, but in the special interests which the hon. member is so able to voice. Let me get back to facts. I proved my point by quoting textually the evidence of Col. Trew, Commissioner of Police for the Cape Western districts. The Commissioner of Police made two statements. He said that having served on the Rand and in Pretoria he came to the Cape and found more drunkenness than he found up there; and, secondly, he said that though a drunken native was always run in in Johannesburg a coloured drunken man was left alone here unless he misbehaved himself, in which case he got run in. We are discussing the case of coloured drunkenness in the Cape, and this clause has no application to white people. I made my remark in reference to coloured drunkenness, and I offered to take the hon. member (Mr. Alexander) round the town any night and show him what is occurring. I would like to take him round his own constituency on a Friday night, and he will find as many coloured drunken men as he had majority in the last election. Let me quote the figures showing the drunkenness amongst coloured people:&#x2014;European: males, 829; females, 41. Natives: males, 310; females, 3. Asiatics: males, 19. Other non-Europeans: males, 2,443: females, 256. These figures are for the Cape Peninsula. Finally, I will quote the evidence given by the late Dr. van der Merwe, moderator of the Dutch Reformed Church. On page 170 he says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">I have been living for more than twenty-two years in the Western Province wine-producing districts, and I think it must be evident to us that the amount of drunkenness in those districts, compared with any other part of the Union, is very great. There is no part of the Union in which the serving of tots is so much in vogue as in the Western Province. The first person who drew my attention to the fact was the former moderator of the Dutch Reformed Church, my predecessor in office. The amount of liquor served to the labouring classes must necessarily create the desire for it to an appalling extent, such as we see in the Western Province. Travelling from Worcester to Robertson on a Saturday afternoon one can see truck loads of drunken people going in from the farms to the village, where they visit the canteens and obtain drink. They come out in a condition which cannot be described in words. I have travelled a good deal through the world&#x2014;I have been across to America and everywhere&#x2014;but I have not seen in any other part of the world the state of drunkenness amongst low class people that you will find on a Saturday afternoon at Worcester.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#drummond_chaplin">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DRUMMOND CHAPLIN</person>:</from>

<p>I do not see that anything is gained by quoting the figures to show there is more drunkenness in the Transvaal than in the Cape, or more drunkenness in the Cape than in the Transvaal. The fact remains that there is drunkenness, and we want to discover the best way to reduce it. My friend&#x2019;s argument is that you must take away facilities for getting drink from these people, and it will make them more sober. If it is said that they would not like it my hon. friend would reply that it is good for them, and therefore they must put up with it. That is a very rough and ready method of settling the question. Even if allowance is made for the probability that the convictions are not so readily obtained in the Cape as in the Transvaal, further allowance must be made for the fact that the Transvaal is dealing with natives, and the Cape with coloured people. Even so it cannot be argued that the method adopted in the Transvaal with the object of promoting temperance, namely, total prohibition, has served that purpose. I do not see that my friend&#x2019;s proposals are going to lead to any very satisfactory results. If we attempt to force upon the coloured people down here anything like total prohibition I am certain we should fail, because the respectable people who now drink moderately would have to go without, and, being respectable people, they would not complain very much. They would complain, however, at having a certain amount of slur cast upon them. Those who get drink in greater quantities than they should would complain about the absence of facilities, and the great majority of them would get the drink anyhow. Having regard to local habits which have gone on for many years, there is not the slightest doubt that these people would pay for drink, and if they are prepared to pay there will always be people prepared to find it for them, and we should not achieve our object in that way. We would only succeed in creating a crowd of white people who will pander to those who will have drink, and the last state of affairs will be worse than the first. We must leave a good deal to the discretion of the licensing court. The amendment which the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) had on the paper, and which I understand he intends again to move, will meet the case to a great extent. The licensing board would have the power to withdraw facilities from certain classes of people in certain localities, districts or areas, and if we had that principle it would allow the licensing authorities who have the knowledge of local conditions to use their discretion, <span class="col_1281-1282" refersTo="page_0707"/>and it would avoid putting us in the position of casting a slur on people who would deeply resent it, and also of creating an industry that would supply illicit liquor. I think such a procedure would he more effective than total prohibition.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#strachan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRACHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I have always had a suspicion that, generally speaking, the men of Natal were able to take their fair share in the gentle art of froth-blowing, and I am now pleased to have confirmation of that from the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander). I know little about the drinking habits of the coloured people of Cape Town. I do not go near the De Waal Drive at nighttime, and I know not what takes place there; but I certainly can speak with some authority regarding the coloured people in my own constituency. They are a very respectable class indeed, and are much concerned about the effect of Clause 96 of this Bill. They contend that it will create a distinction between the European and the coloured with respect to obtaining liquor. They are also of the opinion that it will encourage illicit traffic in the supply of alcohol by Europeans to coloured people. They have never abused the privileges extended to them in Natal, which are exactly similar to those obtaining in the Cape. Many of the coloured people who at present are able to obtain liquor from the bottle store and take it to their own homes will be obliged, if this clause is passed, to go to the canteen, and the conditions there, as most of us are aware, are not at all conducive to moderate drinking. There are many temptations at the open counter of the canteen. I would, therefore, ask the House to consider well before it deprives the respectable coloured man of the privilege of obtaining liquor from a bottle store.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I think every member of the House has the greatest respect for the real zeal and enthusiasm of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) in connection with the passage of this Bill, but I do think, if I may say so, that he made a very great mistake in introducing these provincial comparisons, local comparisons between the different parts of the Union, and he has made it difficult for a number of people in this House to cope with the situation he has created. I am one of the members of the House who has consistently and publicly admitted my own personal shame for the state of affairs that prevails here in the Western Province, but the moment you enter into a comparison about the Cape Peninsula and other parts of the Union&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I did not say of the Union, I said of the world.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>The moment you do that you get the whole of these provincial rivalries and jealousies. I do hope that the House will not be misled by following the currents of comparison between the respective purity and the respective evil of the various provinces of the Union.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I did not institute any comparison between the Transvaal and the Cape.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>It boils down to that. The result is perfectly obvious. It is perfectly clear that the hon. member did not intend to introduce that element into the discussion, which is now, as a matter of fact, tending to smother the very thing we are trying to get at. Clause 96 is one of the forms in which it is clear that the Minister proposes to deal with evils such as may be found in the Cape, or wherever it may be, amongst one particular section of the people. I maintain that the main cause of the unhappy state of affairs that we are familiar with is the facilities for obtaining drink under the Cloete Act, and the facilities for getting drink under the tot system. You get a third evil, and that is the evil of drink in the canteens. The evil of the Cloete Act has been largely modified under this Bill. The evil of the tot system will at least be modified, even if we cannot get the tot abolished altogether. The evil of the canteens depends very largely upon the form that Clause 63 takes when the Minister introduces it afterwards. One of the great causes of the evil here, to my mind, is the taking away of bottles after hours and the drinking from bottles in lanes and other places in the neighbourhood. If Clause 63 enables the bar licence or canteen licence to cover the taking away of bottles or the bottle licence allows the supplying in the same room or another room of the same premises and also the taking away of bottles, then the Minister will not have dealt with that particular form of evil. To my mind it is essential for the cure of the evil we know of that that system of taking away bottles after hours by a particular section of the people should be stopped if possible. To a certain extent that can be dealt with under these powers in Clause 81, etc., which enable the licensing board to impose restrictions for particular classes of people, but it boils down to this in the end, how are we going to deal with the bottle off-consumption? I dislike Section 96 very much as it stands. I dislike it for the reasons given by the right hon. the member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt), whose activities we rejoice to see today. For the present, I am prepared to vote with the right hon. gentleman for the deletion of this clause, and the substitution of the other clause that he has proposed. My ultimate attitude on this clause will depend very largely upon the provision that the Minister of Justice makes in section 63, in regard to the taking away of bottles for off-consumption. I have considered this clause a good deal, and the thing that is weighing with me very largely is this, are we not in the other provisions of the Bill going so far to cope with the admitted evils among an important section of the people as to make it unfair to put a stigma in. If we have gone far enough to make the particular evil practically either very greatly diminished or one that ceases to exist, then I am not going to vote for Clause 96 as it stands. If, on the other hand, <span class="col_1283-1284" refersTo="page_0708"/>in the ultimate form the Bill takes I am not satisfied of that position, then, in spite of having been in my whole political career opposed to the colour bar, I reserve the right to vote for Clause 96 as it stands or in a modified form.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry that the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Black, well) raised this question in the way he did, and I agree with the hon. member for Rondebosch (Mr. Close) that it would have been better to have left that kind of odious comparison alone. If some of us described some of the scenes witnessed by us in the town from which the hon. member comes, it would be felt that legislation should be directed to protecting young white girls rather than coloured people. But I think we had better leave that. What is said of our places can be applied to other places. However, we will leave it there. The hon. member takes every opportunity of saying something detrimental to the Cape, and we are getting somewhat tired of it. I want to draw the Minister&#x2019;s attention particularly to Clause 81. If the provisions of Clause 81 are put into force, you have all the remedies you require under this Act. You have the remedies there which will assist you in doing all you want to do under Clause 96. Clause 81 provides that the Licensing Courts can legislate in regard to persons of a particular class, and as the minister explained, the definition of &#x201C;class&#x201D; is wide enough to embrace all and every section. It seems to me we have gone quite far enough in regard to that. I said on a previous occasion, and I repeat, that we are out to assist the Minister as far as we possibly can in his endeavour to minimise drunkenness in this country, but we are not prepared to allow legislation against certain sections of the community merely on account of their colour. If the Minister would meet us there I think he will appreciate it would give him every advantage he now desires. We who know something of the coloured people, know that according to class the majority of coloured people are on a higher social status than the majority of white people in the same class. A coloured man usually is better behaved than a white man of the same status. It may be a sweeping statement, in the opinion of some, but it is perfectly true. The coloured man is constantly trying to rise, while the white man, when he gets to a certain stage, usually is on the down grade. I strongly object to this colour distinction being made. There are coloured men here as well-behaved as any in any other section of the community. Why should we, to get our own way with regard to a few unworthy men, brand the whole coloured community? There is no necessity for it to my mind. Section 81 gives the Minister all the power he requires, and added to that there is the definition of class. What more does he want than that? I do not think he is getting any further by attempting to force this clause through. If he wants to put the Bill on the Statute Book with the least possible delay, he must seriously consider the matter and do away with colour distinctions altogether.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I want to explain my position in regard to this matter. I am going to support the amendment of the right hon. the member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt). The Minister stated the other day that he thought the difficulty could be got over with respect to the coloured men by permits and so forth. But that is not good enough. He ought to know there are eminently respectable people among the coloured. I know a man who does contract work, putting up houses and so forth. That is a man of standing, surely. I knew men earning the same wages as white men. These men are on the increase, because they are getting more education now than ever before. To provide for such men by way of permits is not good enough. They will think it is a slur upon them, and it is, to some extent. Why cannot the Minister accept this amendment? It is a rough division, it is true, but it is the best you can find. When a man is on the register you can take it for granted he is rather above the general run of coloured people, therefore you take that as a guide and you draw the line there. At any rate, so far as the Cape Province is concerned that would be the way it would work out. I think it is quite a fair thing, and you get away from any statement about the coloured people entirely. I do not take the same view as the hon. member for Harbour (Maj. G. B. van Zyl) has taken about the white man, but you must recognize you have a certain class of people, eminently respectable people, in this part of the world, and especially in Stellenbosch, and the position of these people should be recognized. You cannot meet the case by permits. It is not fair. It is infra dig. Take a man like Abdurahman. For a man like him to have to go to the police and ask for a permit&#x2014;it is monstrous. There are other men, doctors and chemists and respectable tradesmen. They should be treated as respectable men, and not subjected to the insult, certainly the annoyance and the reflection, of having to go to a magistrate for a permit.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_broekhuizen">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN BROEKHUIZEN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. members for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) and for Bloemfontein (North) (Mr. Barlow) have made certain rash statements, and I think we ought to be very careful in this connection. The object of the Bill is to stop drunkenness. If the clause as drafted is best, let us pass it, and if the amendment of the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) will be best, let us pass that. Everybody is surely out to get the best possible clause. My experience in the Western Province is that there is a great improvement noticeable among the coloured people compared with the past. The hon. member for Bezuidenhout judges from what He sees as a visitor on Friday afternoon or Saturday, but I have lived here, and I notice a great improvement since 1906. What <span class="col_1285-1286" refersTo="page_0709"/>has caused it? Closing the canteens on Saturday afternoon; in my days they were opened, and I admit it was then almost impossible to walk in some of the streets on account of the drunken people. The position is greatly improved. We must not forget that there are coloured people in the Western Province who are very respectable, who have houses just as neat and clean as any. What does Col. Trew say about the matter? I quote question 6682 in the select committee. [Question and answer read.] He emphasizes that the largest percentage of convictions in the Western Province was amongst natives. It was no less than 65.42 per thousand convictions. For the whites it was 6.90, and for other non-whites 25.12 per thousand. He emphasizes that the largest percentage was amongst natives, and therefore not amongst other people. The convictions for drunkenness amongst natives were therefore much larger than among coloured people in the Cape. I further think that we ought not to make statements about the most drunken city, etc., and that we should try to put the best possible clause into the Act.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>I do think we ought to be very careful before we impose another form of partial prohibition in this country. I was very glad to hear from the speech of the hon. member who preceded me that drunkenness among the coloured people in this part of the country is on the decrease; and I personally believe that it is so. It is a serious thing to condemn a section of the people, because of their colour, to a position of inferiority, and say that they are not allowed to buy a bottle of any kind of liquor without a permit from a magistrate. If we can by some other way diminish this drunkenness which exists, we should rather do that, and only in the last resort should we be driven to a remedy which is going to be a slur on a large number of people who lead as respectable lives as many of us do. It is possible, if we could impose total prohibition in this country, that drunkenness might be diminished; I think the cure is worse than the disease; but partial prohibition has been far from successful. We have it on the Rand, and we must have it there because we have thousands of raw natives who must not have drink. Can anybody say it is a success? Our gaols are filled with white persons, whose crime is that they have sold liquor to natives. Now we are proposing to have partial prohibition in a wine making country. Have we any hope of enforcing it? We are going to fill our gaols here. I think if we carry out the restrictions in this Bill&#x2014;the restrictions with regard to the supply of liquor by the wine farmers under the Cloete Act in open vessels&#x2014;and stop the off-consumption sales by canteens, these two measures will reduce drunkenness amongst the coloured people here.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>My objection to this clause is the same as to Clause 82. It is quite unnecessary. Under Clauses 56 and 81, we have ample powers to deal with local evils; the Minister dropped Clause 82 for that very reason, and if he was prepared to do that, exactly the same principle holds good with regard to Clause 96. There is no earthly need to impose this discrimination when we have the powers in Clauses 56 and 81. I endorse every word the hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Duncan) has said. You will simply fill our gaols, and you will not be able to carry it out. I would be glad if the Minister will show me any right in Clause 96 which under this amendment he will not have in Clause 81. It casts a stigma, and a serious one, on a large section of the population, not on account of their misdeeds, but on account of their colour, and that is what every sensible man will deplore.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I must say that the argument of some members opposite against a colour line under this clause seems somewhat hollow after the same member for political reasons voted in favour of a colour line a few days ago in connection with the women&#x2019;s franchise. I want to remind hon. members that we are concerned here with the greatest trouble in the Western Province, namely, the sale by bottle, or paraffin tin, formerly such a great evil, and the cause of our finding the streets full of drunken people on Saturday afternoon. There is no question of total prohibition. I agree to a great extent with the hon. member for Yeoville (Mr. Duncan) that it is practically impossible to impose total prohibition on a section of the population. If we restrict one or other section, we must allow them to get a certain amount of drink under proper supervision. There is no question here of total prohibition for the coloured man, because he will still have an opportunity of going to licensed places and getting liquor under police supervision. The great difficulty is the sale by bottle, or wholesale, which in the past created so many evils. The hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal) recently said that the wine farmers, who surely know conditions in the Western Province, wanted to suggest that liquor should not be sold by the bottle to coloured people without a police permit, A certain section of the coloured people may possibly feel that this casts a reproach on them, but that is not intended; we only want to improve the condition of the coloured people, and there is a special clause in the Bill to provide for the case of the educated man. It may be a little degrading to go to the police for a permit, but we are engaged here in solving the special problem of a certain class of the population, and most coloured people will certainly be prepared to agree to this clause because its object is to save their own people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#papenfus">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PAPENFUS</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot allow to go uncontradicted the allegation by the hon. member for Hopetown (Dr. Stals) that prohibition amongst the natives in the Transvaal has been &#x201C;utterly useless.&#x201D; I have lived in the Transvaal for about 40 years. I remember in the early days when natives could get drink freely, <span class="col_1287-1288" refersTo="page_0710"/>then murder, manslaughter and all other sorts of crimes were rampant. This from the sociological side, whilst on the economic side 50 and often more per cent. of the natives on the mines were incapacitated for work through drink. The drunken orgies on Saturdays and Sundays incapacitated many natives from work on Mondays, aye, even on Tuesdays and Wednesdays. That state of affairs has, happily, been entirely swept away, and prohibition amongst the natives has been justified by that alone. As to the argument of the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe), I have not heard him use that as far as Europeans are concerned. Why should all the sacrifice and self-denial, if such it be, come from the coloured and natives alone? I have very little sympathy with the illicit liquor dealers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>You are one of those good men.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#papenfus">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PAPENFUS</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member has a gruff voice, and makes rude interruptions. I do not pretend to be a good man, or even better than the hon. gentleman, who is very fond of interpolating remarks which are entirely irrelevant. The ideal condition, as is also stated in the Rooth report, is prohibition, but we shall never attain that ideal until the whites are themselves prepared to make some sacrifice. Until we have prohibition we can never expect that sobriety which everybody would like to see in the interests of social life and efficiency. Prohibition amongst the Transvaal natives has done a tremendous amount of good, and is far more of a success than a failure.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>The Natal Asiatics are reasonably temperate, although there are, of course, cases of drunkenness amongst them. Then the Mauritians and other coloured people in Natal are essentially a sober people. As to the statistics which have been quoted, I was a member of the select committee, and I was impressed by the utter unreliability of these figures concerning drunkenness. You have to consider what lies behind them. In one centre the police are more efficient than they are in another: another centre is a large seaport town where people come from all parts of the world, and many of them over-indulge in liquor. The police in Durban are the most efficient in the country, and do not allow drunken people to walk about the streets. In other districts, again, there may be thousands of people drunk for a week without anybody taking any notice of them. So you have to base your arguments on something very much more accurate than these statistics.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I express gratitude to the hon. members for Pietermaritzburg (North) (Mr. Strachan) and Yeoville (Mr. Duncan) for what they have said. I have received a letter from the Natal Coloured Welfare Association, stating that at a meeting held at Maritzburg the coloured people passed resolutions stating that they felt humiliated at some of the proposals in the Bill, and they were opposed to the amended Bill, because it differentiates between Europeans and coloured, and at the same time encouraged an illicit liquor trade. They considered the exemption clause a humiliation and a stigma. Whether you think they ought to or not, the coloured people throughout the Union look upon this provision as humiliating. Are you going to cause more temperance or abstention by not letting them take a bottle of liquor home, and by forcing them to go into a bar? The only alternative, unless a man becomes a total abstainer, will be to force him to spend his money in the bar. He would thus be bound to drink far more than he does to-day. Is it better for the sake of a man&#x2019;s wife and children that he should take his drink at home where his wife can keep an eye on him and see that he does not make a beast of himself, or that he should spend it in a bar? How much wages will he take home if he can only go into a bar? Statistics have been referred to, but I only gave them because of this attack. Take the figure for the Cape, and add to it. Assuming that 10 per cent. of the coloured people misbehave themselves, are you going to deprive the other 90 per cent. of drink? What would happen to the other 90 per cent.? Forty-five per cent. may leave it alone, but the other 45 per cent. will get liquor, and you are going to have a new industry in South Africa&#x2014;the boot-legging industry. They will get their liquor, and you will create a contempt for the law in South Africa, just as they have bred contempt for the law in America. All for what? Because it is suggested it is going to promote temperance. It is not. It is going to lead to illicit drinking and to more drunkenness. Things have been declared to be bad in the Cape, but my opinion is that, if so, they are going to be ten thousand times worse if this particular measure goes through. It amounts to total prohibition except drinking in bars. I have a note here from the foreman of cabinet works in Maritzburg. There are respectable coloured men belonging to trade unions, and earning in some cases &#x00A3;30 a month. They are working side by side with white men, getting the same wages, they have the same political rights and privileges, and yet they have under this. Bill to get a permit to have wine or beer by the bottle, which does not apply to the Europeans working next to them. That is the wrong way to go about it, and the Minister will be well advised to withdraw this clause, and to substitute something more reasonable on the lines of the suggestion made by the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>I do not believe that the restriction we want to impose in this clause will prevent drunkenness. The drunkenness of the coloured people in the Western Province is not so much caused by the bottle system. In other provinces where they cannot get liquor by the bottle, drunkenness is also found. I grew up in the Western Province, and I, therefore, know everything about <span class="col_1289-1290" refersTo="page_0711"/>drunkenness on Saturday. We do not find many drunken people fifteen miles outside the villages, but inside the villages where the police then arrest them. It is, therefore, not exactly the bottle system, although I agree that it has a good deal to do with it, and I quite agree with the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander) when he says that the coloured man will get his liquor even if he may not take it with him. He will then simply drink to excess in the canteens. I do not want us to make a Bill merely for a few extremists. We cannot do so. We must pass an Act which is beneficial to the great majority of society. We must not prevent the respectable coloured person from taking a bottle with him. I cannot see why a decent coloured person cannot take a bottle home. It is a thing which will lead to trouble. A man may possibly obtain a permit to buy liquor and he will then make money out of the liquor he sells, as happens to-day in the Transvaal. Let me give an example. When a man in the Transvaal makes money from illicit liquor selling, he does not in the least mind paying a fine. If in the Transvaal a man is convicted of drunkenness, his relations come in certain cases and get him put on the black list, and officially he can get no drink. It is strange that that sort or person is always drunk. A man who wants to drink too much will always get hold of the liquor. The closing of canteens at 12 o&#x2019;clock on Saturdays is a very good thing. I agree with the hon. member for Pretoria (South) (Dr. van Broekhuizen) that there are many decent people among the coloured people in the Western Province. This applies especially to the permanent residents. There is, however, a kind of bushman coming from Beaufort West and elsewhere to work for the wine farmers, and they are not accustomed to liquor. There the police can intervene. As to the first-class native, I cannot see why he should not have a tot in the Cape Province, but it seems the intention to prohibit it. But hon. members now want to go a step further and make a distinction as well between coloured persons restricting the sale by bottle. I do not think this is fair to the respectable coloured person. If the Minister will say what exceptions he is prepared to make with regard to bottles in the clause standing over, then it will possibly lessen the difficulty about this clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Zululand (Mr. Nicholls) asked me a question as to the present condition in Natal. The present law in Natal is that as far as the Asiatic is concerned he may only purchase in a bar for consumption on the premises. As far as the coloured person is concerned, he is in exactly the same position as a European. On the whole scope of the Bill as I am trying to pass it, the coloured person would be able to purchase in a bar and he would be able to purchase under the exemption Clause 103, by the bottle. On page 339 of the Votes and Proceedings will be found a new sub-section which I am going to try to add. This states&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">(3) In the Province of the Cape of Good Hope the magistrate of any district may, upon the application of any Asiatic or coloured person, issue to such person a certificate exempting him for a period not exceeding twelve months stated therein, from any discrimination imposed within the district by or under the authority of this &#x201C;Act against Asiatics or coloured persons, as the case may be. The issue of any such certificate may be refused by the magistrate to whom application is made, and any such certificate may be cancelled by the magistrate of the district in respect of which it was issued if the holder thereof is convicted of drunkenness or riotous conductor of a contravention of any provision of this Act, or if the magistrate suspects on reasonable grounds that the holder is connected with any illicit dealing or traffic in liquor, and such certificate shall upon demand be delivered up for that purpose.</block>

<p>There are certain cases in which it might be granted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>That will not apply to Natal?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>No, it is only in the Cape of Good Hope. One would require to put in Natal in that clause. The result of that would be merely that your reputable Asiatic or coloured person would not rely on the occasional exemption issued by a Minister which has been in force for some years, but which is used very sparingly indeed. I fully realize the strength of that argument and, therefore, we have tried to provide for the case of the coloured man or reputable Asiatic obtaining what might be regarded as his licence every year. As far as the Transvaal and the Orange Free State are concerned, of course there is total prohibition to-day. The position of the coloured man and the Asiatic in the Transvaal under this law would be that they would be entitled to be exempted, the ordinary ministerial exemption, the exemptions which apply to the exceptional cases and not to the rule. I think that is quite sufficient for the present needs of the coloured population in the Transvaal. The only point they made when they came to see me was that they wish occasionally at certain times of the year to have the opportunity of obtaining a bottle of liquor. They do not regard it as a slur that they are not able to obtain liquor by the laws of the Transvaal. They do not regard this as a terrible slur, and I must say I have never been able to understand the slur argument. This differentiation which is imposed to assist the coloured community, cannot be regarded as a slur. Of course, people may tell them that it is a slur, and they may be led to believe it, but that it is a slur I deny absolutely.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What about the amendment of the right hon. the member for Fort Beaufort?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>The amendment would practically leave the position exactly the same in all the provinces. I think that is the intention of the right hon. gentleman.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#robinson">

<from><span class="col_1291-1292" refersTo="page_0712"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROBINSON</person>:</from>

<p>As it is to-day?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Yes; it would make no change. The hon. member for Rondebosch (Mr. Close) referred to the form which Section 63 may take as being of some importance to the view which he may take of this section. I have just had the draft prepared, and it is in the form which I informed the committee it would take, namely, that we keep the rights of off-consumption as far as hotels are concerned for some length of time and then those rights of sale for off-consumption cease for all time. [Proposed new Clause 63 read.] These proposals may be changed as far as some part of their form is concerned, but it comes to this&#x2014;that, at the end of five years, the off-consumption sales in on-consumption premises, whether they are bottle stores or hotels in the countryside, will cease.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>That means that for five years the canteens will be able to sell by the bottle.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Yes. We are not making them pay any licence fees for those five years for their off-sales. The trouble which the hon. member, I think, is visualizing is this&#x2014;that there may be small country places so small that they cannot stand both an hotel and a bottle store, although a bottle store can arise in such a place and can be granted a licence. And, therefore, he thinks the policy of increasing your hotel accommodation in the country may receive to a certain extent a setback. There is that difficulty, but I think we have to face this matter that hotels should really be places in which you sell for on-consumption. One could build on to the hotel a place which is not in communication with the hotel, and that place could get a liquor licence, and I can quite understand in a small community that the licensing board would be very careful to see that the same man who had the hotel would also obtain the bottle licence.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>They could not pay the high fees.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>That is a question that might be adjusted at a later stage. It might be we could deal with licence fees on the population basis.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>So the clause maintains the position as far as the canteens are concerned?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, the off-sales are maintained for five years.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Why not make it three?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>These questions of period and so on, are other questions. On the question of 103, I think all the legitimate requirements of the coloured people and Asiatics are fully catered for. The only argument that can be raised is that you should not differentiate, but there will be differentiation in any case, because no one would suggest there is going to be any change in the law of the Transvaal and the Orange Free State. There is no difference in principle, and I do not see much difference in maintaining something in the Transvaal and the Orange Free State, or having it over the whole country. Clause 95 differentiates adversely against the native all over the country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>What will be the position of Clause 63?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>The bottle trade is governed by all sections of this Bill dealing with bottle stores, and, therefore, the man who goes on to these premises, if he is a coloured man, would have the right to have his drink on the premises, but would not have the right to buy a bottle of liquor at the end of the day and take it way with him.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Only the white man can?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, only the white man can, but Clause 103 would deal with the whole position efficaciously as far as the coloured man is concerned. The intention of this is to assist the coloured man. If that intention is to assist the coloured man, I do not think he would attach much importance to any question of differentiation or slur, as long as he knows this is not against him, but a section designed for his protection. It may be that there are certain sections which might be affected by the entire omission of the words which the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) moved to delete, in line 60 and 61. There are blacklisting provisions and others which might be affected, and I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 60, to omit all the words after &#x201C;person&#x201D; to the end of the sub-section, and to substitute &#x201C;not prohibited by or under any provision of this Act from obtaining liquor&#x201D;.</block>

<p>It is a question of principle. If we rely entirely on a section like 81 the licensing board might in one district restrict members of the coloured community from taking liquor, while in the next district the licensing board might decide not to impose any restriction. So, under 81, we cannot deal with the whole of that matter. We can only deal with it by a section of this nature. A section of this nature is of very great importance. Your coloured man is not going to remain the problem&#x2014;is not to-day in fact&#x2014;of the Cape Province. We have more and more going to the Free State and the Transvaal, and we must lay down a general policy. This population is going to travel about South Africa as much as other portions of the population and, therefore, there should be a general law applying to the whole of the country. What form that law should take is a question for the committee. I think this is the right form, and, therefore, I am going to stand very strongly by the section as drafted. I am very strongly in favour of this section being accepted and, therefore, at all events, I cannot possibly agree to any withdrawal of this section and I shall be compelled to vote for this section, because I think it is the right thing to do.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from><span class="col_1293-1294" refersTo="page_0713"/>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I have listened very carefully to the Minister, and I cannot help feeling convinced that the Minister does not understand the psychology of the coloured man or the native man of this country. That I am perfectly convinced of, and I am also perfectly certain the Minister does not understand the feeling of resentment which exists in the minds of a large class of the most respectable of the coloured and native people of this country, and there is no doubt if the Minister will not agree to the deletion of this clause, and is not prepared to accept my amendment, that we are knowingly or unknowingly placing a stigma upon a certain section of the population of this country. I asked the Minister the other evening, and he has never given me any explanation, if he is prepared to define what a coloured man is in this country. There are large numbers of people who, without your knowing their family history, it is impossible to tell whether they are coloured or European, and there are many cases in this country, of which I know myself, of families members of whom are recognized as Europeans, and who are pillars of the church sometimes, in some parts of the country, whereas members of the same family in other parts of the country are recognized as coloured. The Minister may not be so well acquainted with the circumstances in the Province of the Cape of Good Hope as I am and other hon. members are. How is the Minister going to decide in a case of that sort? Surely he must realize, in this province especially, that there are large numbers of coloured people who are only on the border line, and who have only the slightest shade of colour in their composition. Many of these are most respectable, are landowners, and in most responsible positions. Surely the Minister must realize that these people, whom we ought to encourage, must feel that there is a stigma cast on them if you designate them, as in this Bill, Asiatic or coloured, and put them in the undignified position of having to go to a magistrate for a permit. I would like to see this deplorable drunkenness in the Western Province put down as much as the Minister; but you are not going to do it by this clause. You prohibit a particular class of people from having drink. In the minds of a section of the native and coloured people there is the idea that it is not done for their own preservation, but that the European population is prepared and desirous of doing them an injustice; and I am desirous of seeing that that feeling is removed. That that feeling exists a large number of members who know the country will agree. In many cases I go further than the Minister in desiring to strike a blow at the excessive consumption of liquor, but under the existing circumstances of the country, I hope he will agree to delete the clause and substitute the amendment I have moved.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ANDERSON</person>:</from>

<p>There is one aspect of this question upon which the Minister did not touch&#x2014;what would be the position if Clause 96 of the Bill was taken out and the amendment of the right hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) was substituted for it? In my view, if you take Clause 96 out, Natal&#x2019;s position will be that instead of Asiatics being restricted, as at present, to on-consumption privileges, they will have unrestricted rights and be placed on the same footing as the European. For that reason I am going to strenuously oppose the amendment of the right hon. member. With regard to the definition of &#x201C;coloured person,&#x201D; I do not think any person who reads the definition in this Bill can have any serious difficulty in understanding what is meant. A coloured person means any person who is not a native or a European.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What is a European?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ANDERSON</person>:</from>

<p>It is not necessary to give the definition of a European. I think that coloured people should be restricted in their right to purchase liquor. In deserving cases, there is Clause 103 under which letters of exemption can be granted as the Minister pointed out; I hope the Minister will stand by his clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I am afraid I cannot take the same view of &#x201C;coloured person.&#x201D; I left that point entirely alone, because I wanted to deal with the main principle. My objection is to specify &#x201C;coloured person&#x201D; and &#x201C;Asiatic.&#x201D; When it comes down to the crux you are going to have the greatest contention in applying that definition of &#x201C;coloured person.&#x201D; What are you going to do with people from other parts of the world, like Mexicans, people from the Argentine, Japan and Brazil? How are you going to exclude them under the definition of &#x201C;coloured?&#x201D; They may be people of culture and of the highest breeding and capacity. I foresee the most tremendous difficulties in the application of the clause. The Minister has indicated he is not wedded to the particular drafting of Clause 63 as to the question of time and so on. It is a very long and important clause, and it would be much more satisfactory for the committee if we could study it on the Order Paper, and I hope it will be put there at once. The clause would be much more restrictive than the Minister&#x2019;s draft seems to indicate. I object to the clause as it stands both on principle, and also on its application. Very great consideration will have to be given to the definition clause. Under another Bill there is to be a local board to decide who is or who is not a coloured person, and under such an arrangement the opportunities for the exhibition of personal malignity and spite will be enormous.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>As to the point raised by the hon. member for Klip River (Mr. Anderson) the most difficult thing in the world to define is a coloured person. This difficulty has been emphasized in the Cape in the matter of school attendance. In one case some children were refused admission to a school, and the case was taken to the highest court, which decided that the children were not of pure European descent. In another instance a man was on the voters&#x2019; roll as a non-European. He appealed to the Supreme Court, which decided <span class="col_1295-1296" refersTo="page_0714"/>the point by going into his ancestry, eventually coming to the conclusion that he had a preponderating amount of European blood. But what will be the position of a licence-holder&#x2014;he will not be able to go into these minute details. There are families in the Cape, half of whose children go to a European school, and the other half to a coloured school, according to the outward appearance of the children. As a matter of fact, you can only decide who is coloured by an exhaustive examination, the carrying out of which for the purposes of this Bill will create enormous difficulties. A coloured man who has the appearance of a European will be able to obtain a bottle of wine to take home with him, but his brother who may look like a coloured man, will be unable to do so. It will be impossible to define coloured unless you trace the family history, because there are so many gradations of colour. It is not right to insist on a clause of this kind, which will be ineffective, and will place a stigma on thousands of people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>One must admire the Minister&#x2019;s patience with such lengthy speeches and slow progress, and for putting his hand to such a thorny subject to try to get a liquor law that will satisfy everybody. In connection with the drink question, there is of course the phrase, &#x201C;So many men so many opinions.&#x201D; The object in this clause honestly is to decrease drunkenness, but the question arises in my mind whether we shall not create conditions in the Cape Province which will be as bad or worse than those prevailing in the Transvaal to-day. We have here a kind of half prohibition, and we feel the danger that very many white persons will be punished as criminals for selling liquor. There will always be the temptation to sell liquor, especially in the parts where it is constantly being worked with What temptation will the foremen or overseers of a neighbour not be put into over against a coloured man who cannot get a permit to buy a bottle of liquor? It will not be possible to control it, even with the best supervision. It is said that we cannot carry out total prohibition, but if I had to choose I should prefer that, for white and coloured persons, to prohibition for a section of the population. The Minister says that it is not intended to cast a reflection on the coloured people in preventing their buying liquor by the bottle without a permit. I do not say it is such a stain, because it is being done with the best intentions, but there can be no doubt that coloured persons will still feel insulted by it. Many of them have reached a high standard of civilization and are extremely respectable. I come into daily contact with them. They are builders, overseers, etc., first-class people. I have some furniture in my house made by a coloured man, and I should like to see any man in the country who can make better. They are highly civilized, and I do not think that we should force them to have a permit when they want to buy a bottle of liquor. They will feel aggrieved at the power of discrimination. I think the Minister should accept the motion of the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt), or that of the hon. member for Hopetown (Dr. Stals), which has the same tendency. It is difficult to draw a line between coloured and white people, but my great grievance is that the civilized and respectable coloured person will be told to get a permit.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I listened with interest to the hon. member for Klip River (Mr. Anderson), and his argument seems to be that as the amendment which is going to be moved by the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) does not exactly fit the conditions which pertain in Natal, therefore he is going to vote for the original clause as printed. Now I suggest there is another course he can pursue, that is, he can put some proviso in the amendment of the hon. member for Fort Beaufort that will meet the Natal position. The hon. member in drafting the amendment probably did not know the whole of the conditions which pertain to Natal, and, therefore, it is up to the Natal members to amend it in such a way as to cover the position. As regards the clause itself, as printed, I think any of us who have acquaintance with the coloured people believe this is an impossible clause. As I read it, it does not attack the drunken man at all. The drunken coloured man is going to get his drink from the shebeen. He is going to be protected. He is going to be supplied out of buckets and will get as much, or even more, than he does now. The only man you are going to attack is the sober coloured man. Every one of us who comes into contact with a great many coloured men and to those of us who know the respectable coloured man, living exactly as a European of a decent class, it seems to us impossible to force such a clause as this upon him. Surely a well-educated coloured man is not going to be turned into a criminal because, for dinner on a Sunday afternoon, he has a glass of beer with his family. Surely a coloured man who is a graduate of a university is not going to be turned into a criminal because he has a bottle of wine with his friends in his own home. It is impossible to think that you are going to penalize every decent coloured man because we all agree there is a considerable number of drunken coloured men who ought to be punished. Punish the drunkard as much as you like. We do not punish him hard enough. We are so keen in preventing the sober man from getting drink that we forget to punish the man who is a curse to the community. I suggest to the hon. member for Klip River (Mr. Anderson) that instead of venting his wrath on the amendment of the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt), he should amend the clause in a way in which it will work, instead of putting a premium on the shebeens. This clause should be called &#x201C;the shebeening clause.&#x201D; It is a godsend to the men who are running shebeens. With regard to the statement of the Rev. Dr. II. P. van der Merwe, who said he had seen truckloads of coloured labourers transported from their farms to the villages in a drunken state, I can only say I have lived a good many <span class="col_1297-1298" refersTo="page_0715"/>years in this country and I have travelled many miles in motor-cars, and I have never seen drunken coloured men going from the farms to the villages. I have seen hundreds of coloured men going from the villages to the farms drunk. Every decent man in the country, coloured men included, would be only too glad if you could stop that traffic which debases the lower class of the community. In our anxiety to hit somebody, don&#x2019;t hit the innocent coloured man instead of the culprit.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>Perhaps it might lead to the termination of the discussion if I make it clear, if the clause is negatived, what I propose to move, and it will meet the hon. member for Klip River (Mr. Anderson) and Natal. I have no intention to take away from the other provinces conditions which at present exist any more than I wish to put an unnecessary stigma upon anyone. What I propose to move will make it clear that the position shall remain as it is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>But a coloured person is not prohibited in Natal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>A coloured person is a European in Natal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>My amendment makes it clear whatever the law in Natal, Transvaal and the Free State, it remains the law if the amendment is carried. I want to make it clear if Clause 96 is negatived, the amendment I propose to move will leave the conditions as they legally exist to-day in Natal, the Transvaal and the Free State, exactly as they are. I want the hon. members for Natal to understand the position.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It is not so, because I think the word &#x201C;prohibited&#x201D; forms part of the amendment in the case of Natal. In Natal the Asiatic is entitled to buy drink in a canteen, but he is not entitled to buy it by the bottle. If that amendment is accepted, he will be entitled to buy it by the bottle. So you see, he can buy it in a restricted form. If the hon. member adds the words &#x201C;or restricted&#x201D;, it will meet the point.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>If the Minister will tell me where to put them in I will do so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>After the word &#x201C;prohibited&#x201D; put in &#x201C;or restricted&#x201D;.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I shall be quite prepared, if the clause is negatived, to move my amendment as the Minister now suggests.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister has now conceded a good deal to the prohibitionists. I hope he will now be so friendly and sensible as to yield a bit to the moderate people. Why should prohibition be applied to a class it has never been applied to before? Why should all coloured people be insulted and penalized on account of the bad ones? Will the bad ones be stopped from getting liquor illicitly? The Minister is one of those who made fun of total prohibition in America as a hopeless failure, and now he wants to apply a similar measure here in respect of coloured people, Asiatics and natives. There was prohibition of this kind in the Transvaal, and the result, as appears from the figures quoted by the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell), was that there were more cases of drunkenness, in Johannesburg alone, among coloured people and natives than there were in the whole of the Western Province where there was no prohibition. All the efforts made in the Transvaal to keep liquor from the coloured and black people failed, and thousands of whites, men and women, were put into gaol owing to those attempts. The Transvaal law once went so far as to provide that the convicted smuggler could only be sentenced to imprisonment, and yet it availed nothing. Now the Minister wants to apply in the Cape Province a system that has failed in the Transvaal. He wants to create criminals of a class of people who have never yet been considered criminals. There are hundreds of teachers among the coloured population. Not one of them will be able to drink a glass of wine, unless he first obtains a magistrate&#x2019;s special permission. According to the reports of certain inspectors you find a class of white person that comparers unfavourably with his coloured neighbours. Would the Minister regard that aspect as sufficient ground for enforcing total prohibition for the sake of that handful among Europeans? The Government should fight drunkenness, not moderation. Moderation ought to be encouraged. The Minister says it is no affront to provide that liquor should be kept from a certain class without respect of persons. How would the Minister like it if I wanted to provide in the Bill that it would be a punishable offence for a Cabinet Minister to drink a glass of wine. Would such a provision not be notice that all Ministers required protection against themselves? It seems to me that the gentlemen who drafted the Bill did not so much want to reform the liquor laws as to prevent the wine farmers as much as possible from selling their pure produce. I, therefore, move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the further consideration of this clause stand over.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I should like a vote to be taken now. I think we have had a very full discussion, and that nothing more can be added to the different views. I think we must have uniformity in the country, and I strongly urge that the clause should be passed as it stands.</p>

<p>Motion put and negatived.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>Before we divide I just want to mention one argument which has not yet been used. The clause says. [Clause read.] At present it is lawful for coloured people and Asiatics in the Cape Province to possess liquor. Yet there is no drunkenness on the farms, because the farmer gives them a certain ration of liquor every day, and as they can buy liquor in the villages by the bottle, there is no reason for them to steal liquor or grapes. My argument now is that, if we are going to prohibit <span class="col_1299-1300" refersTo="page_0716"/>the people from buying liquor, we are going to tempt the workman on the farm to steal grapes and make liquor himself. He will then be able to sell that liquor to people who cannot buy it. There are many grape farms in the Cape Province where the coloured person can pick grapes at night to make mos. The position to-day is that most of the vineyards are open. What I am afraid of is that we are creating a great temptation to workers on the farms to make liquor from the grapes. I appeal to the Minister and to the committee to withdraw the clause, or otherwise accept the amendment of the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt), or that of the hon. member for Hope-town (Dr. Stals).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#badenhorst">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BADENHORST</person>:</from>

<p>I just want to urge the Minister to assist us. I also represent many coloured people, and there are many respectable ones amongst them. I do not see my way to telling them that they may not buy by the bottle. They are not people who drink too much. Another point is the difficulty of saying who is white and who coloured. If I were to introduce some of them to the Minister he would say they were Europeans. The Minister must assist us, and give the respectable coloured person the right of buying by the bottle.</p>

<p>Question put: That sub-section (1) proposed to be omitted by Dr. Stals, stand part of the clause,</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;38.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Barlow, A. G.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Pienaar, B. J.; Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;56.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Chaplin, F. D. P</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Tellers: de Jager, A. L.; Robinson, C. P.</p>

<p>Question accordingly negatived, and the first part of the amendment proposed by Dr. Stals agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I did not want to deal with the matter at once, but on this point we must have the same rule all over the country, and I want to make it clear that we in the Free State and the Transvaal have to give us our position and have the same laws as in the Cape and Natal. What is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander. If it is a good thing for the Cape and Natal, it must be good in the Transvaal and the Orange Free State; it must be a better thing, because the numbers are so much smaller. Members of this side who voted against me are making the road open to this Bill being dropped, or the same position being created all over the country. I do not know whether these hon. members understand the gravity of the position, but on a matter of this sort we should not have different legislation. I only want to make the position clear.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The big stick!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>No, a very small one.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>We must compliment the Minister on the way in which he has conducted his Bill through the House; but it is the first time I have seen a Minister of the Crown use his position to intimidate the committee. The Minister has no right, when the committee has come to a decision by a large majority, to turn round and say: &#x201C;If you do not adopt my views, I shall move that it be the same all over&#x201D;&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>In this portion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>The majority of the committee has taken up a view which, earlier this afternoon, I thought the Minister was prepared to accept, when a large number of his own supporters got up and spoke in favour of this amendment. I was surprised when, at the end, I found the Minister was not prepared, and going to vote on this clause. A large section of the committee has agreed to <span class="col_1301-1302" refersTo="page_0717"/>delete these words, and I appeal to the Minister to leave it to the discretion of the committee. The Minister himself, and I am very glad of it, and hon. members on all sides of the House have acted up to it, said that this is not a party matter, and he has left it to the committee to decide what shape the Bill shall take when it leaves the precincts of this House. Although many of us have not seen eye to eye with the Minister on many of these clauses, we have, irrespective of party consideration, given him every consideration and assistance; and nobody realizes more than I do the tribute of praise that is due to him for the extraordinary patience he has shown in the various stages of the Bill as it has gone through the committee. It is on account of this that I appeal to the Minister not to try to interfere with the deliberate judgment of the majority of the committee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I have a good deal of sympathy with the attitude the Minister has just now adopted, and it has nothing to do with party at all. We have heard this afternoon why we should depart from the principle laid down by the Minister in this section and allow certain respectable coloured people in the Cape to buy liquor. In the Orange Free State there are a number of respectable coloured people&#x2014;landowners&#x2014;and I do not see by what right the committee shall say these people shall not obtain liquor as they do in the Cape. By its vote the committee has laid down that certain classes of coloured people in the Cape can get liquor.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister was not here and does not understand.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>Why discriminate against the same class of coloured people in the Free State? What the Minister proposes to do is to open the door to the same class of coloured people in the Free State.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister&#x2019;s own Bill made a discrimination between coloured people in the Cape and those in the Free State and Transvaal&#x2014;with regard to off-consumption.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>You want to go further now.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>Why make such a fuss about this question of uniformity, which has been given up already? It is a simple question of how you are going to apply certain restrictions which everybody thinks are necessary. To try to impose another form of partial prohibition is a dangerous course, and not to be adopted unless as a last possible resort. There are other matters which do not bring about partial prohibition and racial discrimination.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>We are trying to secure uniformity. When you talk about people being restricted you know you are referring to Asiatics and coloured men in other parts of the Union. My aim all through has been to steer as far as I can a middle course between extreme opinion, but when I find on one amendment a section of members voting in favour of greater restrictions and on the next amendment the very same members voting for an extension of opportunities for obtaining liquor, it strikes me as being most extraordinary. One outstanding instance was that offered by Free State members who were very much afraid of restaurants, but they voted against us in the last division. I cannot understand that mentality. This is one of the great difficulties I have had over this Bill, and I think it fairer to mention members who generally vote with the Government, so that hon. members will see that I am not trying to prejudice the position. We cannot go on with a measure of this nature in the way we are doing. I am not saying there is any sign of obstruction, but everybody seems to think that every section should be examined through a microscope, but it is impossible to get through a big consolidating measure of this kind if we are going to be so meticulous.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>There must be a certain amount of give and take also.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>At the report stage I will consider the matter to see in what way we can obtain some uniformity.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>We all sympathize with the Minister&#x2019;s desire to secure uniformity, but in a country with such diverse conditions as South Africa you cannot have entire uniformity. If the Minister had aimed at a desire to secure uniformity on principles and had left out a number of these minor points, which are really matters of administration, we would have made greater progress. We have not spent much time on important clauses, and I do not think we have laid ourselves open to the charge of wasting time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I sympathize with the Minister in the disappointment he feels over the rejection of the sub section, but it would be a tragedy of the worst description to abandon the age-long tradition that coloured population in the Transvaal and the Free State should not be allowed to obtain liquor. The argument in favour of uniformity can be extended too far. The only other thing is to steer a middle course and to retain the existing state of affairs so far as this section is concerned. But to say that because you have been defeated on this clause you are going to go to the opposite extreme and allow the coloured people in the Cape and Natal to get what liquor they want would be a terrible position to face. I beg the Minister not to carry the clause to that extreme. We must accept the position with the best grace we can.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cilliers">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>I also want to appeal to the Minister to reconsider the matter. Our conditions differ greatly from those in the Cape. I am very sorry that we have lost. We have a few coloured people, but thousands and thousands of natives, and if they are permitted, it will mean their absolute ruin. I am, therefore, opposed to it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I have listened to the orations of the last four or five speakers, but it <span class="col_1303-1304" refersTo="page_0718"/>seems to me they have been reflections on the recent vote. On a point of order, I call attention to the fact that Standing Order 70 says that no member shall speak against or reflect on any motion of the House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The vote on sub-section 1 has not been completed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>The reason I voted against the clause was because I was satisfied that the amendment of the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) would meet our needs. The Minister should realize that there are essential differences in different parts of the Union. While we are desirous of helping the Minister to get the Bill through, we have to view the matter in the light of the people who sent us here to represent them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>I have the greatest sympathy with the Minister and how a Free Stater can vote for this I cannot understand. The Minister is right to show the Free Stater the right way.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>On a point of order, are not all these speeches a reflection on the last vote?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>All the speeches are not, but the last speech is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot see that it is, but I take no notice of the hon. member for Ceres (Mr. Roux) who dare not vote for anything in favour of temperance. I think the Minister is right, and on the next clause they will vote right and come with us. I cannot understand how a man from the Free State can vote for a coloured man getting a bottle of wine or brandy in Colesberg and yet fight like the very devil against him in getting it at Phillipolis. Naturally, the coloured men in the neighbouring towns will ask why they can&#x2019;t have it, and they will start agitating now. We want to keep the bottle away from these coloured men and the Minister is light. There are quite a number of men in this House who are not following this Bill at all&#x2014;they are simply asking their pals how they should vote.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conroy">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CONROY</person>:</from>

<p>I am very sorry that the hon. member for Bloemfontein (North) (Mr. Barlow) has been so courageous as to teach me and other members from the Free State a lesson. It comes badly from him to want to teach us how to vote. I know what I have voted about, and if I have to vote on the matter again, I would do so in the same way. I shall not allow myself to be intimidated by him or anyone else. I am prepared to defend my action to my constituents, but he dare not do so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_rensburg">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN RENSBURG</person>:</from>

<p>[Inaudible.] We are not going to apply prohibition to the white people in the Cape Province, and why then should we do so to the coloured people, seeing they have always had the right to buy liquor. If I get the privilege of voting upon local option, I shall always support it. Why should we allow the white people to drink, and prevent the coloured people, who are able to pay for it? In the Free State the coloured people were never permitted to buy drink, and why should we allow it now? We cannot do it. [Inaudible.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#steytler">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STEYTLER</person>:</from>

<p>I just want to say that I voted against the clause for the same reason, because I cannot see why we should expose Europeans to liquor and protect coloured persons from it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>That is your excuse is it not?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Won&#x2019;t the hon. member withdraw the amendment? It is practically the same as that of the hon. member for Fort Beaufort?</p>

<p>Question put: That the words &#x201C;(2) Subject to any restriction or condition imposed by a licensing board under the authority of section&#x201D;, proposed to be omitted by Dr. Stals, stand part of the clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>You might kindly explain to the committee, Mr. Chairman, what the position will be. There are certain members of the committee who are desirous of omitting the whole clause and substituting the proposal which I have suggested afterwards, and they are really not in a position to know how to Vote. I take it that whatever may happen now it would be open to the committee to delete the clause in whatever form it may appear before the committee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>That is so.</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes-47.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Barlow, A. G.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Sampson, H. W.; Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;51.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p><span class="col_1305-1306" refersTo="page_0719"/>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Chaplin, F. D. P.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Gilson, L D.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P, W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Tellers: de Jager, A. L.; Robinson, C. P.</p>

<p>Question accordingly negatived, and the second part of the amendment proposed by Dr. Stals agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by Mr. Blackwell, Mr. J. P. Louw and the Minister of Justice, in sub-section (2), dropped.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by the Minister of Justice, to omit sub-section (3), put and agreed to.</p>

<p>All the words of Clause 96 having been omitted,</p>

<p>New Clause 96,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the following be a new Clause 96:</block>

<ol>

<li>96. Save as is otherwise provided in this Act no person shall supply any liquor in the Provinces of the Transvaal, Orange Free State or Natal to any person to whom under the law in force in these provinces at the commencement of this Act the supply of liquor is prohibited or restricted and no such person shall in these provinces obtain or be in possession of any liquor.</li>

</ol>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I want to say this amendment would be a blot upon the law from a drafting point of view. It is very bad drafting to make the position that a law which has been repealed will still remain in force.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>That can be put right at the report stage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I shall certainly vote against that amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>Then there will be no clause at all.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>If hon. members do not accept the half loaf in the shape of the amendment by the right hon. the member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt), the position they will create is this, that in the Transvaal and Natal any coloured person may walk into a bar or bottle store and demand to be served with drink. Seeing we cannot get the whole thing, I intend to vote for the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>There is some contradiction in the terms of this. If you are going to restrict a person so that he cannot obtain liquor, you cannot in the same breath say that no person shall obtain liquor.</p>

<p>Proposed new clause put.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I must point out that after our deleting sub-section (2), I should really have put the amendment of the hon. member for Hopetown (Dr. Stals). I understood he was going to withdraw it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>Under those circumstances, I withdraw it.</p>

<p>With the leave of the committee, amendment withdrawn.</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;57.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Chaplin, F. D. P.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie. J. H.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Robinson, C. P.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R.; de Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;47.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Barlow, A. G.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p><span class="col_1307-1308" refersTo="page_0720"/>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Reitz, H.; Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Proposed new clause accordingly agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 97,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 3, to omit &#x201C;eighty-two&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;eighty-one&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In lines 5 and 6, respectively, to omit &#x201C;Asiatic or coloured&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. B. DE VILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to support the amendment of the hon. member for Rondebosch (Mr. Close). I took up the attitude this afternoon that no distinction of colour should be made, and I am glad that the House also wants to make none.</p>

<p>Amendments put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 98,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRUBEN</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to move an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 18, after &#x201C;Cape of Good Hope&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;excluding the area under the jurisdiction of the Eastern Districts Local Division of the Supreme Court of South Africa</block>

<p>I see the clause provides that Natal shall be excluded from the spread of the tot, and I wish to press that the Eastern Districts of the Cape Province be also excluded from the tot system.</p>

<p>Business suspended at 6 p.m., and resumed at 8.8 p.m.</p>

</speech>

<debateSection name="#evening_sitting">

<heading>Evening Sitting.</heading>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRUBEN</person>:</from>

<p>When the House suspended business I had moved an amendment to provide for the exclusion of the eastern districts. I wish to say emphatically that farmers and other residents in the eastern districts are very much averse to the extension of the tot system to the Eastern Province. It is true that as the law stands to-day there is nothing to prevent them giving the tot, but if it is specifically included in an Act it is going to be looked upon by the labourers in those areas as a right which they should demand. As the law stands, Natal is excluded, and this Bill proposes to confirm that exclusion. The conditions of native labour and so forth in the eastern districts of the Cape Province are very similar or almost identical to those of Natal. Our labourers are mostly the aboriginal natives who, we know, are intemperate in the use of alcohol, and if it is right to exclude Natal from the tot system I claim that equally so should the Eastern Province be excluded. When I speak of the Western Province tot system, I hope that there will be no repetition of the suggestion by certain hon. members that a reflection is being cast on the wine farmers as such. Many of my friends arc wine farmers, and we all know that no one in this House has accused them as a class of being addicted to drink, or anything of that sort, when we attack their tot giving. We all know that they are a sober community, and it is not the wine farmer as such who has had any remarks made about him. The remarks made about the tot have no reference whatever to the character of the vine farmer, but to his pernicious system. They were able to give six to eight tots per day, but now in this Bill the amount is reduced to one tot per day, to be given at a certain hour. To that extent there is a vast improvement, but&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#waterston">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERSTON</person>:</from>

<p>Who is going to see he does not get more than one?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRUBEN</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, that is the point. What check can be made of kind of liquor, the time it is given, and quantity and number of tots? I say the system is bad, and very open to abuse, and anything we can do to prevent its extension should be done. The argument for it from certain members on this side of the House is that it has been an old custom among the wine farmers for the best part of a century. We know that, but all old customs on account of their age are not therefore desirable. If it must be given in wine districts, then restrict it entirely to those districts. If the tot is extended throughout the Union we are going to have this position&#x2014;and I am speaking more particularly of the Eastern Province&#x2014;that in order to supply their labourers with the tot, the cheapest and worst products of the wine districts are going to be bought by men who give tots, in order to give them as cheaply as they can. I ask the House to think what that will mean. The cheapest products of the wine farmers which cannot be otherwise sold will be sent all over the Union for the giving of tots by employers who are not producers of wine. In the Transvaal they will probably make their own peach brandy for giving peach brandy tots. I move this amendment for the further reason that if this clause is going to be passed, I want to see that at least in the main only the wine districts of the Cape Province are included. I do not make any secret of it that if the amendment is carried I still mean to oppose the whole pernicious clause for the extension of tots throughout the Union. [Time limit.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from><span class="col_1309-1310" refersTo="page_0721"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry my hon. friend has not gone the whole hog in this business and let us tackle the whole evil. I want to move an amendment in sub-section (1), Clause 98, in the first line&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To delete the words &#x201C;in sub-section (2)&#x201D;</block>

<p>because I then want to move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit sub-sections (2), (3) and (4).</block>

<p>It has this great advantage, that it makes things uniform throughout the Union. You will then have uniformity in the law, which I have no doubt the Minister will duly appreciate. This tot system, there is no question, exists in the Cape Province. It is to a very large extent condemned in the Cape Province. It helps to bring contumely and scorn on the wine farmers of this part of the Union that they resort to giving tots to their men. I know myself there are wine farmers in this part of the province who would only be too glad to have a law passed which would enable them to say to their labourers &#x201C;the law does not allow us to give tots.&#x201D; It is not necessary. I employ over 100 coloured boys, and I never give them tots and I have never been asked for them. If this were dropped, it would be for the benefit of employees and employers as well.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. B. DE VILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>They will get it elsewhere.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Why should they, especially if you take away the off sales of the canteen? That is a great evil in regard to that. I am perfectly certain the majority of the wine farmers themselves would be only too glad to get rid of it. I am also convinced that once this thing were got rid of and there were no wine farmers competing against one another in giving the tots, they would not suffer in regard to the supply of labour. That is as regards the Cape Province, but to extend it to the Transvaal and the Free State&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>This section limits the rights of people in the Free State.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>We will deal with the Transvaal then. One must remember the hundreds of thousands of natives there are in the Transvaal. They would take this wine that is given them, but that will not satisfy them, and you will cultivate in them the taste for strong liquor. If you once accustom the natives of the Transvaal to take this wine they won&#x2019;t stop at that, and, of course, we know the result. It is proposed to limit the amount given and the time at which it is given, and to provide that it must be given under the supervision of a European. Where are you going to get the people to supervise all that? How are you going to enforce it? Who is going to be there to see it is not given before 4 o&#x2019;clock? It is not a practical thing to carry out. Then there is the quantity also. It is not a practical proposition. I do hope the committee will support this, and I do make an earnest appeal. The tot system has been a rotten system in the Cape Province.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_members">

<from><person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBERS</person>:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>It has brought scorn&#x2014;I say that quite advisedly. People who come from the north point a finger of scorn at the fact that some of our farmers give tots. It does promote a taste for strong drink. Nobody, I believe, would welcome a law forbidding the giving of tots more than the wine farmers themselves. Certainly in the case of other farmers it is not necessary, and is not given in the majority of cases. I hold very strongly it is not necessary. They will get the boys just the same, judging by the experience of other people, myself included. I do hope the committee will support this. It is a very grave thing.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hugo">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HUGO</person>:</from>

<p>I have not yet spoken on the Bill, except on the tot system, but when I listen to the speeches of the opponents about the shameful condition of the tot system which has existed more than a century, especially in the Cape Province, then I conclude that they are persons who have not had the least experience of the matter. If we ask them whether they were ever present when a tot was given, then they say that they have never seen it. They have a prejudice against a matter they know nothing about. The hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger) does not give liquor to his workpeople, who number about 100. We also heard evidence before the committee, of farmers who gave their labourers no drink. Then a neighbour of such a farmer said that the workpeople of the farmer who gave no tot bought the liquor by tinsful. On the farms where no tots are given they get a certain tip, wine money, and on Saturday they go and buy a paraffin tin of liquor with the half crown. The tot system is condemned because it causes drunkenness. Those who travel through a wine district like the Paarl, will see drunken people there on a Saturday afternoon. But those are not the workpeople on the farms. They are not drunk from liquor given them by their master, but from liquor obtained in the canteen on Saturdays. On that day they are not present on the farms. I grew up as the son of a wine farmer and know what I say when I challenge any hon. member to quote an instance where a man has got drunk on his master&#x2019;s tot. Moreover, we have here to do with provisions about restricting the quantity, and the time of the tot. I do not want to speak so much about the restrictions, but about the ridiculous time limit. The man who likes a tot will not wait till 4 o&#x2019;clock. The hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger) said that it was warmest at 3 p.m., but the workpeople will be wanting a tot at 11 o&#x2019;clock. They will not wait if they cannot get it, but will buy it or make it themselves. It is not only the wine farmers&#x2019; workers, but those of all farmers in the districts accustomed to a tot. The amendment wants to divide the tots <span class="col_1311-1312" refersTo="page_0722"/>over four equal portions of the day, for instance into four or five equal parts. I can assure hon. members that they will never see a drunken man as a result of the tot system. My experience is that if a man on a farm asks for a tot, then he has long had the taste for liquor, and if his parents come with him to ask, then he has possibly been drunk long before. He does not acquire the taste through the tot system. It was always the custom to give the workers four or five tots a day, according to the work they had to do. The farmer will take good care that his men are not drunk, because it is in his own interests. I know of cases e.g. of my brother, where even the children would see that their workers did not drink too much. If a man then got drunk on a farm he got the liquor from outside. The master would, the following day, speak to such a man and ask him where he got it, and threaten to take away the tot if he drank again. The arguments about drunkenness and the taste which the workers have got from the tot system are therefore groundless.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#william_macintosh">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILLIAM MACINTOSH</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to speak in support of the amendment of the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger). I was on the committee of 1918; after all, it was 10 years ago, but I have not heard any arguments since then which are different from those put before us then. The wine and other farmers were given a chance of putting their views forward; I have refreshed my memory as to the effect on my mind, and the effect was that I moved in the committee&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Your committee is of opinion that the &#x201C;tot&#x201D; system is the root of the evil (drunkenness) and should be abolished by law.</block>

<p>Three out of seven voted for it; it was lost by one vote. I have heard nothing to change my mind in regard to that. It is worth while 10 years later to look at some of the evidence. That of Mr. Charles Leonard&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>All wrong.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#william_macintosh">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILLIAM MACINTOSH</person>:</from>

<p>I believed that evidence, and I believe it still. His evidence was to the effect that when he bought his farm &#x201C;Gloria&#x201D; he found this tot system in vogue there, and it led to a state of things that was so disgusting, in his own words, that he could not alter it; he wanted to clear it out. He used no compulsion, but gave his labourers the option of receiving half-a-crown a week in lieu of the tot, and within six months every man took the money instead of the tot. The difference this made to working conditions on the farm was almost beyond belief. The Minister admits that the tot system in the Western Province is abused, and he proposes to limit the quantity of the tot, yet notwithstanding this, he proposes to extend the tot system to the Transvaal. I cannot see the logic of that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To insert the following new sub-section to follow sub-section (1):</block>

<ol>

<li>(2) In the Province of the Cape of Good Hope any adult bona fide employing in farming operations any native, Asiatic or coloured person, being a male of or over the age of 21 years, may on any one day supply gratis to such native, Asiatic or coloured person one and one-half pints of unfortified wine: Provided that such wine shall be consumed during intervals of not less than two hours and in not less than three equal portions.;</li>

</ol>

<p>in line 18, to omit &#x201C;The Cape of Good Hope,&#x201D; and in lines 33, 43 and 48, respectively, to omit &#x201C;sub-section (2)&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;sub-sections (2) and (3)&#x201D;.</p>

<p>We have never asked for the tot system to be extended to any other province of the Union. The quantity mentioned in my amendment is very small, and it must be remembered that a pint of fortified wine, which is allowed under the Bill, can carry very much more alcohol than one-and-a-half pints of unfortified wine.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#waterston">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERSTON</person>:</from>

<p>What difference would it make to the wages?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>A man would get the same wages whether he had the tot or not. Then the Bill allows wine to be given to a lad of 18 years, but my amendment limits the age to 21 years and over. My amendment would satisfy the farmers, and the law can be carried out only if the farmers are satisfied. The hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger) has not been in touch with the wine farmers, but I speak from first-hand practical knowledge. Ninety-nine per cent. of the wine farmers wish to retain the tot system in the interests of sobriety. They work with wine, and if the men are not given a reasonable quantity they will help themselves, or else they will send for liquor to the nearest town, or go there themselves. You hear of drunkenness amongst the workers for the fruit farmers who do not give a wine ration, but on the wine farms you do not have drunkenness from one week&#x2019;s end to the other. Is it not very much better for the wine farmer to give their men a reasonable quantity than to see the men help themselves or drift into the towns to obtain liquor? Then you must not forget that if the workers on wine farms were not allowed to have wine they will help themselves to the grapes, and turn them into wine within 24 hours. Where will you find labourers better looked after than those on the wine farms? It is essential that the wine farmers should be allowed to give these tots. My amendment is more reasonable than the proposal in the Bill, and it will satisfy the wine farmers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>I admit that I am not sufficiently au fait with conditions in the Cape Province to be able to form an independent judgment, but the amendment of the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) makes the impression on me, and his explanation has confirmed it, that I can support it. I want to ask the Minister if he can give a little information <span class="col_1313-1314" refersTo="page_0723"/>about Sub-clause (2), seeing he asks us to vote that the natives, Asiatics and coloured people must work not less than a month to be entitled to a tot. The Minister knows that the tot is a stimulant and it is so intended in time of hard work, and then it will be one of the most useful institutions we could think of. It is just during times of pressure, the sowing and reaping time when the hardest work must be done, that there is most need of such a pick-me-up, and I should like to know from the Minister what he means by the provision. It is at that very time that casual labour has to be employed. There is another point I do not understand, namely, that the tot must be given after 4 p.m. The hon. member for Wepener (Mr. Hugo) has already stated the objections to it, and I think this point should be entirely dropped. The hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger) said&#x2014;and I cannot understand it&#x2014;that he fears as a result of the tot system that the people will get more taste for brandy, in other words the people will first drink wine, and then learn to drink brandy. That may be the experience in the Cape Province, but it is not mine with regard to the natives in the Transvaal. I want to instance a piccanin who could hardly walk, who came on a small basin of brandy and would have drunk it all if he had not been stopped in time. I think other hon. members have also had similar experiences. It seems to me that while the white people come into the world with a repulsion for brandy, it is an inherited sin with the natives to be born with a strong desire for brandy. Therefore the fear of the native learning the use of brandy through the tot does not exist in my opinion, because they come into the world keen on drink. Then there is another point. I can understand that it would be somewhat difficult to grant the privilege&#x2014;because it amounts to that&#x2014;in the towns also because it might lead to illicit liquor dealing, but yet I think that if the system can be applied to villages it will be much better because there is no one in the House who has not yet sinned against the law. Everybody has certainly once, in the form of medicine, given a tot to his labourer and why cannot it be made legal. It is only a point I raise, but one on which I particularly want clarity about the provision that a tot may only be given after 4 o&#x2019;clock, and therefore I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 23, to omit &#x201C;not earlier than 4 o&#x2019;clock in the afternoon.&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 18, to omit &#x201C;the Transvaal&#x201D; in lines 29 and 30, to omit &#x201C;in the Transvaal and&#x201D;.</block>

<p>The people there are totally opposed to the extension of drinking facilities in the Transvaal. I understand the Free State has the right to supply a tot, but they have never used it. I therefore hope I shall get the support of the Free State members against the extension of the tot system in the Transvaal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conroy">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CONROY</person>:</from>

<p>I know that it is difficult for us in the town to form an opinion about the tot system, because it is no burning question with us, but one who sits as a layman in the House in so far as the drink question is concerned, and has to listen to the various experts on liquor will of course subsequently not know where he is, if he were to be influenced particularly by those who have never yet come into touch with farming conditions, and do not know the circumstances on the countryside. I listened to the hon. members for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger) and Port Elizabeth (South) (Sir William Macintosh), and their prejudices against the tot system in the Western Province. I admit I am a layman in regard to the liquor question, but as a practical farmer I have made it my business to get into touch with the practical farmers in the Western Province, and I can say that I have never yet met with drunkenness on the farms as a result of the tot system. What farmer, what man of sense, would intoxicate his workmen before the day&#x2019;s work is done, and not even then? The hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) moved a very fair amendment. I have tried to get into touch with progressive farmers in the Western Province, and they say that if the provision is in force a master can only supply liquor after 4 o&#x2019;clock. It will result in the people on the farm becoming drunk owing to the quantity given at once. It is a fair request to say that at least a pint and a half of liquor shall be given, and to leave it to the farmers to divide it up over the day. The farmers work with these people and have experience, and will see that the work is not interfered with by drunkenness. A challenge has been issued to mention cases where workpeople have got drunk owing to the tot system. I hope the Minister will not be led by the experts, the hon. members for Cape Town (Central) and Port Elizabeth (South) in the matter of the tot system, but by the practical people who have experience of the system. According to the clause, the Minister wants us to retain our privileges in the Free State, but he goes further and even curtails them. There has never been any necessity in the Free State for prosecutions owing to the frequency of drunkenness. We have a tot system in the Free State, and it existed there long before I went to live there, 25 years ago. According to the statistics of the Department of Justice, the Free State is high up in respect of minimum drunkenness, and I want to ask the Minister to let us keep what we have. Clause 98 (2) provides that a man may only give a tot to an Asiatic, native, or coloured person when he has been a month in the service. This is a new provision, and will cause difficulties in practice. The mealie farmers particularly must in time of pressure hire 10 or 20 natives for thrashing. It is very hard work, and the natives are hard at it with the thrashing machine from daylight till dark. Why, then, should we only be allowed to give a tot to a man who has been a month <span class="col_1315-1316" refersTo="page_0724"/>in employment? I hope the Minister will see the unfairness of it. The old Free State law merely provides that a bottle of liquor may be given on a farm under the supervision of the master.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It may be a bottle of brandy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conroy">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CONROY</person>:</from>

<p>That was the old law, but nevertheless no bottles of brandy were given. The position in the Free State differs very much from that in the Cape Province, where there is plenty of liquor, but we will surely not give natives bottles of brandy costing 5s. each, in addition to their wages.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>Peach brandy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conroy">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CONROY</person>:</from>

<p>That occurs in Johannesburg (North), not in the Free State. Then provision is made for the tot being given on the farms, but not in the villages. I hope the Minister will not tamper with the position in the Free State. The Minister knows, with regard to drunkenness and the liquor traffic, that the Free State is a model, and the finger cannot be pointed at us. If the tot system worked well in the Free State, let the Minister take it as a model and rather try to construct than to destroy. I assure hon. members that ministers of religion in the Free State, who are great supporters of local option, often did not even know that the tot system prevailed in the Free State. That shows there has been no abuse. I hope, therefore, that the Minister will take away none of our privileges.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>It is absolutely no use to go to the evidence on the question of the tot system, and I do not propose to weary the House with it. We have had abundant evidence during the last 10 or 15 years as to the effect of the tot system, and those who have not been persuaded already will not be persuaded by any amount of new evidence or any re-hash of the old. Those of us who were satisfied that the evidence produced before the select committee in 1918 and on this Bill was conclusive, feel that, as a matter of custom, it is a bad and evil system, but it seems to me that we shall be taking a very deplorable step indeed if we give the solemn sanction of Parliament to a system which the great bulk of us know to be a curse to the country. Once you have the system embodied as a matter of right in the law, where is it going to stop? Here we have at the present moment the principle of restriction recognized to a certain extent. It may at any time be comparatively easy to enlarge the amount given. If that is not to be the case, I would like to know how the law is going to be carried out. We shall, in my opinion, be making ourselves ridiculous if we put in a proposal of that kind without any sanction whatever to see how the principle of the law is going to be enforced. I have listened with a great deal of interest to our wine farming friends, who support this system. Why they do it, I have really yet failed to find any satisfactory reason, except that ft is an old custom. It does not affect their labour. We have had farmers in this House, we have the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger), who apparently employs on his farm three, four or five times as many labourers as any ordinary farmer in this House does, and he certainly has no difficulty in getting labour. If you look at the evidence given before the Baxter commission by Mr. Duminy, you will find the same thing. The same with regard to Mr. Leonard. His facts given before that commission cannot be set aside. I have listened to the wine farmers supporting this system and the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) said it is necessary for the wine farmer, the people who are working with wine all the time. Will the hon. member tell me this, does he justify the considerable use of the tot system by the grain farmer? If so, on what grounds? It does seem to me to come to this, that the grain farmers who use this system are using it as an inducement to get labour, and not because of the peculiar conditions under which the labourers are carrying on their jobs. I take this clause itself as a proof, in spite of the strong opposition of the wine farmers, of the great necessity of imposing very rigid restrictions on the use of the tot. But I object to the clause not only because it embodies the statutory principle of the giving of the tot in the Cape, but I object to its extension to the Transvaal. What evidence has been given of any demand for its extension to the Transvaal? Still more striking and significant when you come to study the implications of this clause is the fact that Natal is excluded altogether. Why? Because it is recognized that the tot system in Natal would be a very serious and dangerous thing. The whole of the provisions about the tot system in Clause 98 seem to be bad and contradictory and devoid of any principle which would show why it should he extended to one state and kept from another, and the fact of the omission of Natal is to my mind one of the most striking and significant proofs of the argument we are using that this clause should not be in the Bill at all.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>If nobody wants a compromise keep it as it is.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>Where is the compromise in the Transvaal? The Transvaal has not got it at the present time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It happens in the Transvaal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I am talking about the state of the law. It is permissible here, and I understand it is not permissible in the Transvaal, but it is permitted by law in the Free State.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It is the whole idea of trying to keep the middle course.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>Then I ask the Minister to take his courage in his hands, steer the middle course which leads to safety, and drop out <span class="col_1317-1318" refersTo="page_0725"/>the whole clause altogether. If he will put the great weight of his influence in this House in the direction of striking it out altogether, he will have a great majority behind him in support of that action. It is for these reasons that I propose to vote for the amendment of the hon. member for Von Brandis (Mr. Nathan). I also propose to vote for the amendment of the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger), which will have the effect of stopping the whole of the tot system, and I ask the Minister to bear in mind his great opportunity of doing a great public service&#x2014;go one step further and earn the gratitude of all right-thinking men by striking out this clause altogether.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. M. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to support the amendment of the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie), because I think it a great improvement on the clause in the Bill. The latter will only have the effect of increasing drunkenness. To give a worker a pint and a half at 4 p.m. will intoxicate him, it is quite late then, and it will have unpleasant results for the man&#x2019;s family. It is much better to divide up the one and a half pints over the day. I have very great respect for the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger), and his business capacity; I also respect his grey hairs; but however great he may be, he is a child in farming. It is not right for him to come here to teach the farmers what is good for them. The farmers have been giving their workers liquor since they came into the country in the time of the Huguenots, and brought the vine with them, not to make them drunk, but as a medicine to freshen them up. The hon. member stated that the majority of the wine farmers agreed with him, but I want to point out to him that the wine farmers co-operate as the Wine Farmers&#x2019; Association, and that they have all with the exception of very few to-day joined the co-operative societies. I go so far as to say that we may leave it to the workers to take their tot, because they will not take too much. I am a farmer, and also make a little wine, and at threshing time I tell them to drink as much as they want and they do so, without ever taking too much and getting drunk. The coloured people can control themselves just as well as the Europeans. The hon. member for Albany (Mr. Struben) advocated the Eastern Province being exempted from this clause. I ask, why this narrow provincialism? The coloured people there will surely be able to get liquor, and the only consequence will be that smuggling will take place. I think the amendment of the hon. member for Worcester is possibly not the best, but it is the best in existing circumstances.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I consider this is about the most unscientific clause I have ever seen in any Bill. I wonder how the Minister thinks we are going to supervise this Bill with all these absurd and childish restrictions about 4 o&#x2019;clock and so on. Surely we will have to have a policeman standing behind every owner in the country. I wish the Minister would tell us why Natal is being excluded. He told us that it is because he wants to compromise.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>No, at the second reading debate I made a promise that Natal would be excluded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Then where does the Minister arrive with his uniformity? I threatened to wreck the Bill on Clause 91 this afternoon because he could not secure uniformity, and yet he now throws uniformity overboard. Where are you going to land with these extraordinary clauses? We are making a great fuss about extending the tot system, and yet a single policeman can go and put a stop to it right through the country without consulting the Minister or anyone else. I am against the whole clause because I firmly believe that once the native in the Transvaal has the right to receive drink from a white man, the whole liquor law goes by the board. At present the farmer in the Transvaal knows it is illegal, and that keeps him within bounds, but once you tell him it is legal, where is it going to end? The position in the Free State is a totally different one. I have never seen a drunken native in the Free State, although they have a tot system because there are practically no raw tribal natives there.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Why do you call it a tot system?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Because in the Free State law that after 4 o&#x2019;clock you can give a native a tot.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It says nothing about 4 o&#x2019;clock.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Well, leave four out of it, but it is the tot system. The Free State law says you can give a native a tot which must be consumed in your presence. Quite legitimately it has been asked why have we not had the terrible consequences in the Free State that are prophesied for the Transvaal. The Free State has never been a wine-producing country. The Free State native situation is totally different from any other. I do honestly believe that once you allow the Transvaal farmer to give the native a tot you are telling him, in effect, that natives are allowed to have liquor. The Transvaal farmer is no worse than the Free State farmer, but no better, and you are placing this temptation in his way, because of those thousands of raw natives around him. He would be more than human if he stood with a watch at 4 o&#x2019;clock and used a tape measure. In the Cape, I know, they have had the tot system, and it has been entrenched for two centuries. I do not see how we can do away with it there.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Your idea is that the whole clause should go?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Yes.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Perhaps that is best.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from><span class="col_1319-1320" refersTo="page_0726"/>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister has tacitly admitted in drafting this Bill, that it is a danger in Natal, and how does Natal differ from the Transvaal with regard to the natives? Not a scrap. If the danger is so great in Natal it is every whit as great in the Transvaal. I will go further than what I said about this clause just now, and say it is not only unscientific, but it is illogical. How are we going to the country and tell them we have admitted the tot system to the Transvaal when your Government and Minister admit it is a dangerous principle in Natal? I do not know how we can face the public and tell them that. I do not believe the innuendo that the Cape farmers are pushing this because they want to sell their brandy; under this extension of the tot system they will sell no brandy in the northern provinces. Every tot that will be given will be peach or potato brandy, which is a vile, raw liquid. We are going to initiate the native into the evils of liquor. It is now going forth that it is the will of the white people that the natives should start drinking, and acquire a craving for alcohol.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I think there is such a diversity of views on this clause, and every section wants their own, that I am quite prepared to withdraw it. That means that the law remains the same in the Cape as it is to-day. My idea was to get a better position to-day. It is not acceptable in any quarter of the committee. We have allowed the principle of uniformity or partial uniformity to go into a previous section. It is rather absurd to say that your coloured employees must not be given a drink when they can buy it. I had hoped to improve the position: I can find no assistance for a compromise, and I am prepared to withdraw the clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will not withdraw the clause. We are very well satisfied with the way he has met us, but we should like the small amendment passed which has been proposed by the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie). I must say that I am greatly astonished that the supporters of moderation, even total abstainers, were so illogical. I had great respect for the views of hon. members who want to restrict the use of drink as much as possible, but they have run away from that principle this afternoon. Strong supporters of restriction like the hon. members for Rondebosch (M. Close), Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger), Johannesburg (North) (Mr. Geldenhuys), and Hospital (Mr. Papenfus) have all run away from temperance. They voted for allowing the coloured people to buy an unlimited supply of drink by the bottle. Why did they run away? Has the coloured vote anything to do with it? Did that make them alter their attitude? Did they possibly go so far as to hold a caucus meeting about the matter? I have lost my respect for their views. How does the hon. member for Johannesburg (North) justify it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>I voted with you.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>But according to your standpoint you were then on the wrong side. You were not consistent, I was astonished at the division. The hon. member for Wepener (Mr. Hugo) made an excellent speech on the tot system. He spoke as the son of a wine farmer, and set out the position correctly. It is strange that the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) and other hon. members should attack the tot system because according to them it will increase drunkenness and undermine the coloured people. I want to ask the hon. member whether he has ever yet seen a coloured person in the Western Province coming away from a farm drunk? They return to the farms drunk from the canteens. The wine farmers stock a good class of light wine, and see that the workers are not injured in their working capacity. The tots they get in the canteens intoxicate them, but the tot system does not increase drunkenness. I now come to the Transvaal. There we also have a tot system, but it is illicit. There are times when we all give a drink to the natives. It has been said that the liquor we use in the Transvaal costs 10s.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. S. GROBLER</person>:</from>

<p>Do you give it? Then you break the law.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>I know that we all contravene the law, even the hon. member for Bethal (Lt.-Col. H. S. Grobler). Has he never yet been guilty of it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>I never have.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>We have the same system, but with us it is illegal. I go so far as to say that I would rather see a few Europeans abusing the privileges here given, than I would allow the morals of the Transvaal public to be further undermined by doing illegal things. Nothing is so demoralizing as to compel someone to contravene the laws of the land. The hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) says there is no danger of drunkenness in the Free State because the class of people there is so exceptional. But what of the natives in the locations? All the natives in South Africa know the taste of liquor. I ask the Minister not to withdraw the clause, hut to accept the amendment. In any case the provision that a man must have been employed for a month or longer before he can be given a tot must be deleted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>There is a great conflict of opinion about this matter. The practice has existed for years in the Cape Province of giving the workers liquor, and I cannot condemn it much if it is done in a moderate way. As for the Transvaal, however, I want hon. members from the Cape Province to assist us in preventing the tot system being extended there, because the feeling against it is very great.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>Not amongst the farmers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>I want to ask the hon. member for Waterberg (Mr. van Niekerk) whether he knows that on the 16th December at the Waterberg Dingaan&#x2019;s Day festival a resolution <span class="col_1321-1322" refersTo="page_0727"/>against the tot system was passed by about 1,500 people with only 15 dissentients.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>I absolutely deny it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>I have facts to support it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>You read it in the &#x201C;Kerkbode,&#x201D; but it is quite wrong.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>I believe that what the &#x201C;Kerkbode&#x201D; says is right. When the hon. member returns to Waterberg he will have to answer for his statements fin the House. The hon. member also represents the natives as a native commissioner.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>I do not represent them here as a member of Parliament.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>Do not let us attack each other.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>If I were to have a referendum among the natives 99 per cent. would vote in favour of it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>What about the great native chief Khama, who prohibited liquor in his territory.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>He is in Rhodesia.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>Let us follow the example. The hon. member mentioned that I read the &#x201C;Kerkbode.&#x201D; Let me say that in the Transvaal the church councils of all the congregations, I think about 100, with only three exceptions resolved to ask the Minister not to introduce the tot system into the Transvaal. They wanted to send a deputation to him, but owing to his illness, that was impossible. The executive, however, went to see him and he received them very well. I do not believe he promised anything, but he must certainly have been influenced a great deal, and that is presumably the cause that he has withdrawn the proposal to extend the tot system to the Transvaal. The Free State is satisfied with it. Very well, but our conditions are very different. I know that in the Free State no brandy is made from prickly pears, maroelas, etc., but that happens in the Transvaal, and I hope the Free State will help us to keep the tot system out of the Transvaal. The hon. member for Waterberg (Mr. van Niekerk) said he contravened the law. It is a strange thing if a lawmaker openly states here that he breaks the law. I think the Minister ought to have him arrested, and then we shall be rid of him. The Natal members, who have exemption in Natal, will support us against the extension of the system to the Transvaal, and I hope the Cape members will too. I, myself, see much good in the proposal of the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie), because the provision that a master can only issue tots after 4 o&#x2019;clock, I cannot quite understand. If the hon. member will support me, I shall have no great objection to his amendment. I also visit wine farms in the Western Province and know the conditions there. The coloured people do not get drunk on the farms, but in the canteens on Saturday.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will not carry out his intention of withdrawing the clause. There are, doubtless, people in the Western Province who abuse the system now in force. The leading farmers here, especially the wine farmers with whom I recently discussed the matter, are just as ready to fight drunkenness as anyone else. For this reason they are in favour of the provisions of the clause, because their fighting of drunkenness will avail nothing if a certain section abuse the system. For this very section it is necessary that restrictions should be made, and for this reason I hope the Minister will not withdraw the clause. That the adoption of the clause will bring about the extension of the tot system to the northern provinces does not weigh with me. It is not the wine farmers&#x2019; object to benefit by it. We only want to create a reasonable state of affairs. We find it difficult, however, to agree to the clause as printed. I therefore welcome the amendment of the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie). I do not think, however, it provides for all contingencies. It only makes provision for the supply of wine. There are, however, people in the Cape Province who want to give a tot to their workers, but who make no wine. It is therefore better to provide that people who have no wine may give brandy. I therefore move, as an amendment to the amendment proposed by Mr. Heatlie&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In the proposed new sub-section (2) after &#x201C;wine&#x201D;, in line 5, to insert &#x201C;of one-quarter pint spirits</block>

<p>That is only a small quantity, but we want to avoid the appearance of wanting to extend this clause. No one will object to this alteration, not even the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell). I just moved the amendment to avoid trouble in parts that are not wine districts. Now I want to say something about the expression used by the hon. member for Rondebosch (Mr. Close). The hon. member spoke about the tot system as &#x201C;an evil and a curse.&#x201D; I think that is wrong. I am not speaking about the tot system as an institution, hut as I know it, and once practised it myself. To-day I have only white men in my employ. I, however, want to reply to the accusations of the hon. member for Rondebosch and others that it is nothing but an evil. I am convinced that, where properly given, the tot is no evil, but a benefit. I want to quote the words of well known physiologists about the use of alcohol and wine. They say they can be used as a foodstuff. Alcohol burns in the body of the normal person, even in those of the hon. members for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) and Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe). They have laid down that a person can digest two to three ounces of alcohol an hour. It burns better than, for instance, fat or sugar, namely 98 per cent. combustion. The members opposed to the system now want to ridicule it, but it is not ridiculous. A well-known German or <span class="col_1323-1324" refersTo="page_0728"/>Austrian physiologist has proved that liquor is not unhealthy, and for that purpose he has conducted personal experiments. He has used alcohol to fix the effect of the highest effort. It appears from the result, inter alia, that, as I have always maintained in and out of the House alcohol may not be taken on an empty stomach. I have always so regarded it from the moral standpoint, but now it is attested by the physiologists. He took alcohol with tea and a piece of bread, and increased the quantity for three or four hours in succession. His findings are interesting, even to the hon. members for Bezuidenhout and Winburg. He took a large quantity of alcohol without injurious results. It is very strange that the quantity mentioned in the amendment of the hon. member for Worcester is, according to the physiologist, the minimum which a man can digest, namely, 5.10 cubic centimetres an hour. The book is called &#x201C;The Action of Alcohol on Man,&#x201D; and it contains the statement&#x2014;[quotation read]. [Time limit.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#papenfus">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PAPENFUS</person>:</from>

<p>I see the hon. member for Waterberg (Mr. van Niekerk) is not in his place, but is nevertheless in the House. He accused me of running away from the last vote. I want to say that I did not run away from the last vote, and that it was my intention to vote with the Minister. A member, indeed a Minister, was feeling exceedingly ill, and asked me to go out, as he wished to go home. I agreed. I have been looking at the evidence to try and ascertain why it is sought to extend this tot system to the Transvaal. The hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie),&#x2014;I do not see him here&#x2014;in his remarks just now said that this request does not emanate from the wine farmers of the Cape. Well, the relevant evidence which I can find in going through this blue book, is contained, firstly, on page 733. There we find that evidence was given by Messrs. C. W. H. Kohler, Roux and du Toit, representing the wine farmers of the Cape Province. Question 5,286 is&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">You are speaking for the wine industry as a whole?&#x2014;Mr. Roux: Yes, but I am also farming in the Northern Transvaal, and I have 1,000 natives on my farm.</block>

<p>The next question is&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">The recommendation came from the wine industry that the tot system should be spread all over South Africa?&#x2014;Yes.</block>

<p>Further, we have question 5,327&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">You recommend that employers of labour should be allowed to give their labourers the tot? Does that come forward as the united voice of the wine industry?&#x2014;Yes.</block>

<p>Here is the straight evidence of the representatives of the wine farmers who appeared before the select committee. It is quite clear and quite concise and it is unequivocal. It comes forward as the united voice of the wine industry. Further evidence I find on page II consisting of a letter from the Minister of Justice to the chairman of the select committee in which he stated that the National party caucus in the Transvaal had transmitted a resolution to him approving of the issue of tots by farmers to their natives in the Transvaal, etc. That is the only evidence I can find of a desire on the part of anybody to have the tot system extended to the Transvaal. Naturally, one is prompted to ask whether, in view of the restricted giving of alcohol to coloured people in the Cape Province and the consequent loss of monetary value, it is part of the compromise referred to by the Minister that the tot system should be extended to the Transvaal. I can come to no other conclusion. I have now quoted the only evidence I can find asking for the extension of the tot system to the Transvaal, but contra there is a great deal of evidence. I do not want to quote all of it to the House, but I would like to refer to a statement made by Major Herbst, Secretary for Native Affairs. He says&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">It is sincerely hoped that this proposal will not become law. It is an experiment which may have far-reaching results. We cannot afford to tamper with principles which are necessary for the peace and good government of the natives.</block>

<p>A statement like that coming from the secretary for Native Affairs weighs with me far more than the loose, sloppy and unsubstantiated utterances of the hon. member for Waterberg. There is also a telegram from the missionary committee of the Lydenburg Presbytery. [Extracts read.] There is a wealth of testimony of that character from men who have the right to talk. I have not heard of a single farmer in the Transvaal who wants the tot system introduced there. I claim to be a farmer, and I employ a considerable number of natives on my farm. It would be madness to start giving these people liquor. It would upset the whole countryside. If the tot system is to remain in the Cape, I condemn it root and branch. The coloured people have been debased, degraded and debauched through the tot system. This compromise of the Minister, which I can only construe as a desire on the part of the wine farmers to make good any losses by restriction here in the Cape Province by a sale to farmers of neighbouring provinces, is wholly to be condemned. I ask the Minister to pause. There is no means of safeguarding this, and no means of seeing the law is observed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>There is no means to-day.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#papenfus">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PAPENFUS</person>:</from>

<p>I know, but you will be legalizing it. If you once legalize it, then the obligation rests upon the state to see that the law is given effect to, and that is hopeless. I implore the Minister not to think of extending this pernicious and vicious tot system.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>In spite of what has been said in favour of the tot system, it will be recognized there is a strong consensus of opinion in the country in favour of some measure of reform, which has been felt to be urgently needed for a long time. I had high <span class="col_1325-1326" refersTo="page_0729"/>hopes that this year at least some measure of reform would be introduced. The Baxter commission which sat ten years ago, found nothing to say in favour of the tot system and thought something should be done to reform it. To-night I feel the reform of the tot system has sadly come to grief on the rock of party politics?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Where are the party politics?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>Hon. members know full well that party politics weighed much greater than the temperance issue in the vote that was taken this afternoon on the question of off-sales to coloured people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Absolutely unjust.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Withdraw that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member should not reflect upon a vote already taken.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not want to reflect on a vote that has been passed, but I only want to say the clause carried this afternoon has stultified this attempt at reform. I cannot understand how men can vote in favour of off-sales for coloured people and then be strongly opposed to the tot system.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>That is not our fault.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>Coloured men may hoard it on the farm.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Where do the party politics come in?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>It was very clear to me this afternoon&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Order.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>If the Chairman rules me out of order I cannot reply to that. I think no reply is necessary. Hon. members on the other side know full well what happened this afternoon.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>What about your own side?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I know a number of men also voted from this side, but these were not the men who have been fighting for the cause of temperance in this House. I thought members who were fighting for temperance would feel this was a measure of reform which was urgently needed. In these circumstances I do not feel justified in bringing any further pressure to bear upon the Minister in regard to the reform of the tot system. If coloured men can carry drinks from the canteen to the farm, worse liquor than he gets from the farmer, I cannot see where there is any reform of the tot system. In the Free State it is not really a tot system. In the Cape Province we have had the system all along, but the tot system has only developed in the Western Province among the wine farmers. With regard to the Transvaal, after our experience in the Free State I did not think there was much danger in introducing it in the Transvaal, but certain arguments have been advanced which have weighed with me more strongly than I thought they would. But personally I doubt whether the system would be abused as gravely as many of these men think. I was in favour of applying a system which has been tried in this country and which has not shown itself open to very much abuse, and therefore I thought we could bring about a certain amount of reform in the Western Province by adopting the Free State system, and I thought this was a fair attempt to compromise, but under these circumstances I do not see how we can carry out a compromise owing to the action of members of the Opposition this afternoon, and I think the Minister is perfectly justified in withdrawing the whole clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. and rev. gentleman who yielded to the crack of the party whip this afternoon might have devoted the words he has addressed to the committee to one of his leaders, the Minister of the Interior. He was seen to vote on a different side of the House from that on which the hon. gentleman voted. I think it is parliamentary to call your attention to, and it might be reflected from the Chair, what a great dramatist wrote&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind; The thief doth fear each bush an officer.</block>

<p>If it would be within the bounds of parliamentary usage, I would in all sincerity refer that quotation to my hon. friend. We expected from him a certain amount of Christian charity preached in this House, and instead we find from him, who considers himself a paragon, the attribution of the very worst motives to those who happen to differ from him. We have not only heard that from him in this House, but also in regard to political problems in the country within the past two years. We would have expected him to attribute to other people motives equally honest as those of himself. Before the hon. and rev. gentleman was heard of, the question of the tot system was discussed in the Parliament of the Cape of Good Hope and since then in the Union Parliament; and I have never held any other opinion, as a farmer living in a wine district, than that the tot system should be done away with, not because it is utilized by the wine farmers for financial considerations, but because we in the wine and fruit district areas would have equally good labour and no difficulty in securing it without that system. I happen to live in a valley where there are progressive farmers, and we have good labour&#x2014;as good as in any part of the Union, and none of us gives a tot to our men, who are not more drunken than the labourers on other farms to which the tot system applies. My objection to the system is that it physically deteriorates the labourers, notwithstanding what my hon. friend over the way has said, who has quoted how excellent in building the human frame a certain amount of alcohol is; but there are <span class="col_1327-1328" refersTo="page_0730"/>other authorities who hold different views. Under a system whereby young people of 16 years of ago and upwards have been brought up, getting from two to five, and even six, tots a day, it undermines their system, and the youths grow up with a certain craving for alcoholic stimulant. The result is, not from the high ethical standard, or that of my hon. friend, which he would not give credit for as far as any hon. member on this side of the House is concerned, but from the commercial standard, it would give us healthier and better labourers than at the present moment. It is on that account that I would like my hon. friend to accept the amendment of my hon. friend the member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger). Everything that prevents encouraging the taste for alcohol in the labourers is in the interest of the farming population itself. In those districts where the tot system is in vogue, on Mondays it is very often difficult to get efficient labour.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>My hon. friend lives in a district where the principles carried out in my valley are not adopted. The absorption of light wine by these labourers may become a habit, and at the age of 21 they are more likely to take liquor in excess than if in their youth they had never been trained to take it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_rensburg">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN RENSBURG</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister said that he was prepared to withdraw the clause, but I hope he will not. It is very necessary to have a certain amount of restriction of the supply of liquor to servants. I hope, however, that the Minister will be prepared to accept amendments. I consider the amendment of the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) very fair. I agree with it. The farmer is best able to say what is the best way of giving a tot to his workmen. It is much better to distribute it over the day than merely to give it after 4 p.m. Now we come to the Free State. In the Free State the farmer has the right to give a tot, but it is laid down here that it can only be given to people who have been in employment for at least a month. Then the tot may only be given after 4 p.m., and it may not be given in the villages. The Free State farmers are not used to those restrictions. There are times when we are very busy on the farms, and when we employ a large number of casual labourers. They do not remain a month. See what troubles the farmer can get into if he cannot give these people a tot. It often happens that the farmer in busy times goes to the village with his waggons and servants, but under this clause he may not give the servants a tot in the village. It will only cause trouble in the Free State. The provisions are wrong, and I shall be glad if the Minister will alter them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nieuwenhuize">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NIEUWENHUIZE</person>:</from>

<p>It seems to me that it is absolutely necessary to protest against the word &#x201C;tot-system&#x201D; in relation to the Transvaal and the Free State. What is a system? A system is something that is followed throughout the country, something which is an established practice. The practice followed by the Free State farmers of giving something once a day to their servants when they feel so disposed is no system. The word tot-system does not, therefore, apply to what is here proposed. I am surprised to hear such strong disapprobation of the proposal, and to hear such prophecies about the misery that awaits us. There is absolutely no danger of the misery referred to overtaking the farming population of the Transvaal, if what already exists in the Free State, namely, the right to give our servants a tot once a day, is extended there. The hon. member for Johannesburg (North) (Mr. Geldenhuys) spoke of the great support which the opposition to this part of the Bill has had in the Transvaal, but this support was principally based on a wrong interpretation of the Bill. I have seen one of the notices convening a meeting which was sent out to the persons who were to take part in the deputation. It states that if the Minister&#x2019;s proposal goes through, every Transvaal farmer will be compelled to give a jug of wine to his workers every day. That is stated in the convening notice that I saw. When such a thing is represented everyone will, of course, disapprove of it. Here we have the great difference between what the Transvaal farmers want, and what is said therein. No farmer in the Transvaal or the Free State wants to adopt the Western Province system. They will not do so. It would, moreover, be much too costly. Now I am surprised that, although the large majority of the Transvaal farmers ask for the extension to them of the provisions about supplying one tot a day as prevails in the Free State, there should be such great opposition. The opposition to a great extent is due to the wrong interpretation given to the words of the Bill. It is made out, inter alia, as if everybody is free to give just as much drink to his servants as he wishes, without any supervision being exercised by Government. That is, however, not so. Everyone reading pars. (3) and (4) will clearly see that there is actually a keen supervision exercised. If a farmer commits an abuse and gives his servants too much liquor, then the order can immediately be issued preventing him from any longer having the right of giving tots. In the second place, it is provided that when it appears to a magistrate that a farmer is giving bad, or unhealthy, liquor, it can also be immediately stopped. In the third place, an entire ward, a portion of a district or of a province can be excluded by the Government from the application of this clause. The Bill, therefore, contains adequate limitations. I think we should help each other, and, as it is asked in the Transvaal and the Free State, to allow the existing practice in the Free State, and to extend the Free State law to the Transvaal, it is our duty to meet those desires. The hon. members from the Cape and Natal must assist us in that. We are not opposed to accepting the amendment of the hon. member for <span class="col_1329-1330" refersTo="page_0731"/>Worcester (Mr. Heatlie). Let the Cape retain its system. Let the Transvaal and the Free State have their own system, and Natal be entirely exempted. I sincerely hope the Minister will not withdraw the clause. The Transvaal farmers have for a long time been longing for the readjustment of an impossible position. There are a few points that I should like to see altered. The Minister has already proposed an improvement, namely, the deletion of the provision that a servant must be employed a month before he can get a tot. The provision that the liquor shall only be given after 4 p.m. can also be scrapped. I cannot quite understand why the proviso to par. (2) has been put in. Why should a resident in a village not be allowed to supply his servants with liquor? Why cannot he give a tot to his good servants in the afternoon? Why must this difference be made? I think it is altogether unnecessary. I do not believe that the villages are excluded to-day in the Free State, and, therefore, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit all the words after &#x201C;agent&#x201D;, in line 29, to &#x201C;area&#x201D;, in line 32.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#hugo">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HUGO</person>:</from>

<p>It is clear from the debate that hon. members for each province would rather have their own tot system or their own restrictions. The greatest difficulty is caused by par. (2) which mentions the hours when a tot can be given. Then there is the difficulty that employers within a municipality may not give liquor to their employees. To solve all trouble in connection with this, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit sub-section (2) and to substitute the following new sub-section:</block>

<ol>

<li>(2) In the Provinces of the Transvaal and the Orange Free State any bona fide employer may to his male employee of 18 years or above that age supply gratis one single drink of intoxicating liquor per day in quantity not exceeding one quarter of a pint in the case of spirituous liquor or not exceeding one pint in the case of liquor of any other kind.</li>

</ol>

</speech>

<speech by="#sephton">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SEPHTON</person>:</from>

<p>When the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) associated himself with the hon. member for Hoopstad (Mr. Conroy), I do not think he fully followed what the hon. member for Hoopstad said, who claiming to speak as a practical farmer, and in defence of the tot system, said that no practical farmer made his servants drunk until at least the day&#x2019;s work was done.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conroy">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CONROY</person>:</from>

<p>That is a wrong construction on my words.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#sephton">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SEPHTON</person>:</from>

<p>Those are the words the member used. He may not have meant just what he said, but it seemed to me to give away his whole case. I more especially rose to say that the tot system has not found its way into our part of the country at all, and therefore I am very strongly in favour of the amendment of the hon. member for Albany (Mr. Struben). I am strongly opposed to seeing drink brought nearer to our borders in the Eastern Province. Our homes are secure and safe, which they would not be if liquor obtained a footing there. I have heard men in the Western Province say that when they sent their boys with wagons to the drops they were never quite sure when they would return, and often they had to send out to see what had become of their wagons, which they sometimes found deserted on the road and the drivers missing. That is one of the effects of the tot system, and also to the driver being able to obtain liquor so easily. During all my experience as a farmer, and I have had to send many wagons to town, I have no recollection of ever having had my native driver drunk and unable to return home in consequence of such drunkenness, which is due to the fact that our natives are sober. They do not get drink there and are not contaminated in the manner they are in the Western Province. Recently a congress of the Bantu people was held in Aliwal North and they sent me a resolution desiring me to protest against the tot system and certain other features of this Bill. The tot system, they say, is very strongly deprecated for the reason that it creates an insatiable thirst which ends in drunkenness. That, sir, is the considered opinion of representatives of the Bantu people at a congress held at Aliwal North during the course of this month. They are just as much opposed to it as we are, and I say it will be a sorry day when the tot system extends to our borders. I hope nothing will be done to make it easier for natives to obtain liquor, as would be the case under the tot system.</p>

<p>On the motion of the Minister of Justice it was agreed to report progress and ask leave to sit again.</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Progress reported; House to resume in committee to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1928-02-22T22:35:00">10.35 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

