---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol10 - TUESDAY 13 MARCH 1928'
layout: debate
year: 1928
month: MARCH
month_slug: Mar
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>TUESDAY, 13th MARCH, 1928.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1928-03-13T14:21:00">2.21 p.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: LONG SERVICE INCREMENT.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON (for Sir Thomas Watt)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether the Administration will consider the advisability of paying the long service increment to all railway and harbour employees who have served for seventeen years and longer?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#anderson">

<from><span class="col_2011-2012" refersTo="page_1072"/>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The Administration has given careful consideration to this question but regrets its inability to extend the scope of the long service increment.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>DIAMONDS IN NAMAQUALAND.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the extent of the diamond reserve in Namaqualand;</li>

<li>(2) what number of claims have been pegged in the diamond area there;</li>

<li>(3) what number of claims are held therein by the H. Merensky Syndicate;</li>

<li>(4) what number of claims are held there respectively by other syndicates or companies;</li>

<li>(5) what is the value and weight (carats) of diamonds recovered as the result of operations in Namaqualand;</li>

<li>(6) whether work is being carried on at present by syndicates or companies, and, if so, why is it allowed to continue;</li>

<li>(7) if all work has been prohibited, when was it stopped;</li>

<li>(8) how many claims are held by private individuals;</li>

<li>(9) in what areas or localities do syndicates or companies hold their claims;</li>

<li>(10) in what areas do private persons, if any, hold claims; and</li>

<li>(11) to whom have discovery rights been granted?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#hay">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) There is no diamond reserve in Namaqualand. The whole district, in common with the rest of the Union, is closed to prospecting for precious stones.</li>

<li>(2) None.</li>

<li>(3) None.</li>

<li>(4) None.</li>

<li>(5) 59,298 carats valued at &#x00A3;401,922 up to 31st January last,</li>

<li>(6) On the farm Kleinzee which is owned by Messrs. Ronaldson and van Praagh in freehold with no reservation of precious stones rights to the Crown, and on which precious stones were discovered and digging operations carried on prior to 1st April, 1927, work is at present proceeding. If the hon. member will refer to section 2 (1) of the Precious Stones Act, 1927, he will see that the Government has no power to prohibit work on farms of this nature. All that can be done is to control the output under section 115 of the Act and arrangements in this connection have been made.</li>

<li>(7) Prospecting in Namaqualand was prohibited in February, 1927, and I am unaware of any prospecting having taken place since then.</li>

<li>(8) None.</li>

<li>(9) Falls away.</li>

<li>(10) Falls away.</li>

<li>(11) Discovery certificates which on proclamation of the ground will entitle the holders to select their claims have been issued to the following: V. Dick, S. Rabinowitz, R. Kennedy, J. Papert, H. Gelb, J. C. Caplan, E. Reuning, and a further certificate has been, or will be, issued to J. E. Carstens.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>PENSIONS: EX-REPUBLICANS&#x2019; WIDOWS.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether there are any widows of ex-republican officials in receipt of pensions; and</li>

<li>(2) whether widows of Union military officers receive pensions, and, if so, whether they are debarred by reason of residence in Rhodesia?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#hay">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No, unless an award was made under the War Special Pensions Act, 1919, in consequence of such official&#x2019;s death on or as the result of military service.</li>

<li>(2) Yes. There are no restrictions as to residence.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RAILWAYS: ENGINES, TENDERS FOR.</heading>

<question by="#richards" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Maj. RICHARDS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What tenders for the supply of engines for the South African Railways have been called by the Government since its accession to office;</li>

<li>(2) upon what dates were the various tenders called for;</li>

<li>(3) what countries sent in tenders;</li>

<li>(4) what were the differences in prices quoted;</li>

<li>(5) what tenders were accepted and for how many engines;</li>

<li>(6) whether any engines, excluding electric units, were ever purchased without formal tenders being called for; if so, (a) why, (b) in what numbers, and (c) at what cost;</li>

<li>(7) what proportion of the total number of engines purchased or ordered will be paid for, (a) out of Loan Funds, and (b) out of the Renewals Fund;</li>

<li>(8) in what country were the loans raised, and on what terms; and</li>

<li>(9) whether loans raised in Great Britain for railway and other purposes have always been on the most advantageous terms?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#richards">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) to (7) I lay upon the Table a statement embodying the information asked for.</li>

<li>(8) Since Union the earlier practice of earmarking loans to the objects for which they were raised has been abandoned. The proceeds of all loans raised are credited to the Consolidated Revenue Fund and expended therefrom in accordance with the annual loan appropriation made by Parliament, so it is not possible to say definitely whether the moneys expended in connection with these tenders were raised in Great Britain or locally. The loans raised during the period 1924-&#x2019;25 to 1927-&#x2019;28 are as <span class="col_2013-2014" refersTo="page_1073"/>1924-&#x2019;25: London loan, 6 per cent. inscribed stock, repayable 1940-&#x2019;50, &#x00A3;8,000,000; issue price 99&#x00BD;. Local loan: 5 per cent. local registered stock (10 years) repayable 1935, &#x00A3;2,400,000; issue price par. 1925-&#x2019;26: London loans, 5 per cent. inscribed stock, repayable 1945-&#x2019;75, first issue, &#x00A3;4,000,000; issue price 99&#x00BD;; 5 per cent. inscribed stock, repayable 1945-&#x2019;75; second issue, &#x00A3;4,000,000; issue price 99&#x00BD;. Local loan, 5 per cent. local registered stock, repayable 1940-&#x2019;50, &#x00A3;6,667,296; issue price par (includes &#x00A3;4,361,363 6 per cent. local registered stock, 1927-&#x2019;32, converted into this issue). 1926-&#x2019;27: London loan, 5 per cent. inscribed stock, repayable 1945-&#x2019;75, third issue, &#x00A3;4,000,000; issue price par. Local loan, 5 per cent. local registered stock, repayable 1940-&#x2019;50, &#x00A3;8,332,704; issue price par (includes &#x00A3;3,574,447 6 per cent. local registered stock, 1927-&#x2019;32, converted into this issue). 1927-&#x2019;28: London loan, 5 per cent. inscribed stock, repayable 1945-&#x2019;75; fourth issue, &#x00A3;5,000,000; issue price 99&#x00BD;. Local loan, 5 per cent. local registered stock repayable 1935, &#x00A3;4,600,000; issue price par.</li>

<li>(9) All the loans raised in Great Britain during the period were issued in accordance with the provisions of section 9 of Act 22 of 1917 (the General Loans Consolidation and Amendment Act), &#x201C;upon the best and most favourable terms obtainable.&#x201D;</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>May we have the statement read? It is a matter of very great importance.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I will read it, certainly.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>I referred to the tenders.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>It is a very big volume of information. I am afraid I cannot agree to take up the time of the House. I am laying it on the Table.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>Arising out of the Minister&#x2019;s reply, do all loans raised by the Union Government in London enjoy the privilege of being termed trustee security loans by virtue of British legislation favourable to the Union?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>That is a question which the hon. member must put on paper for my colleague, the Minister of Finance.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>May I not ask the Minister, is it not a fact that without such favourable legislation, the Union Government would have to negotiate these loans on the same footing as any foreign nation?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#nicholls">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I think hon. members will realize it is necessary to have notice of these questions. I think it would have been better if they had put them on paper.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>In regard to the purchase of material in Germany, is the Minister aware that the official statistics of comparative wages in January, 1927, show that the workers in Germany received only 62 per cent. of the wages paid for similar work in Great Britain?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member must see that the Minister is not prepared to reply to questions like that without notice.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>It arises out of the reply which the Minister refused to read.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I have already indicated I am not prepared to reply.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>Will the Minister tell us was one of the engines, 187.5 tons, bought in Germany found too heavy to negotiate some of the bridges on the South African railways?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>I am not an encyclop&#x04D5;dia. I am always prepared to give information after consulting my officers, and if the hon. member will put the question on paper I will give him full information.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>Has the Minister not heard of a monster engine not being able to be brought from Salt River works to Cape Town because it fouled the platform at Woodstock?</p>

</question>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>A very badly informed Minister!</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>DEFENCE: LIEUT. BENTLEY&#x2019;S POSITION.</heading>

<question by="#giovanetti" to="#minister_of_defence">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. GIOVANETTI</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What were the terms of appointment of Lieut. Bentley in the South African air force;</li>

<li>(2) whether that officer obtained permission from the Defence Department to take the flight from London to the Cape;</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government has considered the desirability of suitably recognising Lieut. Bentley&#x2019;s record flight;</li>

<li>(4) why no official recognition has been made by the Government of the flight; and</li>

<li>(5) whether Lieut. Bentley has been retired from the service?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#giovanetti">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Lieut. Bentley was appointed to the S.A. air force on 28.10.23 for a period of three years and re-appointed on 28.10.26 for a further period of three years, in accordance with the regulations relating to the appointment of flying officers in the S.A. Permanent Force.</li>

<li>(2) Yes, and he was granted leave for the purpose.</li>

<li>(3) and</li>

<li>(4) On the representations of the Union Government his Majesty the King has conferred upon Lieut. Bentley the Air Force Cross in recognition of the distinguished service to aviation by his flight. The decoration in question was duly presented to Lieut. Bentley by his Excellency the Governor-General.</li>

<li>(5) Lieut. Bentley tendered the resignation of his appointment in the S.A. air force on the 26th January, 1928, and this has been accepted.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#giovanetti" to="#minister_of_defence">

<num>VI.</num>

<p>Standing over.</p>

</question>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_2015-2016" refersTo="page_1074"/>POSTS: FARM TELEPHONE LINES.</heading>

<question by="#duncan" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Mr. DUNCAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is the case that in the construction of farm telephone lines imported steel poles are being used;</li>

<li>(2) whether suitable wooden poles could not be obtained from the Forest Department or elsewhere; and</li>

<li>(3) what is the cost of the steel poles per mile as compared with that of locally-grown wooden poles?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#duncan">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) Suitable wooden poles have not so far been obtainable and, unless specially treated with chemical or other process, have failed. Experiments are at present being made with wooden poles which have received various types of special treatment by the Forestry Department before installation, but these are not entirely satisfactory and sufficient time has not elapsed to secure comparative data as to life and service.</li>

<li>(3) The cost of a steel pole, landed here, is approximately 10s. 5d. and that of a wooden pole, 7s. 6d., but taking transport costs and increased cost of erection there is very little difference. The life of the steel pole is, of course, very much greater. I would like to supplement that answer by saying I have made every effort to induce local enterprise to endeavour to produce these things for our use in South Africa, and I even got together on one occasion representatives of the moulding industry and urged upon them that they might work co-operatively in order to produce for a start the basis of our farm poles, but unfortunately the cost as they represented it to be was prohibitive.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>Mr. GILSON</from>

<p>Has the Minister considered the effect of these poles being destroyed?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#gilson">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>The hon. member ought to address his question over there [the Opposition]. He can rely on all the facts being taken into consideration.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>Mr. GILSON</from>

<p>Is there any reason why these wooden poles should not be used in the towns as well as on the farms?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#gilson">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>None at all.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>PHOENIX DIAMOND MINE.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Upon what date was the Phoenix Diamond Mine (Orange Free State) proclaimed;</li>

<li>(2) whether the mine had been officially surveyed upon that date, and, if so, how many claims were proved;</li>

<li>(3) what was the total registered output of the mine up to the date of proclamation;</li>

<li>(4) what is the total to recent date;</li>

<li>(5) whether the Government is aware of the sub-division of the farm upon which the mine is situated;</li>

<li>(6) what company represented owners&#x2019; or prospectors&#x2019; rights or conducted the correspondence;</li>

<li>(7) what is the Government&#x2019;s share agreed upon; and</li>

<li>(8) whether the Minister will lay the correspondence upon the Table or permit the perusal thereof by any member of Parliament?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#hay">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The Phoenix Diamond Mine has not yet been proclaimed.</li>

<li>(2) The mine has been surveyed and contains approximately 38 claims.</li>

<li>(3) Falls away.</li>

<li>(4) The total registered output of this mine up to 29th February last, is 7,236 carats, valued at &#x00A3;32,887.</li>

<li>(5) No, but if the farm has been subdivided this will not affect the position.</li>

<li>(6) Phoenix Diamonds, Limited.</li>

<li>(7) Under the Mining of Precious Stones Ordinance No. 4 of 1904 of the Orange Free State which applies to this mine in terms of section 2 (2) of the Precious Stones Act No. 44 of 1927, the Government&#x2019;s share amounts to 40 per cent. Under section 50 of the said Ordinance the Government is negotiating for the leasing of the Crown&#x2019;s share in this mine to the Phoenix Diamonds, Limited.</li>

<li>(8) In the case of the negotiations referred to, the Company has placed before my department a good deal of information in regard to its position and this must be treated as confidential. I am therefore unable to comply with the hon. member&#x2019;s request.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. HAY:</from>

<p>May I ask further, in reference to this mine, whether any cables passed between those representing the owners or from the department, and himself when he was away?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#hay">

<from>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>No cables passed.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#van_der_merwe" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>*Dr. VAN DER MERWE</from>

<p>As the mine is in my constituency and great interest is taken in it, I should like to ask the Minister what he proposes to do as regards the proclamation?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#van_der_merwe">

<from>*The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>I am afraid I cannot give you a definite answer at present.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>DIAMONDS: MR. AREND BRINK.</heading>

<question by="#hay" to="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. HAY</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries whether, in view of the Government&#x2019;s refusal to lay upon the Table of the House the official correspondence relating to the acceptance of Mr. Arend Brink as adviser on diamond control to the Government since 1920, the Minister will consent to such correspondence being made available for perusal by any member of Parliament?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries" to="#hay">

<from><span class="col_2017-2018" refersTo="page_1075"/>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES:</from>

<p>Yes. The hon. member can see the correspondence at my office if he so desires.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>DOORNKOP ESTATES.</heading>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) By what date is it expected that the sugar mill which is in course of erection on the Doornkop Estates will be completed and ready for crushing operations;</li>

<li>(2) what extent of land has been planted to sugar cane on the Doornkop Estates to date and what acreage is sufficiently matured to be available for milling purposes at the present time;</li>

<li>(3) what acreage is it estimated will be available for crushing when the mill is ready;</li>

<li>(4) whether the employment of natives by tenant farmers is prohibited under the regulations governing the Tenant Farmers Extension Scheme, Doornkop;</li>

<li>(5) whether, notwithstanding such prohibition, natives have been so employed, and, if so, on what grounds were the regulations departed from;</li>

<li>(6) whether the progress made in establishing cane and erecting the sugar mill is sufficiently advanced to warrant the assumption that the loan of &#x00A3;70,000 granted by the Trades Facilities Board of Great Britain for the erection of the mill will be repaid on due date;</li>

<li>(7) whether the agreement between the Department of Labour and Mr. Nathan Rosenberg of the Doornkop Estates has been amended so as to provide for the formation of a limited liability company instead of a co-operative society to secure the individual holdings and the cane products of the 100 tenant farmers placed on the Doornkop Estates by the Department of Labour; if so,</li>

<li>(8) whether the Minister will lay a copy of the amended agreement upon the Table; and</li>

<li>(9) upon what date were a number of European youths sent to the Doornkop Estates for employment there, upon whose authority were they sent, and upon what conditions were they employed there?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The mill will be ready for working in May next.</li>

<li>(2) 5,000 acres have been planted. No mature cane is available at the present time.</li>

<li>(3) Nothing will be available as all the cane is plant cane, some of which will only mature during the latter end of the year.</li>

<li>(4) Yes. Regulation (20) prohibits employment of natives by trainees. It reads&#x2014;<br/> No tenant or member of his family may employ natives or coloured persons. Europeans, however, may be employed on such terms and conditions as may be approved by the Minister.</li>

<li>(5) In order to expedite the work of planting some natives were employed on one or two occasions by the department on the Minister&#x2019;s authority under Regulation (31), which reads&#x2014;<br/>Should the welfare officer report that a tenant and his family is unable to cultivate the plot of land allotted to him satisfactorily, the Minister may, upon the recommendation of the supervising welfare officer cause one or more persons to be engaged to assist the tenant, provided, however, the cost of such additional labour will be borne by the tenant concerned.</li>

<li>(6) This is a matter which concerns the Doornkop Sugar Estates which is responsible for the repayment of this loan. The Labour Department is responsible for financing the trainees until the sum of &#x00A3;70,000 is repaid, and it cannot give the date when this will have been done.</li>

<li>(7) No.</li>

<li>(8) Falls away.</li>

<li>(9) Thirty European youths were sent to Doornkop during February and March, 1927, upon the authority of the Department of Labour to assist the trainees. They were furnished with free rail warrants to and from their homes and during the period which the work lasted&#x2014; approximately two months&#x2014;they were paid 4s. 6d. per day.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>I would like the Minister to tell the House what wage he pays those natives.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>That I cannot say. I presume the ordinary local rate.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#hon_member" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>An HON. MEMBER:</from>

<p>Eight shillings?</p>

</question>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. ANDERSON</from>

<p>What is the ordinary rate?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>You did not ask what the natives were paid.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>What position is Mr. Rosenberg assigned under the proposed amended agreement, and at what rate of pay?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#nel">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>There is no proposed amended agreement. The agreement which was entered into with the company remains as it is.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>How does the Minister reconcile that with his statement in the House last year that the co-operative agreement had to go by the board, and a new agreement entered into on a limited liability basis?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>That has not yet been done.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Is the position now that there will be no money available to reduce the indebtedness to the Trade Facilities Board in 1928?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Hardly likely. In 1929 there will be.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>How does the Minister reconcile that with his statement last year&#x2014; with reference to 1928?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#anderson">

<from><span class="col_2019-2020" refersTo="page_1076"/>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>If the hon. member had only caused a little rainfall to come earlier&#x2014;</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>Are these tenant farmers continuing to draw subsidies from the Government until the end of next year?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#nicholls">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Those are the terms of the agreement.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nicholls" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. NICHOLLS</from>

<p>How long does that operate?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#nicholls">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Up to a period of three years.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>When does that expire?</p>

</question>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Col. D. REITZ</from>

<p>The whole thing will be a wash out, anyway.</p>

</question>

<question by="#gilson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. GILSON:</from>

<p>Is that the total land available for the planting of cane?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>That is the total extent of the farm for planting purposes. The total area is 7,000 acres.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Has the Government under consideration buying out the interest of Mr. Rosenberg?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#anderson">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>That I am not prepared to say.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>Is the Minister aware that the unfortunate hundred tenant farmers have as much confidence in Mr. Nathan Rosenberg as the National Council of the Labour party in the Minister himself?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member must not ask frivolous questions.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>Will the Minister explain how he accounts for his most definite statement last year that 2,500 acres of cane would be ready for cutting in 1928.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I have made no such statement.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. MARWICK:</from>

<p>On 6th June, 1927&#x2014;Hansard has it.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>The hon. member knows more about it than I do.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#robinson" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. ROBINSON:</from>

<p>I understand that one of the conditions was that tenants were not to employ natives or coloured people. What reason is there for this prohibition against the employment of coloured people?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#robinson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>The scheme was for white labour, and it was to prove that sugar-growing could be done by white labour without the aid of outside labour. This would have been successful had it not been for drought, and on one or two occasions natives were employed. That is the ordinary condition of the agreement.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#close" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. CLOSE</from>

<p>Was that regulation imposed in pursuance of a white labour or a civilized labour policy?</p>

</question>

<question by="#barlow" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. BARLOW</from>

<p>If Mr. Rosenberg&#x2019;s scheme fails is the Minister prepared to immolate Mr. Rosenberg and establish a regency?</p>

</question>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>Do I understand that the mill will be ready in May, but no cane will be ready for crushing for another twelve months?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>The cane will be ready for crushing towards the end of the year.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>Why does not the Minister rise when he is replying?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I am not rising any more. I have risen enough.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>Do I understand from the Minister&#x2019;s answer that the mill will be ready next May, but no cane will be available for crushing for another twelve months?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>That is wrong.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#pretorius" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>*Lt.-Col. N. J. PRETORIUS</from>

<p>*Lt.-Col. N. J. PRETORIUS:</p>

<p>I should like to know whether it is a fact that a tenant from whom the ground is taken away has to work for another tenant for a whole week, and to ask whether he thinks this is fair.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#pretorius">

<from>*Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member can put the question on the order paper.</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Put it on the paper.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>Can the Minister reply with reference to young Europeans who were sent to work there&#x2014;will he explain how it was that on February 22, 1927, when asked what young men were sent to Doornkop, he said he had no information on the point.</p>

</question>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>I take it I am within the rules of the House in trying to get some information from the Minister. I again ask when will the first cane be ready for crushing in the mill, which the Minister says will be finished in May.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#blackwell">

<from>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>Towards the end of the year.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>May I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to express an opinion whether a Minister in giving a reply to a question should remain in his place, and bark the answer across the floor, or whether he should address an hon. member with the same courtesy as he is addressed by hon. members?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member should not use terms like &#x201C;barking across the floor of the House.&#x201D;</p>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>I withdraw the term &#x201C;barking&#x201D; and I repeat the question. We have to rise when we put a question. Is the Minister in order in remaining in his seat when giving an answer to a legitimate supplementary question?</p>

</question>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, before you give your ruling I wish to read rule 59. I take it that the answer is given to you, sir, <span class="col_2021-2022" refersTo="page_1077"/>and, through you, to the House. If a Minister opens his mouth and makes an utterance by talking, I take it that shows a desire to speak. Under the circumstances I take it that whether in the case of an ordinary member or a Minister, if he opens his mouth and talks, the proper course is to rise.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I quite agree with the hon. member that anyone who wishes to address the House must rise in accordance with rule 59. But with regard to these supplementary questions, the tendency is to become entirely frivolous, and the question is whether the Minister making a reply does intend to address the Chair. I think to a very large extent hon. members are themselves responsible.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>The question I put was an entirely serious one with a desire to gain information and without any desire to rag the Minister. May I now repeat the question? The Minister having told us that the mill will be ready in May, when does he expect the first cane to be ready for crushing?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>Perhaps it would be better if the hon. member put the question on the paper.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>If the practice of putting supplementary questions is to be allowed, I submit that they follow only from the answers given by Ministers. If the Minister says he cannot answer my question and would prefer that it be put on paper, I will do so. I am anxious to have the position defined, and I want the Minister to reply to the question with proper courtesy.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>Is the Minister prepared to reply to the question?</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Should not the dignity of the House and the Chair demand that when a question is put to a Minister he should rise when he gives a reply?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>May I, especially in consequence of what has just happened, say a few words? Well, sir, I think that everybody in this House must take the strongest exception to the manner in which the right or the privilege of putting supplementary questions has been abused of late in the most &#x2026; I appeal to hon. members.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Are we going to have a discussion on this matter? I rise to a point of order.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The right hon. member has raised a point of order, and, I take it, the Prime Minister is speaking to it.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>I want to know if the Prime Minister makes this statement, will hon. members have an opportunity of discussing what he said?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>*The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>Hon. members must blame themselves for the attitude taken up by the Minister.</p>

<p>I again say with regard to this that members have themselves to blame if they are not courteously answered.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>I rise to a point of order. I protest as a member of this House against the Prime Minister being allowed to lecture this House. I rise on this point of order because it is a serious constitutional question.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>*The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I must stand on my rights, and I say that the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt)</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON</from>

<p>Sir, is it not against the rules of this House that a member who commences in one language should continue in another?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#byron">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I took it as a new beginning. The right hon. member rose to a point of order which I took as practically an insult to the Ministers here. I rose on the specific point of order&#x2014;</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#prime_minister">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>I rose, Mr. Speaker&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>I will not give way.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_labour">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>I ask Mr. Speaker to give a ruling.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I cannot allow this discussion to proceed, and if there is to be any further discussion on the matter, hon. members must put a notice of motion on the paper. I am not going to allow any further discussion.</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<p>I just want to say, Mr. Speaker&#x2014;</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#thomas_smartt">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>Order!</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>DELIMITATION COMMISSION.</heading>

<question by="#nel" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Mr. NEL</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the Government has now received the report of the Delimitation Commission; and, if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether the Minister will state (a) when the report is to be laid upon the Table of the House, and (b) when it is to be published for general information?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#nel">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) No.</li>

<li>(2) The report will be laid on the Table as soon as it is received.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister to repeat that, we cannot hear a word of what he said.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<p>[Answer repeated.] The report will be published in due course.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_2023-2024" refersTo="page_1078"/>JUSTICE: NATIVE KILLED BY ACCIDENT.</heading>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Mr. MARWICK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether a native named Piet, who was wounded by a bullet fired at a mad bull by a European constable at Johannesburg, died on the 2nd March, 1928, in the Johannesburg hospital;</li>

<li>(2) what steps were taken to apprise the native&#x2019;s relatives of his having been injured accidentally by the police;</li>

<li>(3) what steps have been taken to inform the native&#x2019;s relatives of his death; and</li>

<li>(4) what compensation is to be paid to the deceased&#x2019;s relatives?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#marwick">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) The native&#x2019;s employer undertook to write to his relatives at Steynsrust in the Orange Free State and did so on the day of the accident. The native&#x2019;s cousin who works in Johannesburg was also notified by the employer and visited the injured native in hospital.</li>

<li>(3) In accordance with the usual custom the Native Affairs Department was notified of the death and the relatives arrived on the day of the funeral, but too late to attend.</li>

<li>(4) The question whether compensation can be paid will receive consideration after the magistrate has held the inquest.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>JUSTICE: MAGISTRATE&#x2019;S ALLEGED BIAS.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_justice">

<num>XIII.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether his attention has been drawn to the fact that on two occasions recently two Johannesburg attorneys in open court invited a certain magistrate to recuse himself on the alleged ground that he was suffering from so marked a bias in favour of the Crown that accused persons tried before him could not obtain justice, and that upon the refusal of the magistrate to recuse himself, the attorneys in question withdrew from the defence; and</li>

<li>(2) in view of the foregoing, what action is the Minister taking in the direction of (a) instituting an enquiry into the allegations and giving the attorneys in question an opportunity of substantiating their allegations, and (b) protecting the magistrate from further persecution?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_justice" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF JUSTICE:</from>

<p>The hon. member will have seen from the reports in the press that the Attorney-General of the Transvaal has taken action to prosecute one of the attorneys concerned for contempt of court. The matter will, therefore, come under the investigation of the Supreme Court.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>POSTS: UNESTABLISHED OFFICERS.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS replied to Question VI by Dr. Stals, standing over from 6th March.</p>

<question by="#stals" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he has any intention of extending the system of unestablished officers;</li>

<li>(2) whether he intends to continue the existing offices; and, if not,</li>

<li>(3) what does he intend to do with the unestablished officers?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#stals">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) The system of unestablished offices will vary from time to time as applied to particular offices, but it is not likely to be extended.</li>

<li>(2) It is proposed to raise 39 unestablished offices to established rank and to reduce six established offices to unestablished rank.</li>

<li>(3) It is not proposed to terminate the services of any postmaster whose services have been satisfactory, but to transfer incumbents at offices which have been regarded to other posts in keeping with their salary and qualification. This, of course, can only be done gradually and some considerable time must lapse before the whole matter is adjusted.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>POST OFFICE SAVINGS BANK.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS replied to Question III, by Brig.-Gen. Byron, standing over from 9th March.</p>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) In the Post Office Savings Bank what amounts stand to the credit of (a) European depositors, (b) coloured depositors, (c) native depositors; and</li>

<li>(2) (a) how many individuals hold Union Loan Certificates of the face value of &#x00A3;1,000, and (b) what face value of Union Loan Certificates are held by (i) Europeans, (ii) coloured persons, (iii) natives?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#byron">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) (a) and (b) combined, &#x00A3;6,123,000. When accounts are opened particulars of race are not furnished and the surnames afford no indication as to whether the depositor is European or coloured, consequently information under the separate headings cannot be furnished; (c) &#x00A3;288,000.</li>

<li>(2) (a) 1,320, (b) (i), (ii), (iii) combined, &#x00A3;5,719,896. No separate record is kept of Europeans, coloured and native investors in Union Loan Certificates. The foregoing figures have been taken as at 31st January, 1928.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>DEFENCE: OFFICERS&#x2019; RESIGNATIONS.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE replied to Question IX, by Col. D. Reitz, standing over from 6th March.</p>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_defence">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Why the officers of the Potchefstroom commando resigned in a body on the 9th January, 1928;</li>

<li>(2) why the officers of the Vaal River commando resigned in a body on the 31st January, 1928;</li>

<li><span class="col_2025-2026" refersTo="page_1079"/>(5) whether in each case a private was promoted to the command of both these commandos over the heads of all the officers;</li>

<li>(4) what is the military experience of the two newly-appointed commandants;</li>

<li>(5) whether the hon. member for Potehefstroom intervened or made any suggestions to the Minister with regard to these appointments, and, if so, what was the nature of such intervention or representations; and</li>

<li>(6) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table of the House the letters dated the 9th and 31st January, 1928, respectively, whereby the officers referred to sent in their resignations?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#reitz">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Thirteen out of the twenty-nine officers of the Potchefstroom commando resigned as a protest against the appointment of Burger A. J. Alberts as commandant, under cover of a letter dated 11th January. Since then one officer has withdrawn his resignation.</li>

<li>(2) It is not known that the officers of the Vaal River commando resigned in a body on 31st January, 1928. The last resignation recorded took place in 1926.</li>

<li>(3) Both were burghers.</li>

<li>(4) Both officers served in the republican forces during the Anglo-Boer war.</li>

<li>(5) Had many representations from various persons.</li>

<li>(6) A copy of a letter referred to in (1) will be laid on the Table of the House. With regard to the Vaal River commando, see reply to (2).</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Col. D. REITZ</from>

<p>I asked the Minister specifically whether the hon. member for Potchefstroom had made representations. I got the reply that various people had made representations. That seems to me to be burking the question. I would like to ask the Minister to reply specifically to my question on this point.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#reitz">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>I am not going to reply to a question specifically asking me who have made representations. On every one of these matters all kinds of representations have been made to me.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>We will draw our own conclusions. In reply to No. (2) the Minister said he did not know why the officers of the Vaal River commando had resigned.</p>

</question>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>He said he did not know they had resigned.</p>

</question>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Col. D. REITZ</from>

<p>The Minister or his department is in possession of a letter dated 31st January, 1928, wherein the officers of the Vaal River commando resigned in a body. I asked the Minister, who ought to know what is going on.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member cannot discuss that.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>Does the Minister know that the officers of the commando have addressed a letter of the 31st January resigning? [No reply.] You ought to know it.</p>

</question>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>Will the Minister be good enough to give an answer to the following questions&#x2014;(1) whether the officers of the Potchefstroom Defence Force commando were not asked to nominate a commandant and accordingly selected Col. Grimbeek, D.S.O., who had previously held the position, and (2) why, upon what grounds and upon whose recommendation the Minister in face of this appointed Mr. Alberts, who had only recently come to reside in that district? [No reply.] I do not know exactly if I may be allowed to say what the Minister of Defence contemplates by looking up into the air. I wish merely to speak from a point of his want of courtesy.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>Will the hon. member confine himself to asking a question?</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>Yes, sir. Then I will repeat the question, with your permission. Perhaps it was too much for the intelligence of the Minister. I know he is generally very intelligent.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member must confine himself to asking the question.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>I asked whether &#x2026; [question repeated].</p>

</question>

<question by="#blackwell" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. BLACKWELL:</from>

<p>On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, may I ask your ruling whether on the question put by my hon. friend, the Minister may remain entirely silent. Either the Minister can answer the question or ask that it shall be put on the paper or refuse to answer, but to treat it with this studied contempt, or rather may I put it this way, that to take up such an attitude would be to treat this House with contempt and I ask you to enforce the rights of members in regard to receiving a reply to their questions. I do submit that the least a member is entitled to be told by a Minister is that he cannot answer the question, or to say that it should be put on the paper. The questions put by my hon. friend were entirely legitimate questions. There was no suggestion of ragging or improper procedure.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>There is nothing in the rules to compel any Minister to reply to supplementary questions.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>This is not a supplementary question.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>Order.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>RESERVE BANK NOTES.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF FINANCE replied to Question XII by Mr. Alexander, standing over from 6th March.</p>

<question by="#alexander" to="#minister_of_finance">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is a fact that it is possible to peel apart the two layers of paper making up the South African Reserve Bank notes, thus facilitating fraud in passing off the front and back parts of the notes as two separate notes;</li>

<li><span class="col_2027-2028" refersTo="page_1080"/>(2) whether it is not in the public interest that all the Reserve Bank notes in circulation should be withdrawn and new notes should be printed on one sheet of paper only, and not on two, as at present; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Government is prepared to take into consideration the advisability of making representations to the board of the bank in this connection?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#alexander">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) I understand that this is the case.</li>

<li>(2) I am informed that the issues which have the same design on the back and front of the note are being withdrawn. This has been the practice for some time.</li>

<li>(3) Seeing that the management of the bank have the matter in hand, it is unnecessary to do this.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>DEFENCE: OFFICERS&#x2019; RESIGNATIONS.</heading>

<question by="#reitz" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Col. D. REITZ:</from>

<p>On a point of order, I want to ask the Minister of Defence one of the questions which I put to him that he has not replied to.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>If the hon. member has any further question to ask, he had better put it on the paper.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oral_question">

<heading>ORAL QUESTION</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>FORT KNOKKE CEMETERY.</heading>

<question by="#munnik" to="#minister_of_the_interior">

<from>Mr. MUNNIK</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the attention of the Government has been drawn to press reports that the remains of Boer prisoners of war of the Anglo-Boer war are being removed from Fort Knokke, which is required for railway extension; and</li>

<li>(2) what are the facts?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_the_interior" to="#munnik">

<from>The MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) The removal of remains, which include those of certain Boer prisoners of the Anglo-Boer war, from the cemetery at Fort Knokke has already taken place. The Railway Administration has acquired from the defence department the land known as Fort Knokke, which will be utilised for the future development and expansion of the Cape Town station yard. The cemetery has never been a public one, and was used for the burial of Anglo-Boer war prisoners and imperial soldiers. It would have been quite impracticable for the Railway Administration to have obtained the consents of the next of kin, but the Maitland Cemetery Board undertook at the cost of the administration to remove headstones, memorials, etc., carefully and re-erect them at the respective graves in the Maitland military allotment. Assurance was given that the work of removal would be conducted carefully and reverently in such a manner as would meet with the approval of the relatives of those buried there, if it were possible to trace them. A short service of consecration is being held to-morrow at the military allotment, No. 4, Woltemade.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#women&#x2019;s_enfranchisement_bill">

<heading>WOMEN&#x2019;S ENFRANCHISEMENT BILL.</heading>

<speech by="#byron">

<from>Brig.-Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BYRON</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That Order No. XII, for to-day&#x2014;House to go into committee on Women&#x2019;s Enfranchisement Bill&#x2014;be discharged, and set down for Tuesday, the 20th March.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Motion put; and a division was called for.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>On a point of order, my experience some years ago in asking leave to move that Order No. So-and-so should be set down for another day, was that it had to be moved as an unopposed motion, and a single objection prevented the motion being put.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The rule has been altered.</p>

<p>Upon which the House divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;53.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Barlow, A. G.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Chaplin, F. D. P.</p>

<p>Christie, J.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Gibaud, F.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Nel, O, R.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: de Jager, A. L.; Robinson, C. P.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;58.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Hertzog, J. B. M.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Malan, C. W.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p><span class="col_2029-2030" refersTo="page_1081"/>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Pienaar, B. J.; Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly negatived.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#patents_designs_trade_marks_and_copyright_act_1916_amendment_bill">

<heading>PATENTS, DESIGNS, TRADE MARKS AND COPYRIGHT ACT, 1916, AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the House do now resume in committee on the Patents, Designs, Trade Marks and Copyright Act, 1916, Amendment Bill, and that Mr. Speaker leave the chair.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#munnik">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MUNNIK</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Motion put; upon which the House divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;59.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Barlow, A. G.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Beyers, F. W.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>lie Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Waal, J. H. H.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Hertzog, J. B. M.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Malan, C. W.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J.</p>

<p>de V. Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Pienaar, B. J.; Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;43.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Chaplin, F. D. P.</p>

<p>Close, R, W.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Gibaud, F.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Robinson, C. P.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R.; de Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly agreed to.</p>

<p>House in Committee:</p>

<p>[Progress reported on 24th February, on Clause 1.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>When this Bill was considered last the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) made certain remarks. As hon. members know, there is an International Treaty between us and other countries, and the hon. member represented this Bill as being in conflict with that treaty. In the second place, the hon. member wanted to make out that a certain company would be much benefitted by a Bill of this kind and that the House should disapprove of it. The hon. member was wrong on both points, and it is necessary for me to shortly deal with the legal side of the matter. I do not want the House to be under the impression that a contravention of the treaty is taking place. A conference was held in Berne in 1886 and I just want to deal with one clause that was passed there, viz., the one, that if anyone wants copyright in a foreign country which is a member of the conference, he need only concern himself with the laws of the country of origin, in other words, if a piece of German music is to obtain copyright in South Africa, then the person need only concern himself with the copyright law of Germany. Shortly afterwards a movement arose in France that if anyone wanted copyright for a foreign thing, he should only have regard to the laws of the country of origin without considering our laws. England did not share that view, but in 1896, at the conference of Paris, what was known as the &#x201C;Declaration of Paris,&#x201D; and from 1896 to 1908, the position was that if anyone wanted copyright in a foreign country he should only be concerned with the laws in the country of origin. England, however, did not sign the declaration, because England stood by the position&#x2014;and the English law is also our law&#x2014;that if copyright is applied for in a country the question of recourse and procedure which are valid in the country where the copyright is sought shall indeed be taken into consideration. In 1908 a further conference took place in Berlin, and the whole policy was altered <span class="col_2031-2032" refersTo="page_1082"/>and the English view adopted. Clause 4 of the Treaty of 1908 lays down that when anybody seeks copyright he shall confine himself to the laws of the country where it is being applied for. In the second place, it lays down that such a country shall have the fullest rights in respect of legal proceedings for infringements. It did not remain at that, and by the Act of 1912 (No. 20), Australia laid down that any person desiring copyright or right of performing music in Australia, could only ask for it when it was registered.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>You are wrong.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>In the law there are certain legal remedies which can only be employed if it is registered there.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Only criminal registration.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>The principle is the same. There is the obligation to register there to get certain rights. In New Zealand there are the same regulations. Canada, however, has gone further. According to the Act of the 1st January, 1924, no action can be instituted according to law, unless the rights are registered. There has already been a test case between the Canadian Performing Rights Company, and a musical society there, and the former lost the case. They asked for an interdict and damages because the theatrical people performed music, but the decision was that no action lay because it was not registered, and the Court of Appeal upheld that. If it is legal there, and no contravention of the treaty, how can it then be said that it will be so here. It is precisely the same position. We have to do here with the protection of people, of performers and orchestras against a very big body, namely, the Performing Rights Society, which is registered in England. They get a lot of money out of this country for the right of performance. Hon. members must not confuse copyright with performing right. Of course, the copyright remains unaffected. If I buy a piece of music I can play it, but not have it reprinted. Now we have a big company asking all people who perform music in public to pay without it making any difference whether it is performed by a particularly talented artist or a person of lesser talent. We know that in performances it often depends just as much or more on the talent of the performer as on the writer. Every hall-owner in the Union is now asked to pay an annual amount to the Performing Rights Society or otherwise get into trouble if music were performed in such a hall. Take a small village. There is a hall and the owner is asked to pay &#x00A3;3, &#x00A3;4 or &#x00A3;10 a year. The trouble is that the Performing Rights Society does not say on what works they have representation rights. They simply allow performances in such a hall, and then come and say &#x201C;You performed such and such a piece of which we hold the rights and you must pay a fine.&#x201D; Every caf&#x00E9;, restaurant, hotel, in short, where-ever music is performed, must pay. Since this Bill was introduced they have acted a little less sharply, but if the Bill lapses that large body will be able to ask as much as it pleases.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>They have the rights over the music.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>Just like a labourer to his wage. We do not take away the copyright. The right to demand damages if your rights are encroached upon is left if you can prove that damage has been suffered.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>How can one prove that?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>Let me take the opposite case. Every time I perform a man&#x2019;s music I advertise it. That will induce people to buy it. If a well-known singer sings the music of a person in South Africa, he advertises it, and the composer will do good business with it. Now money has to be paid for the performance. Mr. Schlesinger has to pay between &#x00A3;400 and &#x00A3;500 a year to the Performing Rights Society. He can manage to do it because he then has all the rights, but what of the small municipalities? There often are, in a small village, three or four players who perform a little music and give a great deal of pleasure by their performances as well as teaching music. There is a small orchestra in nearly every small village. They play at dances, etc., and everywhere that they play in public a certain sum has to be paid to the society, and how many more of these bodies will there be? We know that already there are the Canadian Performing Society and the English Association, and I have a letter here from a firm in England that has notified the local Broadcasting Service that they are owners of a certain number of pieces of music, and that they give notice that the Broadcasting Company will have to pay for certain music they are broadcasting. I have the minutes of the select committee here. We had tariffs fixed by the company in England before us. There are tariffs for a pier, for hotels, halls, pavilion, tea rooms, restaurants, etc. The society acts as if it were a Government, and issues instructions as it thinks fit. We all acknowledge that music is in the public interest. The number of South African composers that are performed here, and live here, is very insignificant, and they sell their rights. I doubt whether 3 per cent. of the composers do not sell their copyright to the publishers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>They sell the copyright, but not the &#x201C;royalty.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>Now all the owners of halls must pay an annual amount. If &#x00A3;5 is paid for a small ball, e.g., in Christiana, which of the composers will get it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>It is divided.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>About &#x00A3;4,000 is obtained from South Africa every year, and I should like to know how much of it goes to South African composers. A large institution like Schlesinger only pays &#x00A3;400.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>&#x00A3;1,000.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from><span class="col_2033-2034" refersTo="page_1083"/>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>No, between &#x00A3;400 and &#x00A3;500.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>That does not include the amount for broadcasting.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>Only &#x00A3;400 comes from the Schlesinger group, the rest from other sources, from the small halls, small villages, etc. We pay the money which is spent in England and Germany, and how much do our composers get? The composers here also favour the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>When I first came across this business I agreed with the hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees). I thought that was a trust trying to extract money from South Africa. The Performers&#x2019; Rights Society is not a trust or monopoly, but a co-operative rights society to protect what the law has given them. They have certain copyright rights. How would a composer in Germany, France or England protect his right in South Africa if he could not co-operate with the people here. We should be honest on this question. If this Bill goes through, we are only pretending to preserve to the composers their performing rights. The hon. member is quite wrong in saying that the Australian law says that they demand registration [Law 26 of the Australian law read]. If you want to seize pirated works, it allows you to prosecute criminally, but only in special cases have you to register. I ask why our Copyright Act says &#x201C;may&#x201D; register? Because the Berlin treaty lays down that it shall be optional. Law 59 in our own country says this [quotation read]. Our law, therefore, has left the door open. I doubt if any of our music has been registered. Assuming this Bill passes, and we force every composer to register, how is it going to operate as notice to the performers? The present system of notifying performers by circular is far more efficient notice that they are infringing the copyright than any notice in the Deeds Office. Are performers going to keep a long list in Pretoria which they must search to see if they are infringing a copyright. Songs are evanescent things and who is going to keep the record of 40, 50 or 100 of them arriving every week? Who will register them in Pretoria? It is impossible. This Bill makes it impossible for the performers to give notice. Take bioscopes, we give them by law the right and we say you must give a week&#x2019;s notice before they can take proceedings. How, in practice, are you going to give a man a week&#x2019;s notice? To-night a party is performing at Christiana. To-morrow, that party goes on to Bloemhof, and it proceeds on circuit. How, in practice, are you going to give these people notice? No composer who owns a copyright can possibly comply with this law. I have been looking through the report of the select committee, and, as far as I can find, no single witness has denied the composer&#x2019;s right to royalty on performances, but they took this view, that while they admitted that the composer was entitled to his rights and royalties, it was unfair to them because they did not know which were copyright and which were not. I admit there is force in that, but I say that this Bill is not going to remedy that position. I would put it to the Minister of Justice that if this Bill passes as it stands, it is going to infringe Section 8 of the British Copyright Act in the schedule to our Act, it is going to infringe Section 159 of our own Act, and it is going to infringe Section 144 of our Act, which says that any alteration of this nature should be done by the Governor-General by proclamation. I admit there is some force in the argument that a performer, or a company like the African Theatres Trust are entitled to know exactly where they stand. They say &#x201C;we cannot be expected to pay money for some nebulous asset.&#x201D; Registration in the companies office is not going to operate as notice. I am prepared to meet that point by moving&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 16, after &#x201C;copyright&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;or to a musical copyright work published by any publisher who shall have given notice by registered letter to the owner, manager, or lessee of any place in which music is publicly performed or broadcasted that the right of public performance in all copyright music published by such publisher is reserved&#x201D;.</block>

<p>That will operate as a far more effective notice to the people concerned than this idea of the hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) of going and registering in Pretoria. I admit that notice should be given. I would go further and say that no single performer in this country has ever been called upon, or interfered with except after he has received notice that these things are copyright. I submit that my amendment is a far more effective notice to performers, that certain compositions are copyright, than this idea of registration. To go and ask a composer or an author to go to Pretoria or employ an attorney for that purpose and pay a guinea to have a song registered is out of the question. There will be hundreds of thousands of songs on this list if this law goes through. I ask the hon. member, is it practicable? I would like to meet the hon. gentleman&#x2019;s view, especially as expressed in committee. There is some force in the contention that people are entitled to know exactly what is copyright and what is not, but I hold, and I think it is a fair view, that this amendment of mine will operate as notice of copyright.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>When the member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) introduced the Bill I thought the provisions were unjust. At the second reading I spoke against the Bill and, in consequence, I was put on the select committee to go into the merits of the case. I had hardly commenced hearing the evidence before it became clear to me that the hon. member was quite right. A so-called society, registered in England, acquired all the performing rights of certain composers and, now, in my opinion, they are abusing their position. Municipalities and other bodies are notified by the society that they must pay a certain amount every year to it, otherwise it would sue them for infringing their performing rights. When the municipalities <span class="col_2035-2036" refersTo="page_1084"/>asked the society to send them a list of their music or when musical programmes are sent to the society for approval or otherwise they were refused. As a precaution then the municipalities pay the amount demanded of them. Everybody who hires a hall must now contribute to the amounts the society demands. To say that composers would not be protected if the Bill goes through is nonsense. The great composers whose music is reproduced on the gramophone records get their profit from the sale of the records, and nothing more is demanded for performing those records. Why cannot the same method be adopted in the case of music? The composers ought to be satisfied with the profit on the sale of their productions. If your music is of particularly high standard you can make the selling price higher, as is done in the case of gramophone records. If you want to be paid for the performance as well, then you have to see that it is registered; that is all. Personally I think that composers should be satisfied with the sale price, and thankful that musicians play or sing the music because they advertise it. I have no sympathy with the Performing Rights Society. It seems to be a society which speculates on the musical talent of the composers whose rights they have bought up. They make &#x00A3;4,000 a year out of the Union. No wonder that similar societies are now being established to get a hold on the Union and other countries in the same way.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>This is a very interesting contest, and I can quite understand now why there are 78 lawyers in the House. I congratulate the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) on his altruism, and his wish to stand up for those people so dear to him&#x2014; the authors and composers. It was really delightful to hear his eloquence in regard to them. So deeply affecting was it that I thought I must really consider the question from that point of view only, but there is a great public interest, apart from parliamentary lawyers, who are splitting hairs. I have taken some trouble to find out what is the position of the composer and author in regard to copyright and performing rights. The author certainly can look after himself all the time. If anyone wants to make a film picture of his book he pretty soon interferes. We need not shed tears over him, although he is dragged into the argument as if his rights were being infringed. All the author requires is that his printed work shall not be printed. Now we come to the composer. Here is this Performing Rights Society, Ltd., ever ready to pounce upon anybody, and it is prepared to guarantee that, so far as it is concerned, the company won&#x2019;t prosecute anyone who consents to pay, say, &#x00A3;1,000 a year, or some smaller amount of money. In regard to Schlesinger, it is: &#x201C;If you will pay us &#x00A3;1,000 a year, we guarantee immunity from our interference.&#x201D; That is about all the &#x201C;protection&#x201D; is. The composer, strange to say, is more interested in having his music performed as often as possible than in any other questions relating to it. He will say perfectly honestly that the more his music is performed the better it is for him. What he stands to make money on his royalty in piece music, music for the piano, songs that are printed, and extended sale of copies is what he looks to for reward. He does not need protection from a public or private performer. What he wants is protection from pirating, and he watches that pretty keenly; as soon as he sees a piece of music being sold that his own publisher has not produced, he starts in with an interdict. But the Performing Rights Society desire to jump on the performer so as to exact money from caterers for public amusement. It is perfectly reasonable on the part of the hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees), whatever interests he may be concerned with defending, to stand up for the performer. Half the time this precious and profitable company does not know whether to control a copyright. They simply try to lead caterers to believe they exercise universal copyright privileges over everything musical. They do not want to be put to the expense and trouble of carrying out their business proposition by retaining a staff of inspection. Do not take this question as the Performing Rights Society v. Schlesinger, but the profit-making Society v. some unfortunate performer. It is all very well for the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) to say there is no case on record of any performer being chased and prosecuted, but there is the sword of Damocles all the time over this unfortunate person. I owe nothing to Mr. Schlesinger, and never had even a free pass to his theatres; but I do say he is one of the finest citizens in South Africa, and there is nothing he owns that is not kept up to date. In America they would be thoroughly proud of him and we ought to stand by him, if only on the slogan: &#x201C;South Africa first.&#x201D; I hope the hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) will not give way on a single point, and will insist that the Performing Rights Society doing its business in a businesslike way, and say what it really protects&#x2014;put into force only what it has a right to do. I am glad to hear that the Performing Rights Society is at last paying something to some composers. I would like to see the accounts and a list of those who are receiving substantial sums. The hon. member for Umbilo (Mr. Reyburn) said about one widow receiving &#x00A3;40 a year from this source; it is wonderful!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>This, of course, is a very difficult matter; there is no doubt about that; probably if the Performing Rights people had dealt only with the big people in the business in the country nothing would have been heard of it in this House. Where the matter was brought to my notice was in connection with the municipalities. They were all up in arms, and communicated with me. The police band could at any time be attacked by this association and money taken out of them. A large number of small people could also be attacked. There is, of course, a lot to be said for the attitude taken up by the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz). The only trouble, I think, in connection <span class="col_2037-2038" refersTo="page_1085"/>with his amendment is it is also giving notice in a kind of omnibus way, and we would probably find that before any breaches occur a round robin would be sent to all people who give performances in the country, and a pamphlet with thousands of pieces, and these pamphlets may escape attention at a later stage. I thought there might be a simple way out of the difficulty which meets the hon. member&#x2019;s point, which is an important one. I move, as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 16, after &#x201C;copyright&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;or on the face of which public performance is prohibited&#x201D;.</block>

<p>There are two points which the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) made&#x2014;the expense of ephemeral musical productions&#x2014;there may be matters not copyrighted in the country from which they come. Instead of that expense being incurred, put on the face of it &#x201C;public performance prohibited.&#x201D; Naturally, when there is consent there is no trouble about that. Copyright means public performance prohibited, and also that there is a fee paid in connection with that. What I am trying to meet is the argument that it is unfair to force a man to pay &#x00A3;21 for every piece he registers. By &#x201C;public performance prohibited&#x201D; he gets the same right, and does not pay any fee whatever. That suggestion might meet the argument of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central). His amendment is, perhaps, too wide, although we all feel that something ought to be done in that direction. I think there should be some legislation on this matter; I think that is fairly obvious.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Why not the word &#x201C;restricted&#x201D;? That would cover a wider field.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I am not wedded to the language. The amendment of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) is in such wide terms that it might defeat its own object.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#keyter">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KEYTER</person>:</from>

<p>When the Bill was before the House for the first time in 1926, the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) at once moved that it should be read a second time in six months. But as he received certain information in the House he was magnanimous enough to admit that he knew little about the Bill and he, therefore, withdrew his motion. The Bill was then on the motion of the hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens) (Mr. Coulter) sent to a select committee. That select committee enquired into the Bill, and they now warmly recommend that the Bill should be proceeded with. When the Bill was before the House last time the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) moved to report progress without leave to sit again and, in that way, he wanted to deprive us of the opportunity of talking about the Bill. Fortunately the Bill has come up for discussion again to-day. The hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) has convinced me that I ought to vote in favour of the Bill. He admitted when it came up last time that the Schlesinger Company thought that they saw something good in that Performing Rights Society and that Mr. Schlesinger would like to extend his control over them. The hon. member, therefore, admitted that it is something good; we know that Mr. Schlesinger always finds something good, and that he would not hesitate to get hold of it if he saw a chance. I can understand that he would like to get hold of their rights. The right is used, and let me here use hard words&#x2014;to exploit the municipalities and, through them, the municipal ratepayers. If the Bill is passed an end will be put to that unreasonable extortion. There is another point. I know from experience that those people enter into contracts with those municipalities to pay a certain amount for the performing rights. It runs from &#x00A3;5 to &#x00A3;200.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>They do not pay it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#keyter">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KEYTER</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, it is a fact. The municipalities have to pay a fixed amount, but whose pockets does it come out of? It is the municipal ratepayers who must pay the amount to indemnify the municipality from prosecution for contravening the Copyright Act. I hope the Bill will be passed as it stands. I have a resolution here from the Municipal Association in the Free State requesting that the Bill be passed, and I also have various letters asking me to use every endeavour to put an end to that position. I do not stand here to decide who is to have the right to exploit municipalities. I do not stand here to say whether it shall be the Schlesinger group or the Performing Rights Society. I am here to see that neither get it. As stated, I am going to vote for the Bill. I could not very well follow the amendment proposed, but if they meet the demand of preventing the exploitation, then I will agree to them, but if not, I stand by the Bill as drawn. I said in 1926 that I was the last man in the House to take away existing rights. The rights are possibly fixed abroad, and we do not like taking them away, but I have my duty towards my constituents and I will fulfil it to the last. I cannot see how I can vote against the Bill after having seen resolutions like those from municipalities. The Performing Rights Society has forced the municipalities to make contracts and they went so far as to threaten to prosecute municipalities who make contracts and they went so far as to threaten to prosecute municipalities who did not do so if pieces of which they had the copyright, were performed in the Town Hall. What happens usually when one wants to hire the Town Hall? He goes to the Town Clerk and hires it for a certain night, but no one knows what is going to happen, whether there will be singing or playing or something else. If then the man contravenes the copyright then the Performing Rights Society threaten to prosecute the municipality. This actually happened. [Time limit.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister has told us that he sees the impracticability of the suggestion of registering all these songs. That <span class="col_2039-2040" refersTo="page_1086"/>practically emasculates the Bill, for if the second half of it goes&#x2014;as I take it must go&#x2014;there is very little of it left. While admitting there is room for legislation, it seems to me that we shall have to draft another Bill. We see the difficulty of giving the performers notice. The Minister suggests that the difficulty might be met by putting a stamp on the music, but there are hundreds of thousands of pieces of music already in existence and we cannot jettison their unfortunate composers. I am informed that when a popular piece of music is put on the market, the performers do not buy them by the thousand, but obtain only one copy and alter it for orchestral purposes, and they also take liberties with the score. The musicians who perform the piece very rarely see the actual printed music, they playing from a written score. So the Minister&#x2019;s suggestion will not meet the case. The matter should stand over, for the Bill as it stands cannot go through. Sections 150 and 160 practically contradict each other. Then Section 8 of our law definitely states that no prosecution can take place until notice has been given, so the Bill is not really necessary. The giving of seven days&#x2019; notice is impossible, and it is against the English Copyright Act, which is part of our law. We have reached this stage of possible agreement that we realize some sort of notice should be required, but to make the authors and composers register is impracticable. The registration is for the benefit of the performers. It is supposed to operate as notice to them. Is Mr. Schlesinger going to have a man at Pretoria to examine these all the time? Take ten years hence. Are you going to look through all these lists? Some form of notice is desirable, and my suggestion, I think, is the most practicable one. The Performers Rights Society is constantly circulating these things. They have their magazine, and I think the hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) can take it from me there is not much danger of there being an accumulation of superannuated lists which are never looked at. To show the modus operandi here is a broadcasting programme circulated by Mr. Schlesinger, and practically every one of the songs and compositions are copyright; yet he is suggesting a law which will absolve him from payment of royalties. Why should not all these small bands and orchestras pay? If a policeman buys a novel he has to pay for it, and it is no different with regard to music. No one takes a novel into a town hall or into a bioscope and reads it to a thousand people. As I say, it is different in music. There is also a copyright in poetry. The principle is the same, but the operation is different. Take the published song: &#x201C;It ain&#x2019;t going to rain no more.&#x2019;&#x201D; How many people have seen this song with a stamp upon it? For everyone who has seen a stamp upon it thousands have never seen one. How can you put a stamp on a piece of music which is broadcasted? In the Berlin Convention the composers are entitled to performers&#x2019; rights, and here we propose saying that you shall have your performers&#x2019; rights, but we shall see that you never exercise them. Are you going to take those rights away merely because they are uitlanders? There is a moral duty on us because they rely upon our signature to the Berlin treaty. I hope the hon. member will accept my amendment. The law, as drafted, is not practicable, and he must realize that we cannot pass this law as it stands. I ask him to accept my amendment or adjourn the debate so that we can come together and draft an amendment that will meet the position.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#keyter">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KEYTER</person>:</from>

<p>Just before the adjournment I was pointing out the position with reference to the conclusion of contracts from &#x00A3;5 to &#x00A3;200 a year was still worse a few years ago. They only waited until something occurred which they considered a breach of the regulations and then came to the people and threatened them with litigation. That happened in my district and, therefore, municipalities there are insisting on an alteration being made. I have now seen the amendment of the Minister of Justice, and it disposes of many of my objections, but I do not yet know whether the amendment will be passed and had to raise my objections. If it is not passed, I feel that I will vote for the Bill as it stands.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hattingh">

<from>*The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HATTINGH</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz), said that we must protect the people who have the performing right. We must, however, also protect the other side, and the hon. member himself feels that. This Bill practically protects both sides. It does not take away any special right that people have with their performing rights to-day, because it expressly says that the provisions of the Bill shall not apply to works that are registered. As soon as anyone has registered, he has all the rights and privileges which he has to-day without registration. I think registration in. South Africa only costs &#x00A3;1. If a piece of music is not worth that, it is not worth being performed anywhere. When the &#x00A3;1 is paid, registration takes place, and this also removes the difficulty of the seven days&#x2019; notice. The pieces that are registered are alphabetically arranged in the Registration Office, and it is easy for anyone wanting to perform it to ascertain whether it is registered or not. That solves the difficulties. I object, however, to the provision from line 19 to line 22, that the provisions shall not apply to performances of music at a place which is not a recognized place of public amusement. I think that is unnecessary, because performances in a private house are not subject to the law, or we are actually exposing the private houses as well to the same obligations as a public place, because the clause says that if a piece is performed in a public place, seven days&#x2019; notice must be given, but if it is registered, it is not necessary, and an interdict can be obtained without notice, but it excludes a private house. Private people may get into trouble, and I therefore move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit all the words after &#x201C;copyright&#x201D;, in line 16, to the end of the clause.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from><span class="col_2041-2042" refersTo="page_1087"/>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think that the amendment of the Minister will meet the case that has been put forward by the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz), because it struck me, while the Minister was speaking, that there must be thousands of copies of musical competitions in this country that have been issued for years and years which have got no stamp of any sort upon them. Consequently, the amendment proposed by the Minister will not refer to cases of that sort. I thought the whole object was to protect the interests of small people. The majority of these composers are small people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>They have sold their rights.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>A great many have not sold their rights, and, except you have some organization to look after them, it is impossible for them to maintain their rights whenever people are purloining their productions, and why the product of a man&#x2019;s brain in producing music that becomes popular should not be protected as well as any other sort of property. I, for the love of me, cannot understand.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>Take the talent of the performer</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>The artist performing is, I presume, also carrying out his professional duties, and making a living to a large extent by using the talent of the composer of the work that he is performing. My hon. friend (Mr. van Hees) seems to forget that wherever these productions are used for non-money-making purposes, there is no charge of any sort whatsoever, but why should any individual or organization use, for the sake of money-making, the production of an individual without that individual having the right to get same share of the production which his brain has evolved.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>Nobody wants to do that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>My hon. friend says nobody wants to do it. His Bill says that they must give at least seven days&#x2019; notice. A clause of the Bill says that they have no redress except they give seven days&#x2019; notice. How is it possible in a country like this, with its great distances, where a performance takes place without a composer having any chance of knowing that a performance is going to take place, for the composer to be protected? How does my hon. friend reconcile the dignity of this country with the fact that we are signatories to the Berlin convention, from which, in this Bill, you desire to depart? That, I think, is a very serious thing indeed. My hon. friend knows that we are signatories to the Berlin convention, and you here, by a side issue, try to depart from the obligations that we have entered into in connection with that convention.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>This is not a contravention of the Berlin convention.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>If it is not a contravention of the Berlin convention, then I don&#x2019;t know what is a contravention of the Berlin convention. The whole idea of that convention was to protect the music of composers. There must be hundreds and thousands of composers of music who have no opportunity, except there is an organization throughout the various countries to look after their interests, of getting any remuneration for the musical compositions which they have produced. I really do not think that the charges that are made are excessive. The people who are going to pay these charges are carrying on places in this country, either bioscopes or things of that sort, for the purpose of making money, and making money to a very considerable extent, and surely if they are assisted in making that money by the work of a composer, it is only fair and reasonable that he should receive a fair return for the product of his own brain.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>It seems to me that the amendment of the Minister of Justice is identical with the intention of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz), and the question really is then, which is the most practicable form of amendment? There are several points I would like to mention that seem to be weak points in the amendment of the Minister of Justice. The Minister speaks of certain words being printed, or practically having to be printed, on the face of a piece of music other than the usual word &#x201C;copyright.&#x201D; His amendment says that music shall bear on the face of it the words that the public performance is prohibited. I would ask hon. members of this House, do they think that music that is being published for the use of the world is going to have special words printed on it because, possibly, it may come into the Union of South Africa? It seems to me that you are making an impracticable demand in that respect. It seems to me that you are asking the world to say that the whole of the music that is printed is to have these words printed on it, because the Union of South Africa may possibly import some of it. That being impracticable, what would have to happen is that every piece of music imported into the country would have to be specially over-printed with these words. Even that does not cover the point, because a lady in Berlin or in Holland sends a piece of music out to South Africa to a friend of hers, and unless she takes steps to put those words on before it leaves that country, it arrives in this country without having any imprint on it at all. Therefore the suggestion of the Minister seems to be impracticable. We understand from the Minister that he does appreciate the equity of the suggestion by the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz), and therefore, I suggest that the only way of meeting that objection equitably is to accept the amendment of the hon. member. I think that is quite evident. The hon. member for Piquetburg (Mr. de Waal), when it was pointed out that this question affects the small <span class="col_2043-2044" refersTo="page_1088"/>people, interjected that the small people have sold their rights.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The big one also. I did not say the small ones.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>Well, anyway, small and big have sold their rights. Surely hon. members on the other side will appreciate that if, when the publishers have purchased this right from the small and big people, from the composers, if the whole of the profits that can be made from publishing this music are filched from them&#x2014;take it for granted that similar legislation would be passed by every legislature in the world&#x2014;no publisher would be able to give these people any remuneration for their work at all. There would be no future market for the production of musical works because no publisher would pay these people royalties for their work if he could not get his investment back with a profit on it. Musical talent would be absolutely valueless. It would have no market-value in the world. I think the suggestion of the hon. member for Piquet-berg that it really does not matter, that the artist has sold his rights, does not bear one minute&#x2019;s inspection. It is incorrect to think it would not affect the musical composer, because no publisher would publish music if he did not think he had protection under the Copyright Act. I would like to make reference to the remarks made by the hon. member for Pretoria (West) (Mr. Hay). I really do not think that members on the other side will support him in his statement. His statement was more or less to the effect that this Performing Rights Society is an overseas society, so why should we worry about what we do with regard to them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>That was not my main argument.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>No, but it was part of his argument. What I suggest to the hon. member is this, that if he wants to carry the thing to its right and final conclusion, if you do not want foreigner&#x2019;s art or goods or anything, you need not have them, but if you want foreign art and foreign music in this country, you in all honesty have to, pay for them. That is really the position. I can understand the hon. member saying that no foreign art of any kind is allowed into this delightful country of ours, that we are self-contained, but if he agrees he wants music that comes from overseas, surely he won&#x2019;t take up the position that he has a moral right to take it without paying for it. The intention of this Bill is that you shall not pay for the right of performance of a musical work. Whatever the hon. member who introduced this Rill says, if you look at Section 160 (a) and read it, it is perfectly clear to the ordinary man in the street that it is absolutely unworkable, and therefore, the ordinary man in the street will simply say that the intention of the Bill is to filch the rights of the people who have written the music, and that is what the world will say. It be said that in this country of ours, that is talking about &#x201C;South Africt first&#x201D; and that we do not want anything foreign in the country, that we take foreign things, we refuse to pay for them, and then we pass Acts of Parliament practically filching the brains of better people than ourselves.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>I do not want my overseas argument to be misunderstood. It is not the real issue. The whole debate is going astray on the question of protecting the author or composer. This Bill is for the performing rights. It does not interfere with copyright. No author would wish to stop using his books and circulating them as much as possible or one getting on a platform and reading from them, but he does not want any printer or publisher to pirate them. The same with the composer. He is interested in publicly performing his work as frequently as possible, but this society is not. Quite the contrary, it is not concerned in that desirability at all. The composer makes his money entirely on the sale of the music, piano music, songs and so on. If the society were protecting him in that it would be right enough, but he is already protected there. The performer is doing good service in making known the songs, or the musical compositions of a particular composer, and the composer would, naturally, encourage it. That is exactly where the argument is going wrong. The hon. member (Col. D. Reitz) and other hon. members are trying to get tribute on the performing right, but this Performing Rights Society, believe me, does not come in to protect composers in regard to pirating. They care very little about that, but if they can, they get hold of any composer just to add to their list, and then say: &#x201C;We will sell you the whole of their rights; in other words, we will blackmail you if you don&#x2019;t pay the company so much a year. We will go for you at the first chance, but we will sell the guarantee not to jump on you.&#x201D; If that is not blackmailing I do not know what it is. The company does not circulate a balance sheet showing exactly where the profits go. They pocket the profits for shareholders, as far as I can see. I hope this committee will not be misled, and that it will see that there should be no attempt to interfere with performances, or only if they give necessary and sufficient notice. If the society is out to protect composers, and did their business in the right way they would have a number of clerks and travelling representatives, but they do not have any considerable staff. A single representative sits like a spider in the middle of a web, and watches for some unfortunate performer to touch the trap set, and so ensure a catch.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. gentleman who has just spoken does not seem to understand the position. There is a fundamental difference between a publisher and a composer. What is the good of an advertisement to a composer?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>He gets a royalty.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>He docs not under this law He could not live if he had to get the royalty on the actual broad sheet. A book is <span class="col_2045-2046" refersTo="page_1089"/>different; no one stands up and reads a book to a thousand people. What is the good of an advertisement to a composer? It is a barren honour. A composition comes from England and is copied on little pieces of cardboard for instrumental music The performer rarely plays from the actual broad-sheet coming from England. The hon. member does not understand the inner workings and procedure. This society is a co-operative society in which the profits are evenly distributed amongst the members. There is a pro rata distribution to every member&#x2014;of that I can give the hon. member my assurance.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>How would you divide up &#x00A3;50, or what is paid by a particular hall?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>There is a system of points multiplied by the general popularity of a piece. It is not a precise mathematical proposition, but works very well. Last year at Rome an international conference of composers met and protested against this Bill. It was not a &#x201C;spider sitting in a web&#x201D; and a &#x201C;blackmailing association,&#x201D; such as the hon. member spoke of, but an honest body of men trying to get their due. The hon. member discussed Mr. Schlesinger. Assuming that he or some other trust or combine got hold of the thing, they could simply form a monopoly of music and freeze out music at a caf&#x00E9;. We would be in a worse position than we are in now. The hon. member read a letter showing there is another association. The author can sell all his rights.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>The society can.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I do feel we would not be doing a fair thing to the people who relied on our signature to a treaty. I admit we have the right to alter it; but we should not do so without adequate notice, and not in this sort of way. This Bill will not get at the trouble the hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) is trying to get at. This Bill is simply going to say to the composer: &#x201C;We have given you a legal right, and we shall see you shall not enforce your rights.&#x201D; I will not say that this Bill has as its intention to rob them of their rights, but in effect it is robbing the widow and the orphans. The Minister has admitted that this Bill, as it stands, cannot go through. The Minister has practically emasculated the Bill, and can we pass it in that lop-sided condition? I do not deny that there is room for legislation&#x2014;I think there is but this Bill does not meet the difficulty the hon. member for Delarey is trying to get at. Surely the commonsense thing for us to do it to get together or for the Government to assume responsibility for this. This Bill will cause injustice and bring us into disrepute. Let us withdraw this Bill, which is the really sound thing to do, and take counsel how to re shape another Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I would urge the committee to take the view suggested by the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) particularly for the reason that the Minister of Justice practically supports him. He practically says that the Bill is not satisfactory, and is likely to lead to a certain amount of injustice. It would be very much better for us to report progress and ask leave to sit again.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>That will mean next year, some time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>That would give the hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) an opportunity of discussing the matter with other persons interested, and try to arrive at some fair arrangement, so that no injustice is done, and at the same time prevent the Performing Rights Society exercising unfair pressure with regard to the performance of its members&#x2019; music in public. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the Chairman report progress and ask leave to sit again.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the hon. member will withdraw that. The Bill has been before us for two years, and members have had ample time to make it a better measure. I cannot accept the motion to report progress.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I did hope that the hon. member would accept the motion, for we cannot pass the Bill as it stands. In the interests of the case the hon. member has put up it is desirable to re-cast the whole of the law. We have no desire to be unreasonable.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>You could have given notice of amendments.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>As we discuss private Bills in committee we exchange ideas, and realize the good and bad points of the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>I will accept the Minister&#x2019;s amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister&#x2019;s amendment cuts out existing compositions, and that will be a greater injustice to composers throughout the world than even the Bill as it stands. I believe the Minister realizes that his suggestion is impracticable. Don&#x2019;t let us be obstinate about this. We are all desirous of helping.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>What are we discussing?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I am appealing to the hon. member to accept a motion for the adjournment, for the Bill needs revision.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#moll">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOLL</person>:</from>

<p>You have said that over and over again.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>There is a rule which says that such reiteration is not permissible.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I did not know that. I thought it was possible to emphasize what is a perfectly sound argument.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reyburn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REYBURN</person>:</from>

<p>I join my voice with those who are proposing that we should report progress and ask leave to sit again. The speech of the Minister of Justice has thrown a new light on the matter. Some hon. members do not realize what the position is, and even today they are a little bit foggy about the matter. The protection of bioscope operators and <span class="col_2047-2048" refersTo="page_1090"/>restaurant keepers is desirable, but this is not the way to do it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I also would appeal to the hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) to agree to the motion for the adjournment, for there is no doubt the Minister of Justice is very uneasy about the Bill as it stands. The rights of a very large number of people are at stake. I was very sorry to hear the remarks of the hon. member for Pretoria (West) (Mr. Hay) when he referred, in a contemptuous manner, to the Performing Rights Society.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The question is to report progress.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>That is what I am aiming at. An entire change has taken place in the situation this afternoon. If the Bill is passed in its present form a great injustice will be done to a number of people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>I appreciate the request of hon. members that I should accept this motion, but it simply means this Bill goes back to the committee and it will be killed. If hon. members really mean what they say, then when the report stage is reached there will be time to accept any amendment, and have it adopted. Then the Bill must go through the Senate. The opportunity will be given there to make it a better Bill. To throw it back now will be a waste of time of the last two years.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry the hon. member will not accept the adjournment of the debate, and I am sorry the Minister of Justice is not here. I realize that the Minister of Justice considered there were dangers in the Bill drafted by the hon. member, and, as we pointed out, some of the amendments of the Minister of Justice would not meet the objections to the Bill. If my hon. friend is anxious to get the Bill through, is it not better to report progress and ask leave to sit again with a view to seeing if an arrangement can be arrived at which can be satisfactory to all parties, and which would not do a grave injustice to a large number of small people who have a right to look to this committee to protect their rights. He will facilitate the probability of a compromise by doing this, certainly more so than by refusing to accept the motion for the adjournment of the debate now. The hon. member must have realized the Minister of Justice is anxious to meet him, but the amendment is not going to meet the objections raised, and, under these circumstances, I think the hon. member would be well advised to report progress and ask leave to sit again.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Will the hon. member ask the Minister of Justice to come into the House? It is germane to the issue whether we report progress to hear whether the Minister of Justice adheres to his amendment. I understand he now realizes the defects of his own amendment, and we ought to know what he thinks on this matter, because his opinion is important. It is a pity to vote for the adjournment or to carry on without knowing where we stand. This Bill ought to have been introduced by the Minister of Justice.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>It ought to have been a Government measure.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>That being the case, I am sure the Minister of Justice has not intentionally left us. He did not realize the drift of this discussion. The hon. member might do us the courtesy of sending for the Minister of Justice, and of asking him how he would sum up the position now. The hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) admits that new light has broken on his mind on this subject, and I think it is necessary; in fact, we are entitled to a further expression from the Minister of Justice, and if he knew we were desirous of such an expression of opinion, he would come into the House. I ask the hon. member for Delarey to ask the Minister to come into the House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member has said that three or four times already.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>A thing cannot be said too often.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reyburn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REYBURN</person>:</from>

<p>The thing can be put right at the report stage. There is no need to report progress and ask leave to sit again. I have seen trouble caused by the same sort of thing. I recollect a case where it was intended to amend it at the report stage, and trouble was caused in the country, and we were accused of unworthy motives. The hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) realizes this is an imperfect Bill, and I think, after all, he will be well advised to accept the motion to report progress.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to support the motion now before us.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#moll">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOLL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the question be now put.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person></from>

<p>declined to accept the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I think the hon. member for Delarey goes too far. I have an amendment that might be acceptable to many members on this side of the House, which would not take away the composer&#x2019;s rights. What is the actual cause of trouble in this matter is that the Performing Rights Society, in the form of an ultimatum to various proprietors of halls, caf&#x00E9;s and municipalities, informs them that unless they are prepared to take out its licence, they will run the risk of paying the heavy costs of an interdict.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member must adhere to the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I want to point out to the hon. member for Delarey why he should support this motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) thinks that we are going, <span class="col_2049-2050" refersTo="page_1091"/>if I may use a slang term, to lick this Bill into shape at the report stage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>The Bill is in committee now.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>This is the place where we ought to do it, and not at the report stage. I moved an amendment which the Minister himself approved of. This Bill does not require only amendment; it requires a new Bill in effect. We cannot do that at the report stage. I think it is obvious to all that we require a new Bill. The hon. member for Cape Town (Gardens) (Mr. Coulter) raised a point which he was kind enough to submit to me just now, and which I see the potency of. There are points of legal procedure which will have to be considered before this Bill can be made a true Bill. It seems to me that we cannot go on like this. I ask the hon. member to agree to adjourn. Assuming that he refuses to adjourn, will the hon. member tell me whether he is serious when he tells us that he won&#x2019;t adjourn, and that he is going on with the Bill, as it stands. Is he really serious, after what the Minister has told us, and after he has been able to sense the feeling of the House? Surely he is not serious in telling us that he is going on with this Bill as it stands, and that the glaring defects of this Bill can be remedied.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>I do not admit the &#x201C;glaring defects.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>If the hon. member does not admit that these are very serious blemishes, he stands alone in that respect. He said himself that he realized the strength of the arguments that have been brought forward, and that fresh aspects had come to him during this afternoon, and I think that to all of us fresh light has been thrown upon this Bill this afternoon, such fresh light that I really do not see how this House can be asked to go on with the Bill as it stands. Once more I appeal to the hon. member to let us adjourn. We are not hostile to the hon. member&#x2019;s real intention, but we do say that as the Bill stands it does not achieve the object he has in view. Once more I wish to express my regret that the Minister of Justice cannot be brought here, because there is another aspect that I wish to put before the House as to why we should adjourn. As the Bill stands at present, it is really a private fight between private interests, and I hold that this House should not be made the cockpit of private interests and private fights. We are being used here to enter into a private fight with which we as a House have no concern. I repeat that this is not an arena for private fights. The public aspects of the Copyright Act and of composers&#x2019; rights and performers&#x2019; rights are of sufficient interest to justify the Government in intervening with some other Bill. This Bill will never do, and for these reasons I trust that the debate will be adjourned.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#moll">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOLL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the question be now put,</block>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;44.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Malan, C. W.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Pienaar, B J.; Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;34.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Tellers: Blackwell, L.; van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly agreed to.</p>

<p>Motion that the Chairman report progress and ask leave to sit again put and the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;36.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Marwick, J. S.; Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p><span class="col_2051-2052" refersTo="page_1092"/>Noes&#x2014;42.</p>

<p>Badenhorst, A. L.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Malan, C. W.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Mullineux, J.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P J.</p>

<p>To Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Pienaar, B. J.; Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly negatived.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#moll">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOLL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the question be now put.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Surely the Chairman is not going to accept that motion. There is no sense of right in that at all. It is a monstrous shame to put it forward.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>It is grossly unfair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member says it is grossly unfair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Not on the part of the Chair, but on the part of the hon. member who suggested it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I am accepting the motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Gardens (Mr. Coulter) intimated some time ago that he had an amendment. Surely there must be a mistake somewhere.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The committee will understand I am not going to allow very much time for this. Although in my opinion the matter has been sufficiently discussed, I will give an opportunity to the hon. member for Gardens to move his amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reyburn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REYBURN</person>:</from>

<p>Will we have an opportunity of discussing this amendment?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member will have an opportunity. The clause has already been sufficiently discussed, but I will give a reasonable time for the discussion of the amendment, before accepting a closure motion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>I am not moving this amendment with any idea of obstructing the Bill. It is a constructive amendment which I think will be acceptable to the hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees). I supported the hon. member for Delarey on the second reading, but I think he has gone a little too far and I ask him to accept this amendment which will meet the complaints against this society. The question of the innocent infringer is dealt with in Section 8 of the British Copyright Act. Perhaps hon. members would like me to read the section [section read]. The point of the hon. member is met entirely by Section 8, except insofar as it refers to injunction. This society is a genuine society. It is a company which secures under one control the performing rights of composers of musical works. It is their methods to which objection is taken. The society has come to South Africa where, without registering the copyright of their constituent members, it threatens an interdict if any of these works are performed without a licence from it. The first demand was made on the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs at a time when he contracted broadcasting. He acquiesced with the demand for a licence. Then they followed that up by going to one of the largest municipalities in this country and adopting the same procedure, and then the procedure is extended to the smaller man, who may not be able to afford to pay this licence fee of &#x00A3;25, &#x00A3;30 or &#x00A3;40 a year, or whatever it may be. Some of the persons concerned have taken up the attitude that they do not want to infringe any person&#x2019;s copyright, that they are quite prepared to pay a fee for performance of particular music, but object to be called upon to pay a round sum annually, forming a considerable burden perhaps in some cases upon the operations of their business, and not knowing at any time whether the music they were performing was actually copyright. The procedure of this society is this: It sends out an inspector who calls upon the proprietor of such an establishment to take out an annual licence. If he, on his part, inquires whether or not they possess the copyright in any particular works which he may desire to perform, their reply is this: &#x201C;We refuse to tell you. We are not prepared to supply you with a list of our copyright works. You perform at your risk, and if you choose to perform in that way and you happen to perform a musical work in respect of which we hold the copyright, we will take you to court and you will be mulcted in the costs of an interdict.&#x201D; Consequently, this proprietor, when faced with the risk of having to pay the costs of such an interdict, prefers to take out the licence, but he does so under protest and this Bill, I take it, is a reflection of those protests which come from various parts of the country; The case of the innocent infringer is clearly provided for in the British Copyright Act, but it does not go far enough. As a matter of fact, as against an innocent infringer, no summons can be issued. Section 8 deals with the position of the innocent infringer (quoted). The whole position is amply met by giving the defendant the same right in respect of the costs of the interdict, as he possesses where a summons is issued. The plaintiff can get his interdict, but you can take away from him the weapon which compels the persons concerned to-day to make this contribution if he cannot secure the costs of that interdict. The effect then, will be this, that these composers, or the Society on their behalf, <span class="col_2053-2054" refersTo="page_1093"/>will have by proper advertisement and other means to make it clear to the public what are the works in respect of which they have copyright. May I now move, formally, this amendment? [Amendment read.] I move that as a substitution for the first paragraph of Clause 1.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I was rather sorry to see the attitude adopted by some hon. members across the way, and I stated I did not think they were very fair. No more I do. We have been admitting, all along, that some legislation should be devised to meet the point raised in this amendment, that some sort of adequate protection should be provided, that there should be some measure taken to prevent the Performing Rights Society going too far. To my mind the amendment moved by the hon. member for Gardens (Mr. Coulter), to a large extent meets that. We have had the most cogent reasons for altering this Bill very fundamentally, and yet the hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) has not suggested any amendment. They just sit there. We cannot legislate like that. It is reducing the thing to a farce. All along I have frankly admitted that the performers are entitled to some sort of notice and to protection. Not only the composers are entitled to protection, but the performers also. The amendment I moved, as well as that now moved, are both designed to protect not the composers, but the performers. The way to protect the performer is by an amendment that will really protect him without at the same time, robbing the composers of their just rights. The hon. member for Delarey has told us he does not want to rob the composers of their rights, and yet this Bill does that very thing Then why not accept this amendment? I would point to the absence of the Minister of Justice, who actually has an amendment on the paper, and who has disappeared in the last two hours, although this is a Bill of considerable public importance. Are we in a tired House, going to pass a Bill like this, which is going to create an injustice? There is no questions about it. If we pass this Bill we will be doing a rank injustice to large numbers of people. Is this the atmosphere in which to pass legislation of this sort, depriving of their rights people not here to defend themselves, and infringing upon an international treaty? I do hope the House will accept that amendment. Coming back to my own amendment, I prefer mine to that of the hon. member for Gardens, although both aim at achieving the same result, that of protecting the performer without depriving the composer of his just dues and rights, and yet it seems to me the attitude of members on the opposite side has become one of mere obstinacy. That is not the way to legislate in this country. If we sat till to-morrow morning it would become a contest of endurance and obstinacy. We have not, on this side, been trying to make it a contest of endurance, but have been putting one argument after another which are valid. Do not let us legislate in the style of petulant schoolboys, in which neither side wants to give way. One hon. member on the other side said, &#x201C;We will show you, and we will keep you here.&#x201D; No doubt the hon. member who made that remark, and has just come in, can keep us here all night, but it will not be fair legislation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#munnik">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MUNNIK</person>:</from>

<p>The time has arrived to come to a decision on this question, and I now move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the question be now put.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>May I ask the hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) for his views?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry, I cannot do that, and wait until someone has spoken. I will accept the motion.</p>

<p>Motion put and a division called.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>On a point of order, I do not think there was a quorum when the division was called. Is that valid?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>My attention was not drawn to it.</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;30.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Pienaar, B. J.; Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;19.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Tellers: Coulter, C. W. A.; Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Col. D. Reitz put and the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;20.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Tellers: Blackwell L.; Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p><span class="col_2055-2056" refersTo="page_1094"/>Noes&#x2014;30.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p>De Villiers, P. C.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A S.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Pienaar, B. J.; Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Amendment accordingly negatived.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>May I ask the hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) whether he is accepting the Ministers amendment?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot allow it to be discussed now.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by the Minister of Justice and the Rev. Mr. Hattingh put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>New clause to follow Clause 1.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#coulter">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">COULTER</person>:</from>

<p>Before you put Clause 2, I wish to move a new clause to follow Clause 1. The hon. member for Delarey (Mr. van Hees) has assured us that this Bill, in the form in which he introduced it, and in the form in which the first clause has now been adopted by the committee, will not infringe any convention binding on the Union and relating to copyright. He has told us, if I remember correctly, that he has taken opinion on that point, and he is satisfied, I presume on the advice of the law advisers of the Crown, that there would be no infringement of any international convention to which the Union is a party. We must take it, particularly as the Minister of Justice has moved an amendment to Clause 1, that the Government is satisfied that there will be no infringement of any such convention, but rather than to have that view of this clause as it has now been passed in any uncertainty, I think we should make it clear that this Bill should be construed so as to make sure that it does not infringe any such convention. Consequently I move that the following be a new clause to follow Clause 1&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">2. Nothing in this Act contained shall be deemed to infringe the terms of any convention relating to copyright to which the Union of South Africa may be a party.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_hees">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN HEES</person>:</from>

<p>I am prepared to accept that.</p>

<p>New clause put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause 2 and title having been agreed to.</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Bill reported with amendments; to be considered on 16th March.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1928-03-13T18:35:00">6.35 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

