---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol10 - MONDAY 27 FEBRUARY 1928'
layout: debate
year: 1928
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>MONDAY, 27th FEBRUARY, 1928.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1928-02-27T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#new_member">

<heading>NEW MEMBER.</heading>

<speech by="#clerk">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLERK</person></from>

<p>read a letter from the Secretary to the Prime Minister, dated 27th February, 1928, reporting the election of Frank Gibaud, Esq., for the electoral division of Three Rivers, in the room of D. M. Brown, Esq., deceased.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What was the majority?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person>:</from>

<p>Was he elected by his peers?</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#factories_amendment_bill">

<heading>FACTORIES (AMENDMENT) BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Labour to introduce the Factories (Amendment) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 12th March.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#appropriation_part_bill">

<heading>APPROPRIATION (PART) BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Finance to introduce the Appropriation (Part) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 5th March.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#diamond_trade_regulation_natal_bill">

<heading>DIAMOND TRADE REGULATION (NATAL) BILL.</heading>

<p>First Order read: Third reading, Diamond Trade Regulation (Natal) Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from><span class="col_1407-1408" refersTo="page_0770"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the Bill be now read a third time.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>I want to protest against the principle underlying this Bill for two reasons. I am not much concerned with the objection from this side of the House to legislation already passed in other parts of the Union being applied by proclamation, although I don&#x2019;t think it a very desirable method. What I am afraid of is that the law in the Transvaal will be applied in regard to trapping. The Labour party has always been opposed to anything in the nature of the trapping system. If this is applied to Natal it will mean that instead of the trapping system being curtailed or entirely abolished it will be extended to another part of the Union. I do feel the Minister should give us some assurance that as far as that aspect of the matter is concerned it will not be applied to the public of Natal, and that the trapping system will be curtailed in other parts of the Union. There is another vicious principle which is being applied in this Bill. Under Clause 1 of the Diamond Trading Ordinance of 1903 the onus is placed on the person found in possession of uncut stones. The Labour party have always been opposed to the principle that a person should have to prove his innocence. If anyone commits murder or assault the onus of proof is placed on the prosecution, but here, the onus is placed upon the possessor and not the prosecutor. I think that is a vicious principle, and it imposes a restriction in favour of property as against the rights of individuals and the rights of persons. For these reasons I am opposed to the third reading of this Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reyburn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REYBURN</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister if he would not give the assurance that the hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge) has asked for. The trapping system is a bad system, and I think the Minister might give us that assurance.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>I hope members from Natal are going to make quite sure of what is going to be done under this Bill in regard to police practice there. I may congratulate the Minister upon going all out for the big diamond interests. There is nothing like doing a thing thoroughly. Our Natal friends probably do not quite understand what is really the nature of our trapping system. It has been eloquently defended in this House by the Minister of Justice and some of us were amazed when he did so, as it was opposed to assurances given at the general election. During 50 years of trapping have the C.I.D. ever caught a big man? Yes, they did catch a big one, but he was let go and never punished, and is living in luxury in London to-day as an example of successful evasion. They also caught another big man, even bigger than the first, but he was too big and much too heavy to hold, and so that big man also escaped. How is it that after these fifty years those at the back of their unfortunate dupes&#x2014;who provide the capital&#x2014;are never caught, and why then persist in a rotten system so opposed to the first principles of justice&#x2014;namely, that a man is held innocent until he is proved to be guilty? Here is a report in to-day&#x2019;s newspapers of an unfortunate who was arrested after having bought a parcel of &#x00A3;2,000 worth of uncut diamonds through a trap, surely a great temptation to resist. The other day we had information published where a man was trapped with a &#x00A3;700 diamond. The extraordinary thing is that &#x00A3;1,800 worth of diamonds were lost in one year by the traps&#x2014;they were missing, and when the matter was pursued by inquiries the information we got from the police authorities was&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">We trust these traps, and to catch the big buyers we must entrust the former with diamonds of considerable value. When the signal is given by the trap the place is rushed by the police, but sometimes no diamonds are found. The trap did not have them, nor did the supposed guilty person.</block>

<p>You have criminals trapping criminals; and it has been found that the trap and his victim had stolen the diamonds and shared the spoil. It is a dark department and no member of Parliament is supposed to ask any inconvenient questions about its operations&#x2014;big interests don&#x2019;t like it! One trap who was far too successful trapped one of the C.I.D., and it was a genuine, good case, but was hushed up and nothing allowed to leak out. We are committed to this wretched trapping system, and pay &#x00A3;20,000 a year for it. It were better paid for some more legitimate object. Why do we not see to it that people get unadulterated food, that storekeepers are not foisting poisonous food on the purchasers? We cannot find money even for the Minister of Agriculture to completely stamp out scab, or for all sorts of essential purposes, but we can find every penny asked for by the big producers to trap poor people. It may have been useful once, but I challenge the hon. member for Beaconsfield (Col. Sir David Harris), as an authority on the subject, to say how many diamonds can possibly escape since the introduction of grease tables. The process catches 95 to 98 per cent. of the output. Only two men are employed now on these tables, the one to watch the other. All this loud shouting about diamond stealing is absolute rubbish, but the C.I.D. have to keep it up. If the department is successful, their job perishes. So criminal traps do a &#x201C;frame up&#x201D; to prove that they are busy. Ministers must defend the departmental heads in every way and do so. This wretched system is expensive; and absolutely indefensible as far as dealing with the liberties of the common people is concerned. The system leads to carelessness in that men who have to look after their own gold and diamonds throw their responsibility on a department; they rely upon this expensive system and trust to it, instead of looking after their property themselves. Every now and then some unfairly and sorely tempted man or woman is sent to gaol and a family ruined. A State system by which one <span class="col_1409-1410" refersTo="page_0771"/>criminal is paid to get another criminal; the greater criminal often being the official trap, may fill our gaols with convicts for hire to mining companies, but it is an iniquitous anomaly in this century and in this country. If the Minister of Justice also thinks it fair and right he could add to his gaol captures burglars and bank clerks. Indeed there is no end to the great possibilities of general trapping. The system is unknown in any other civilized nation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#richards">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">RICHARDS</person>:</from>

<p>I want to lodge my protest against this Bill, not for the reasons given by my hon. friends on my left. The Government is applying a system against which everyone ought to protest. The Minister is asking for authority to pass a measure which enables him to adapt any clauses of the Transvaal Act, and apply them to Natal, on very short notice, and by way of proclamation. This is a form of government which is only applied to native territories, and should never be applied to a province like Natal. He is also as much in the dark as we are, and has not the foggiest idea what part of the law he is going to adopt for Natal. When he has made up his mind what clauses he is going to take, he should schedule these as part of the Bill and we would then know whether we could agree or otherwise&#x2014;I personally am not satisfied, and I do not know that the House is&#x2014;I would also like to hear from him whether there has been anything in the nature of illicit diamond buying in Natal, and where is the urgent necessity for this, and has he found himself unable to deal with this illicit diamond buying, if there has been any? If he has had that experience there should be no difficulty in making it perfectly clear to us what clauses of the Transvaal Act he wishes to apply. I am certainly going to vote against this.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>There seems to be a total misapprehension. The hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge), the hon. member for Umbilo (Mr. Reyburn), and the hon. member for Pretoria (West) (Mr. Hay) have appealed to me to stop the trapping system, or, at any rate, not to introduce it in Natal under the proposed legislation. There is not a single Act which mentions the trapping system which is not a question of legislation, but of criminal procedure. Hon. members should address themselves on the subject to the Minister of Justice. If this Bill becomes law any prosecutions under it would fall under the department of the Minister of Justice. I am not prepared at this stage to discuss the pros and eons of the trapping system. It may be that one day the House may be called upon to review the whole situation, and if necessary to pass legislation prohibiting the application of the trapping system, but it is not a question of law but practice. However, I am not expressing any opinion either for or against the system. As regards the onus of proof, I cannot do better than refer to the apposite remarks of the hon. member for Bloemfontein (North) (Mr. Barlow) when the question was raised by the hon. member for Pretoria (West) (Mr. Hay). There remain the points raised by the hon. member for Weenen (Maj. Richards). I made clear in my second reading speech the reasons for the urgency of this measure. I also pointed out on a previous occasion that there had actually been a prosecution in Natal since November 16, and the court was bound to discharge the accused because there was no legislation in Natal making the possession of uncut diamonds illegal. Directly this fact becomes known, Natal will become&#x2014;as the hon. member for Rondebosch (Mr. Close) very rightly said&#x2014;an Alsatia for these people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#richards">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">RICHARDS</person>:</from>

<p>Why was that not so before?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>Because they did not know the position. I wonder if the hon. member was here on the second reading of the Bill. What is the good of my repeating that two and two make four and the hon. member keeping on stating that they do not? Does he not attach any value to the argument I advance? I explained on another occasion that in the original Natal Act there was a defect which had not become known until recently. I have had occasion in the last few years to direct my attention to the Natal Act, and I discovered that it was not a crime in Natal to be in possession of uncut diamonds. The hon. member raises a point and then runs away from it when I answer him. I have already said frankly and candidly that this is a very undesirable form of legislation, but if I had introduced the sections from the Transvaal Ordinance or had framed an entirely new Bill there would have been such a discussion&#x2014;as appears this afternoon&#x2014;that the matter would have been delayed indefinitely. It is a most urgent matter, and I therefore appeal to the good sense of the House, but if Parliament is prepared to say there is no reason for the Bill I will be satisfied and we will not legislate at all. Let us run the risk of every illicit dealer smuggling diamonds into Natal and being immune. The hon. member says I leave the House in the dark. That, however, is the very essence of the Bill, for we have to decide afterwards what sections shall be made applicable to Natal. If I have to say now the sections in advance which are to be made applicable I might as well introduce a detailed Bill and I have pointed out the risk of delay if I bring in a measure containing the actual wording.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a third time.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#irrigation_amendment_bill">

<heading>IRRIGATION (AMENDMENT) BILL.</heading>

<p>Second Order read: Second reading, Irrigation (Amendment) Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>The most important amendment in this Bill is the alteration in connection with water <span class="col_1411-1412" refersTo="page_0772"/>lights. Then we have further cleared up doubtful points in the existing law, and we have chiefly in that connection followed the procedure laid down by the court. There are also other new provisions included in this Bill. Before I deal with the most important point in the Bill I want to deal with the laws which have from time to time been in force in the Union, or in its various provinces, and I do so because through the courtesy of an hon. member of this House, a pamphlet has been handed me which sets out the Bill in an entirely neutral manner. Therefore I think it is necessary to know what the law of the Union was from time to time. The first law was of course that of our ancestors, the Common Law. That divided our waters into two groups, namely public streams and private streams. The owner&#x2019;s rights over the stream differed considerably from each other. The public streams were navigable, but there was so much water that it could be used by a number of riparian owners who had the joint use of the water. Private waters were the dry streams and small fountains, which flower occasionally, but were not actually sufficient for joint use. Those were the provisions of our ancestors, but the rights to the streams differed considerably. Dry streams or private streams belonged entirely to farm owners, and they could use the water for any purpose, for irrigation, sale or otherwise. No one had the right of interfering with them. With regard to public streams, on the contrary, every man who was entitled to access to the river had the right to make use of it both for himself and his cattle. The riparian owners had the right to use the water for household purposes, and also for irrigation, but in that case subject to the other riparian owners. So that in times of drought they had to stop using the water for irrigation and also for cattle, because they had to allow sufficient water to run for primary purposes for the people lower down the river. The first amendment in the law was made in 1876 when the Cape Government, on the top of Table Mountain, made alterations and encroached to a certain extent on the rights of owners. Formerly he had the right to private streams, but in the Act of 1876 this right was taken away, and it was laid down that if a man wanted to lead a furrow and did not have sufficient opportunity of taking it out of the stream on his own ground, he might trespass on the land of another and lead his water from there. I do not say that is wrong, because I feel that the law-makers were anxious to encourage irrigation as much as possible, but I quote it because it is said that we are encroaching on certain owners&#x2019; rights, and I am therefore pointing out that as far back as 1876 a similar encroachment took place in the general interest to get as much ground as possible under irrigation. In 1906 another encroachment took place by permitting the building of dams in dry rivers. The Bill was then so amended that the streams were divided into running streams and dry streams. In dry streams, therefore, that is the private streams under the old Act, dams could also be constructed. The right of using all the water of a private stream was then restricted, and it was provided that only so much might be used by the dams that were built, that anyone who built such a dam might use the legitimate amount that he required, and no more. I think that the lawmakers did not take account then of the circumstances that if a surplus of a dry or running river was not conserved it ran into the sea, and the mistake was made that only a certain part of the water could be used. This mistake was rectified in 1907, and it was then laid down that dams might also be made in running rivers, and that the riparian owners only could use a just portion of the water there. In the Free State and Natal before the Union, they did not have any separate water statutes, but the matter was regulated by common law. There were only certain Acts with reference to water for railways. In 1908 an Irrigation Act was passed in the Transvaal which was specially intended to make provision with reference to surplus water, and which laid down what the normal stream of the waters shall be. At the commencement of Union the various Acts were co-ordinated into the Irrigation Act for the Union. It is possibly a pity that it was not called the Act on Water Rights of the Union of South Africa, because other Acts so often encroach upon the irrigation legislation, as I shall make clear presently. I feel, when dealing with such an important subject as irrigation, it is necessary to enquire into the requirements of the people, what the people want in the way of irrigation, and to gauge this with our experience during the last 16 years in irrigation legislation, and then to try to pass an Act which will as much as possible comply with the wishes of the population of the country. We must always bear in mind what is best for the population in general, and that was the view which I and my department took in drafting the Bill. Various things are dealt with in the Bill, and let me now, before I speak on the principle of the Bill, briefly touch on a few points which induced me to introduce it as soon as possible. In the first place it is very clear that when the Irrigation Act was drafted in 1912, the circumstances were very conflicting. The hypographic conditions in one place differed very much from those in another. It could, therefore, be expected that after 16 years&#x2019; experience there would be certain grievances to be removed and points in the Act requiring improvement. I have merely to call to mind the strong agitation in past years against the Irrigation Act. There are e.g. people who protest against the protection clause. Feelings ran so high that the former Government in 1923 appointed a commission of enquiry to ascertain where the Act was causing difficulties, and where there were hitches to make recommendations to the Government about amending the law. The commission consisted of well-known persons, namely Justices van Zyl, Louwrens and Jeppe, and the present Director of Irrigation, who has had long experience in irrigation matters. They travelled about the country and took evidence everywhere. A valuable report was issued by them in 1924 or 1925 with reference to the Irrigation Act, and I may say that a number of the recommendations have been incorporated in this Bill. The <span class="col_1413-1414" refersTo="page_0773"/>thief difficulty that we have always had in irrigation against the 1912 Act, is that the right is taken away in the protection clauses that a man could never build irrigation works for his family or posterity without paying compensation to all the people situated below the irrigation works. If protection is given to a certain area, then notice thereof is of course given, and the people who did not state that they intended to build irrigation works within ten years are thereafter excluded from building even the smallest dam for their cattle to drink at unless they pay compensation to all the people in the district. The result was dissatisfaction, and the people want this to be amended, and that the owners&#x2019; rights which were taken away from them in the 1912 Act should to a certain extent be restored to them. Although the commission was not entirely in agreement with this, I am glad to say that the irrigation congresses have discussed the matter from year to year, and they came to agreement last year at Port Elizabeth with regard to protection, and this was repeated in Cape Town this year. Some people ask what urgency there is for this Bill, and if it cannot go to a select committee before the second reading. The urgency is shewn by the experience of my department. The commission&#x2019;s report shows that it was even impossible for judges to give a decision in connection with certain points which were not clear in the 1912 Act. Another point is that the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) appealed to me in the House last year to put through the Bill, especially Clauses 15 and 16, and I then said that it was impossible to do it piecemeal, and that we would tackle the whole thing this year. The first difficulty, therefore, arose in connection with the protection clause in the old Act. In the new Bill we are trying as much as possible to meet objections and there are legitimate ones. There are cases of inequity. Take e.g. a man who has minor children surviving him. The children did not ask for permission to build dams under the old Act. There is a neighbour who is not very progressive and did not think of applying for permission to build dams, and his children who are possibly progressive, cannot build dams to-day. In other cases good farmers have bought farms, and according to the old Act they cannot even build a small dam. We have therefore started from the principle that we must meet those people in certain respects. We have therefore provided that in future three classes of dams can be built. The first kind is that of free water. In protected areas just as many dams can be built as the landowners require. The object is to entitle people who want smaller works to construct them. The only thing the Water Court will enquire into in such a case, is the proposed size of the works. The second kind of dam will hold up to 150,000,000 gallons of water. The dams also may be built, and the Water Court will only investigate whether they are sound economically. If so, they may be built. They are called &#x201C;smaller works.&#x201D; The third sort is larger works above 150,000,000 gallons of water. I may here possibly be accused of a little socialism because it is laid down that the court shall not grant all the dams applied for, but they shall view the matter from a broad national standpoint. They will only be allowed to be built when they will benefit the nation, and be payable dams. The Water Court will e.g. see that where there is merely an opportunity for one large dam in a river, four or five shall not be allowed to be built. That will prevent them all being failures and causing Parliament subsequently to have to write off amounts spent on the dams. The Water Court will only permit such dams to be built on a sound basis. Ninety-nine out of a hundred dams of that kind will of course be built from monies voted by Parliament, and I think it is not fair to build dams which are not economically sound. With reference to surplus water in connection with the building of dams, we have departed from the idea of proportional division of the water. In the past it was found impossible to divide the water proportionally. This may prevent there being five or six dams in a catchment area. If we could control the clouds and the rainfall equally in all the dams, then such a proportional division would Be possible, but because we have not got that power it is impossible even for a court to fix the proportional division, and it appeared in the past that it was impossible and the department is convinced of it. We are therefore abandoning it because it is practically impossible. I now come to the second important point in the Bill, namely, the provisions on &#x201C;normal streams.&#x201D; This is a very difficult and complicated matter, and it will possibly be best for me to read out what the commission says on the point. We have more or less followed their recommendations in this connection. I do not say that these provisions are perfect, but we have taken what, in our experience, has been the most practicable. Let me say that it appeared to be absolutely impossible to divide the normal streams proportionally. We never knew how much water A or B had used; the normal streams in times of drought often contain absolutely no water, but at other times they have plenty. They change, therefore, from time to time, and with regard to court cases no individual case was decided excepting a few small ones where it was possible, but all were settled by agreement out of court or by arbitrators. As we know what the position is, we just try to keep people out of court as much as possible, and to make a different division so that we do not rush people into costs. I therefore want to quote what the commission said at that time&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<debateSection name="#i_primary_use_in_respect_of_normal_flow_and_surplus_water">

<heading>I. Primary Use in Respect of Normal Flow and Surplus Water.</heading>

<p>There is no provision in the law as it stands for determining the quantity of water to which riparian owners are entitled for primary use.</p>

<p>In streams which have a normal flow, it is impossible for a water court to ascertain what portion of the normal flow would be available for secondary use, or to determine what is &#x201C;surplus water,&#x201D; unless it is authorised and empowered to fix the quantity required for <span class="col_1415-1416" refersTo="page_0774"/>primary use. In streams which have no normal flow (and wherein consequently all the water is &#x201C;surplus water&#x201D;) it is likewise impossible for a water court to determine how much surplus water a riparian owner is entitled to divert or impound for primary use, unless the court is authorised and empowered to fix the quantity required for such use.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#ii_primary_use_and_domestic_purposes">

<heading>II. Primary Use and Domestic Purposes.</heading>

<p>We think that the words &#x201C;domestic purposes,&#x201D; where they appear in Section 11 (2) of the Act, are too vague, and liable in some cases, especially in the case of big towns, to cause serious difficulty where it has to be determined what uses are actually covered thereby. We would, therefore, recommend that the legislature should make it clear what uses it desires to be included under these words, e.g. it is by no means clear now whether these words cover water for flushing drains and watering streets, or water otherwise required for the health and comfort of the inhabitants of a town.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#iii_definition_of_normal_plow">

<heading>III. Definition of Normal Plow.</heading>

<p>We think that it is desirable that the definition of &#x201C;normal flow&#x201D; should be amended, and in that regard we make the following recommendations&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(a) The definition should be widened so as to include water for &#x201C;primary use.&#x201D; This is necessary because by Section 11 of the Act, the primary use of normal flow is preferred to the secondary use thereof. Seeing, therefore, that surplus water is defined as &#x201C;water other than normal flow, if any,&#x201D; it stands to reason that, in a stream with a normal flow, there can only be surplus water when the requirements of riparian owners for primary use as well as for secondary use, now covered by the definition, have been satisfied. This amendment should, however, be made without prejudicing the right of riparian owners in respect of the primary use of surplus water in streams which have no normal flow.</li>

<li>(b) The word &#x201C;visibly&#x201D; should be deleted from the definition. There are public streams, like the Buffels River at Laingsburg, which have no visible flow except during floods, but which have strong permanent underground flows in their beds. These streams were, before 1912, treated as perennial streams in the Cape Province, and we think they should now be treated as streams with a normal flow.</li>

<li>(c) The words &#x201C;can be beneficially used&#x201D; should be amended to read &#x201C;is, and may reasonably be expected to be, beneficially used.&#x201D; This is desirable for, by reason of the existing legal facilities for acquiring servitudes over an upper owner&#x2019;s land, there may be big tracts of land which can he irrigated from a public stream, but with regard to which there is no reasonable prospect of their ever being irrigated by direct irrigation. This may lead to a great deal of water running uselessly to the sea which may other-wise have been intercepted and stored as &#x201C;surplus water.&#x201D;</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#iv_determination_of_normal_flow">

<heading>IV. Determination of Normal Flow.</heading>

<p>We think that it is undesirable that the method of determining the normal flow of public streams should be prescribed by regulation as provided in Sections 10 (3) and 32 (f) of the Act. The definition of normal flow should be clear and comprehensive enough to enable the water court to determine the normal flow of any stream without the aid of regulations. This is desirable because of the difference in the character of streams and in the circumstances connected with them. These are matters which the water court should carefully enquire into and deal with by applying the terms of the definition to the peculiar circumstances of each particular case.</p>

<p>The practical dealing with normal flow is always at some definite point on the stream. It is necessary to know what the normal flow is at that point or what part thereof must be passed on below that point. In these cases the rate of discharge is the practical unit to use. It often happens that the requirements of riparian owners on a stream with a normal flow vary considerably at different times of the year. If in such a case the court were to fix a uniform rate of discharge as the normal flow, a great deal of waste might result therefrom. We would therefore recommend that the water court be empowered to fix for the same stream, where in its discretion it thinks it desirable, different rates of discharge as the normal flow for different periods of the year.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vi_use_of_surplus_water_for_tertiary_purposes">

<heading>VI. Use of Surplus Water for Tertiary Purposes.</heading>

<p>There appears to be no reason why the rights of an &#x201C;authorised undertaker&#x201D; under section 41 of Act 42 of 1922 should not be given to a riparian owner who applies either under Section 20 or Section 21 of Act 8 of 1912. We recommend accordingly.</p>

<p>Those are the recommendations of the commission which was appointed in 1923. Most of the recommendations I have quoted are included in this Bill. It is asked who wanted the alterations. The people who gave evidence before the commission as well as the commission that was sent round to make the enquiry. They press for the alteration. But not only the commission, but my department, and the court feel that it is absolutely impossible to give judgment with reference to the division of water in normal streams and we therefore thought the Bill was desirable. The report is very clear, and, besides this, there were successive congresses, and never yet, as far as I know, have resolutions been taken contrary to the commission&#x2019;s recommendations. Those are the two chief points in connection with water, and let me now come to another important point, namely, &#x201C;the authorised undertakers.&#x201D; I have already been accused of introducing an entirely foreign word. Let me at once say that I took this word from an Act passed about <span class="col_1417-1418" refersTo="page_0775"/>six years ago by this House, the Electricity Act. That defines the word, and therefore it is not such a dangerous word as the congress thought. At one of the congresses it was said that certain rights were being taken away, and that it was unfair. I think the time has come in our country for us to enquire what enterprises need water. We hear a great deal about the progress of industries. Can an industry be created without water? No. Not a single one, and it is very clearly laid down in the Bill that if water is taken away from a riparian owner it can only be done on compensation. Under the Electricity Act the last Government took the same power for the electricity industry. Water can be taken on compensation if it is in the interests of the industry. We go further in this Bill and say that villages adjoining rivers can also take water. What, otherwise, would happen to the water supply of our villages? We, however, protected the rights of owners.</p>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>My friend says no, but I will prove it. The 1912 Act, which is being amended by this Bill, gives the right to riparian villages to have the water without any restriction for primary uses. I have quoted the report of the judges, and the question is asked for what purpose the water is used which is meant for primary purposes. For wetting the streets, etc. That was possible under the old law. We have now gone and protected the rights of lower riparian owners. We do not know how villages may develop, or how large they will be in 20 years, and we cannot allow them possibly to use all the water while the farmers lower down possibly get nothing. We provide that for a white person no more than 75 gallons, and for another inhabitant no more than 25 gallons may be used a day. Where there was formerly free use, it is now limited. We go further with regard to undertakings. What about the railways that have done so much good to the country? Is there any member who will say that we must not allow the railways to take water? That is one of the undertakings which, like the electricity industry, under the Electricity Act, comes under the term &#x201C;authorised undertakers.&#x201D; The municipalities and railways fall under that. Are the railways then, every time they want a little water, to come to Parliament for it? And what about the mines? Are not the mines to have any water? Under the present law they get water, but is the present system the soundest, to allow the mining commissioners to divide the water rights? Such a person probably has no knowledge of water or of the general interests of the farmers. If, therefore, a farm is proclaimed to-day, the mines department takes charge of the water and divides it according to circumstances. We make the provision that the water court, which knows the circumstances and has to make proper enquiries, must grant the water. Is there anything wrong in that? One of my principal ideas regarding this Bill was just where the rights of riparian owners were being gradually taken away, unbeknown, to try as much as possible to bring everything relating to water under the Bill. Therefore I asked the Minister of Mines and Industries last year to so draft his Bill so as not to conflict with the Irrigation Bill which I have now introduced, and which gives the water court jurisdiction over proclaimed farms. The same applies to railways and municipalities. It is no use saying that we want to encourage industries if we refuse to give them water. We must say whether we are to have industries or not. The hon. member for Johannesburg (North) (Mr. Geldenhuys) referred to villages. Does he not want us to deal with villages in the Bill?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#anderson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ANDERSON</person>:</from>

<p>What about the farmers&#x2019;?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member can speak later. If the villages do not get a certain quantity of water to enable them to exist, to whom is the farmer to sell his produce? If there are no industries in the country, to whom will the farmer sell it? We must surely try to look at the matter from all sides. I am trying to protect the landowners as much as possible, to limit the water for the towns, and to see that the water is not all gradually taken away unbeknown to the riparian owners. I do not wish to detain the House on this point any longer. Let me deal with another point about which there was considerable feeling, namely, joint and several liability. I shall, perhaps, be quoted because I have not entirely dealt with it in this Bill, and have only tried to grant certain relief. If we remove the joint and several liability, what difficulty will it cause? The scheduling of land under the Irrigation Act changes almost annually, and the Registrar of Deeds every year registers bonds against farms. That is not the trouble, but if a man cannot pay for the irrigation, who is to pay it? If the Government has borrowed money and a number of people have undertaken a joint and several liability, then they must also undertake that when a man goes insolvent they will be responsible for him. If the Government is held responsible for the money, then we shall soon have all the co-operative societies wanting the same thing from the Government. That will be wrong and will undermine the co-operative principle. It is not fair, and I am not prepared to do it. There is another objection, when ground gets brackish or if the Government is responsible for the damage then an upper proprietor will not be careful and will not mind what happens to the ground below. He will not take care to prevent its becoming brak and just allow the water to run. If, however, he is jointly responsible for the ground lying lower down, he will protect such lower proprietor. If we are to make the Government responsible in such a case, then it will interfere with the future of irrigation works. The Government will then not be prepared to go on with further irrigation schemes. Our schemes to-day are, unfortunately, so uneconomic. We shall not hear, in relation to all the schemes that pay to-day&#x2014;there are not many of them&#x2014;of difficulties in connection with <span class="col_1419-1420" refersTo="page_0776"/>joint and several liability. We get the difficulties with the schemes that do not pay, and the parts that are not economic and where the people are allowed to have too much ground and cannot cultivate it, I am out to put the scheme on a sound basis. Certain amounts will have to be written off, and I am sorry to have to say so, but we shall be obliged to do it. If we have joint and several liability we shall not have difficulties with anyone going insolvent and not being able to pay the money. One of the greatest difficulties is the people that come under the Minister of Lands. Settlers are usually fairly poor; they are put on ground just because they have no ground of their own, and the trouble usually is between the two departments. The people come under the Minister of Lands, to whom they are responsible, as well as to the Irrigation Board. We, therefore, want to try to introduce a system whereby the Minister of Lands takes as much responsibility as possible, and will try to get the money from the people and pay it to the irrigation boards. Otherwise he puts people on the land and the Irrigation Board drives them off. A further alteration is in connection with the mandated territory of South-West Africa. As hon. members know, the boundary between one country and another is usually the middle of a stream or river, but in the case of South-West Africa and the Union the boundary is the high-water mark on the northern side of the Orange River. The people of South-West Africa, therefore, strictly have not even the right to come to the water to drink. The provisions in this connection will certainly be approved by the House. We provide that so long as it does not interfere with the interests and rights of the Union, the people can build irrigation works for 20 years, and can use water in other ways as long as the Union is not injured. There are various other provisions, but I think that they can be dealt with in committee. There are the provisions about pure water, the use of the bed of the river, which is specially of importance to certain parts of the Cape Province, the extension of the powers of river boards, so that they have a reason for existing in as much as hitherto they have had almost no other capacity than registering the orders of the water court. We have tried to consolidate all the Acts regarding irrigation and, in this connection, to make provision for water for railways, towns, mines and other industries.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#anderson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ANDERSON</person>:</from>

<p>What about the farmers?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>We are out to assist the farmers. The towns are restricted so that the farmers get more water than they would get under the old law, moreover we get rid of the farmers&#x2019; difficulties in connection with the protected areas. Those are two amongst other provisions in the interests of the farmers. The hon. member is suddenly taking a tremendous interest in the farmers. Our object was to make the law as practical and practicable as possible. It is based on the experience of the past 16 years, and the difficulties caused by the former Act, and that have come out in the courts, on the report of the commission and in congresses. If there is anything which is not quite clear, or where the House thinks that we have curtailed rights a little too much, we can possibly still amend it. It is our job. My intention is to send the Bill to a select committee after a second reading, the existing committee on irrigation matters. We can then go in detail into whether anything requires alteration. I have specially to protect owners&#x2019; rights as much as possible by providing that if a certain industry needs water it cannot simply be appropriated, but the water courts must be called in to enquire whether the undertaking needs the water and is in the national interest of South Africa. Then they must pay proper compensation to the landowner. What is the difference whether the railways to-day pay compensation and the towns? Why should not the railways and mines and industries not have the right? I do not say the Bill is perfect, but we consulted the best people. I am indebted to the members of my department for hard work, and also to the people outside it who advised us. I am indebted to all who cooperated in drafting a Bill as practical as possible. There are a few points which I want to attack myself later on. The one refers to artesian springs. I will make a proposal later in that connection to take control of them. Then there are a few other points which we can add in the select committee, or in committee of the whole House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>This is an extremely important and complicated Bill, and it is rather difficult to understand. The Minister has made a long speech which some of us have not been able to follow, and I would propose the debate be adjourned, so as to give us time to look into the subject. We ought to have time to read the Minister&#x2019;s speech.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>During recent years this Bill has been pressed for and the provisions were discussed at many congresses, and the changes there recommended have been made in it. The Bill has been lying on the Table a considerable time, and to propose that the debate should be further postponed will simply mean that the Bill will possibly not be passed this season.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>I appeal to the Minister to grant the request. I must honestly say I find the Bill very complicated and difficult, but since the Minister&#x2019;s speech, many things have become clearer to me, and I believe that it may possibly be a very good law. Now I plead for hon. members who do not understand Afrikaans so well, and could not, therefore, sufficiently follow the Minister, that he will give them an opportunity of first reading his speech in English. It will be enough if he postpones the matter till Wednesday or Thursday. We also wish the Bill to be passed this year, but it is of interest to every member and everyone ought to be able to judge about it. The Act will possibly remain in force <span class="col_1421-1422" refersTo="page_0777"/>for years, and we must give our English friends an opportunity.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heyns">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEYNS</person>:</from>

<p>Why do they not learn Afrikaans?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will grant the request for a postponement for one or two days to give hon. members an opportunity.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nicholls">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NICHOLLS</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will listen to the appeal for the adjournment. There is no question in South Africa of such vital economic importance in which the people are so interested. This very important Bill has been discussed in some parts of the country and not in others, and so I hope the Minister will listen to the appeal and allow the debate to be adjourned.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smuts">

<from>Gen. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMUTS</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to press the Minister on this point. The Bill is a specially difficult Bill. I have been trying for two days to master the principles of it. They make a good deal of change in the common law and the statute law. Not only so, the provisions are expressed in very technical language, which it is difficult to understand. The Minister has made a very important statement to the House, and he ought to give members an opportunity to digest it. The Minister may take it that we want to deal with the matter entirely on its merits. The irrigation question has always been dealt with on non-party lines. There are many private interests concerned, and on questions of water in South Africa large numbers of people are vitally concerned. I am sure the Minister will find we will carry out that idea of dealing with this Bill on non-party lines if he gives us a little time to digest his speech. The Minister may say the Bill, in any case, is going to a select committee. I agree that is the right thing, but the select committee should have some guidance from the House. When you change the common law with regard to riparian owners, it should have some discussion before going to a select committee. The Bill ought to go through this session, and I hope the Minister will give us some days for digesting his speech and the provisions of the Bill, and that will facilitate the passage of the Bill. It will enable us to master the details and look at it from a non-party spirit.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>In view of the appeal of the leader of the Opposition, I accept the motion.</p>

<p>On the motion of Mr. Jagger, debate adjourned; to be resumed on 29th February.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railways_and_harbours_service_and_superannuation_amendment_bill">

<heading>RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS SERVICE AND SUPERANNUATION (AMENDMENT) BILL.</heading>

<p>Third Order read: House to go into committee on the Railways and Harbours Service and Superannuation (Amendment) Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I move, pursuant to notice&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the Committee of the Whole House on the Railways and Harbours Service and Superannuation (Amendment) Bill have leave to consider the expediency of amending Section 6 of Act No. 24 of 1925.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#swart">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SWART</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Umbilo (Mr. Reyburn) has an amendment to the instruction, but I regret I shall not be able to put it, as it would involve extra expenditure and therefore requires the Governor-General&#x2019;s approval.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>House in Committee:</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>stated the instruction to the committee.</p>

<p>On Clause 1,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reyburn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REYBURN</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the Chairman report progress and ask leave to sit again.</block>

<p>I do it for the purpose, at a later stage, of moving that the Bill be recommitted to the select committee for the purpose of inserting a provision similar to that contained in the amendment. I want to bring before the committee the position in this Bill. There is a clause dealing with the condonation of breaks of service for pension purposes of men who went on strike in 1914. I want to bring before the attention of the committee the Railways and Harbours Service Act of 1925. Clause 28, wherein it is laid down by this House and has become the law that a railway servant who was discharged from the service on account of the rebellion in 1914 and who has been re-admitted to the service since the rebellion, is entitled to get his service before the rebellion taken into account for all purposes. I would submit to the committee that it is no greater sin, no greater crime on the part of a railway servant to go on strike with his fellows at a time of industrial disturbance than it is for a railway servant to go into rebellion against the Government of the country. The position is now that a railway servant who went into rebellion against the Government of the country, who took up arms against the constitution of the country, has had his break of service condoned for all purposes, long service increment, promotion, etc., whereas the man who in 1914 took his place with his fellows in an industrial disturbance and went on strike cannot have his break of service condoned for any purpose except pension purposes. I think if the Minister took the Bill back to the select committee and then asked for the Governor-General&#x2019;s permission to incur this expenditure, which would not be great, he would be doing a thing which is only fair, just and right. I do not think it would take long for the Select Committee on Railways and Harbours to put that provision in. I understand that in <span class="col_1423-1424" refersTo="page_0778"/>committee it was proposed that it should go in, and the committee was not unfavourable, but the Governor-General&#x2019;s warrant had not been obtained.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>I rise to support the motion of the hon. member for Durban (Umbilo) (Mr. Reyburn), and I do so because I do not think that this proposal will involve any appreciable delay in the passage of this Bill. We are anxious to see the Bill passed, but we want it passed in such a way that no unfair differentiation will be made between railwaymen who have gone on strike and railwaymen who have gone into rebellion. If the Minister is in favour of having no such differentiation, if he is in favour of railwaymen who went on strike securing the same rights as railwaymen who went into rebellion, then there is no reason why he should not accept the proposal of the hon. member for Durban (Umbilo). Probably in a few days the Bill could again be brought before this committee and its passage would be facilitated. If, on the other hand, the Minister desires to continue this differentiation, then he will oppose the proposal of the hon. member for Durban (Umbilo), but I believe that is the only method by which we can deal with the matter at the present stage. When the original Bill of 1925 was passed, it is rather peculiar that at that time the rights of railwaymen were apparently not taken into consideration at all. I do not know whether that was due to an oversight on the part of the Minister, or whether it was definitely due to his policy in making that differentiation, but, after all, I think the members of this committee will agree with me that, however antagonistic they may be to strikes, the withholding by workers of their labour because they do not get conditions that they are satisfied with is less heinous&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member (Mr. Kentridge) is going a little bit far. I gave the proposer of the motion a certain amount of latitude.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not want to go into the merits now. I am pointing out the differentiation which exists between one class of workers and another class of workers. I say I believe that hon. members of this committee will agree with me that this differentiation should not exist. I cannot understand why the provision was not made in the Bill of 1925, unless the Minister believes in the policy of differentiation. I am afraid it is not very creditable to the members of my own party, and particularly those members who are in the Cabinet to look after the interests of railwaymen, that they did not see that the men who went on strike in 1914 should be treated as well as the men who went into rebellion.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. S. F. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>I quite agree with hon. members who spoke before me. I know some similar cases in my district. The hon. member for Umbilo (Mr. Reyburn) rightly said that there is very little difference between the strikers of 1914 and the subsequent ones. Why should the rights of those people who committed the same offence not be restored as well? It remains a grievance - with those people, and on the railways. I hope the Minister will accept the motion of the hon. member for Umbilo.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>It is clear to me that the hon. member who spoke first (Mr. Reyburn) and the hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge) do not fully understand the position. This matter has been very fully discussed in the select committee, and hon. members there asked me to submit a full statement dealing with all the different classes of servants mentioned by them. The matter would then be referred to the select committee, and the select committee would be in possession of all the facts. At a later stage legislation could possibly be introduced to cover the different cases. I agreed to do that, and I repeat that undertaking.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reyburn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REYBURN</person>:</from>

<p>This session?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I do not say this session. Let me deal with the particular case. Hon. members do not seem to be in possession of all the information. The servants who went on strike in 1914 and were re admitted to the service almost immediately were dealt with under Act 7 of 1914. All those servants were placed in the position of having their break in service condoned not only for pension purposes, but all other purposes. These are dealt with under the Act of 1914. Under the Act of 1920, those who had a longer break in their service, in other words who had not been readmitted almost immediately after the strike, had the break of service condoned only for pension purposes. The men who went into rebellion fell into the same class as employees who went on strike and who were practically reinstated and whose cases were dealt with under Act 7 of 1914.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reyburn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REYBURN</person>:</from>

<p>They were the ones who were black-listed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>No, because they were taken back into the service within the period of three years. In 1920 the House dealt with those cases, but only dealt with the cases of men who were members of some pension fund. The cases I now deal with are the remaining cases of men who went on strike in 1914, who were not reinstated and who did not fall under the Act of 1920 because they were not members of a pension fund. I hope that is clear.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>For pension purposes only?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, in the same way as those dealt with in 1920. I am placing these men in the same position, and I regret under these <span class="col_1425-1426" refersTo="page_0779"/>circumstances I am not able to accept the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MARWICK</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to say I support the motion of the hon. member for Umbilo (Mr. Reyburn), because I am aware of a considerable amount of dissatisfaction that exists at the present moment in regard to the withholding of privileges to railwaymen who went out on strike in 1914.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>I regret I cannot allow the hon. member to pursue that. Hon. members must give the reason why they want the committee to report progress.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>On a point of order, is it not open to any member in supporting a motion to report progress to give the reasons why he thinks it desirable to report progress?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>Members can discuss generally the position, but they must not plead for it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#marwick">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MARWICK</person>:</from>

<p>Without going into any details, I should like to express myself as being in favour of this motion to report progress, because it involves a very weighty question and one causing a great deal of dissatisfaction among railwaymen who are affected. I think it is the duty of Parliament to liquidate these outstanding matters and to make an end of them once and for all. I hope the Minister will take this view of it and agree to the motion to report progress.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Let me again repeat that in 1920 cases of this kind were dealt with by the previous Government.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reyburn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REYBURN</person>:</from>

<p>Not for all purposes.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I have admitted that, but I say that I am placing these men, who were also on strike and who were not reinstated, and placing them in the same position as the men dealt with in 1920. The House must realize that if the further benefits are granted to those employees who were not members of a pension fund then we must also extend it to men whose break was condoned under the Act of 1920.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>And those who went to war?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Those who went to war have been treated very liberally.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>No, they have not.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>If my hon. friend can give me any case where this has not been done, I will go into it. I have promised the select committee a full memorandum about all these cases and I think the House might be satisfied with that. I will give the hon. member (Mr. Marwick) a reply privately why we cannot possibly agree to condone for all purposes either in this case or in the case of servants dealt with under the Act of 1920.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>May I say, with due submission, that the Minister is begging the question? This was a discussion that took place in committee, and he was asked to get the information. We know he has at his disposal a large enough staff to get the information to enable him to review the matter under the present Bill. Under the Act of 1925 the men who went into rebellion are dealt with for purposes other than pension.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member cannot go into that question.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>I am only pointing out what we want done. We say there is no reason whatever why men who went on strike&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member is now going into the merits of the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>&#x2014;should not be dealt with on the same basis.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person>:</from>

<p>After the Minister&#x2019;s remarks, and in view of the fact that he held out no promise that a further Bill would be proceeded with during the present session, I think he should consider whether it would be possible to accept the motion to report progress and get the information he mentions at an early date. There is no violent hurry for this Bill. Cannot he see his way clear to accept this motion so as to give a little longer time for the memorandum to be prepared? I feel strongly that as the whole matter is not a particularly urgent one, and as the cases I am interested in are just as urgent as any provided for in this Bill, the Minister might agree to it. I hope he will accept the motion and see if we cannot deal with the whole of these cases during this session, so as to put an end to the many anomalies created under the old administration of the railways of this country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister knows I made constant representations about a case which came to my notice, and that would be affected by the motion of the hon. member. It is that of a man who has contended all along that he never went out on strike, but he was tried by the rough and ready tribunal of the day which went against him, and he has been punished as if he did go out on strike.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member is now going into the merits.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>No, I am telling the Minister that progress should be reported and leave asked to sit again. If that is not done we shall not hear anything more about it this session. It is the only chance to make provision for this man; if it is not done it may be put off until the Greek kalends. We are still early in the session, and there is no <span class="col_1427-1428" refersTo="page_0780"/>reason why this Bill should not stand over for a few weeks.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>I support the motion. The Minister has only one or two cases, and is not dealing with the cases that ought to be dealt with comprehensively. There is so much left out. Experience has shown that in the Service Act amendments are required. Cases are not provided for in this Bill, and they could be if the Minister would agree to report progress and ask leave to sit again.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reyburn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REYBURN</person>:</from>

<p>I think the Minister will realize there is a more widespread feeling than he thought at first. In view of what he has told us, it is desirable that this Bill should not be proceeded with while the point of break of service is still under consideration. This Bill ought to be put off for a week or a couple of weeks. The Bill of 1920 put some men right for pension purposes, but not for all purposes, like promotion. This is another Bill putting men on another basis, but not the same as the 1920 Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I do not want any misunderstanding to exist. I made clear in the select committee that the Government are not prepared to go further than stated in this Bill. No good purpose can be served by further postponing this matter, and the Government are not inclined to include further classes. The hon. member for Cape Town (Harbour) (Maj. G. B. van Zyl) pressed the case of men with military service; the hon. member for Salt River (Mr. Snow) dealt with apprentices, and there was the case mentioned by the hon. member for Umbilo (Mr. Reyburn). I indicated to the committee that I was not prepared to extend the provisions of the Bill, but was willing to submit a memorandum on all those cases. The House or Government may in future, if so advised, pass further legislation, hut that must be left to them. I cannot accept the motion for the adjournment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>Are we to understand that if this finds itself back in the select committee, the Government is not disposed to put back men&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, for the reasons I gave in the select committee, which, unfortunately, I cannot repeat now.</p>

<p>Motion put and the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;15.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Hay, G. A.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Nel, O. R.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Robinson, C. P.</p>

<p>Snow, W. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Tellers: Alexander, M.: Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;71.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Brink, G. F.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Chaplin, F. D. P.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Conradie, D. G.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Deane, W. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Hertzog, J. B. M.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Louw, G. A.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Malan, C. W.</p>

<p>Malan, D. F.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Moll, H. H.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Rider, W. W.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van der Merwe, N. J.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, J. J. M.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Pienaar, B. J.; Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Motion accordingly negatived.</p>

<p>Clause, os printed, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On new Clause 9 proposed by select committee,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 60, to omit &#x201C;refund&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;payment&#x201D; and an amendment in the Dutch version which did not occur in the English.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Proposed new clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>House Resumed;</p>

<p>Bill reported with amendments, which were considered and agreed to; and the Bill, as amended, adopted; third reading on 29th February.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railways_and_harbours_gratuity_bill">

<heading>RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS GRATUITY BILL.</heading>

<p>Fourth Order read; House to go into committee on the Railways and Harbours Gratuity Bill.</p>

<p>House in Committee:</p>

<p>On Clause 1,</p>

<speech by="#william_macintosh">

<from><span class="col_1429-1430" refersTo="page_0781"/>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILLIAM MACINTOSH</person>:</from>

<p>Will the Minister consider the case of men who retire before this Bill can come into operation? I know in my constituency quite a number of men have been compelled to retire on account of age. In the select committee it was stated that the measure could not be made retrospective, and such cases as I have referred to would be dealt with from the charitable fund, as hitherto. The Bill we have just passed is made retrospective till September, 1925. Cannot something of the same sort be done in this Bill, for in the mere matter of machinery there would be a saving rather than that the men should have to appeal to the charitable fund? Unfortunately, I cannot move anything myself, as it would mean additional expenditure.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the chairman report progress and ask leave to sit again.</block>

<p>The Government has decided to adopt the amendment moved in the select committee, altering six to ten days, and we have received the Governor-General&#x2019;s consent, but that consent, unfortunately, was not notified to the House when Mr. Speaker was in the chair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>Will the Minister consider at the same time, the point raised by the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (South) (Sir William Macintosh)?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>It will not be possible to do what the hon. member suggests. We have never made a Bill of this kind retrospective. If we make it retrospective for one year, why not for three, four or live years?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>Make it from the introduction of the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>I will consider that point.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Progress reported; House to resume in committee on 29th February.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#land_settlement_amendment_bill">

<heading>LAND SETTLEMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL.</heading>

<p>Fifth Order read: Second reading, Land Settlement (Amendment) Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>I think it is necessary to apologize to the House for introducing this Bill. It is only two years since we introduced a Bill on settlements, and we then hoped that that Bill would stand for years, without fresh legislation being necessary. Hon. members will, however, see that in administering such an Act certain alterations become necessary in the existing Acts and regulations. Nor do I believe that we have already reached the end of them. We have already had to make many amendments since the 1912 Act. Amendments have also become necessary now in the Act of 1925, and they are made in this Bill. There are a few administrative amendments, but it is not necessary to go into them now. The first important amendment is in Clause 3. The reason is that in the Land Settlement Act there is no provision for the abuses named in this clause, namely, additional compensation in connection with the purchase of ground by the Government. At an ordinary sale there is a hold upon anyone who makes a false declaration, but there is no provision of that sort in connection with purchases by the Government. One instance, inter alia, was brought to my notice the other day, unfortunately I cannot prove it. A certain price was paid for a farm, but the price was actually higher than the purchaser could pay and the seller then agreed to include the one-tenth in the price, with the result that the ground was bought and the Land Board valued it for the price including the one-tenth. The seller and purchaser afterwards divided the balance. That is, therefore, a way of evasion and fraud which cannot be allowed. In many cases the one-tenth is included in the purchase price, and the result is that the Government pays because the seller proves to the Land Board that the one-tenth has been paid. The intention, of course, is that the purchaser shall pay one-tenth, and the State nine-tenths. There are other instances. The Land Board possibly values ground lower than the price the seller wants. Then the purchaser agrees to buy at that price, but subsequently he pays an additional sum upon the purchase price notified to the Land Board. In this way transfer duty is evaded, and it causes a man to give more for the ground than he can actually afford, and he does not retain sufficient working capital. The Land Board takes into consideration whether a man possesses sufficient capital to build a house and to cultivate the ground properly. It sees that there is further capital to work the ground, but if a part is surreptitiously paid to the seller, then he does not retain sufficient, with the result that he fails. Hon. members will see that we are taking steps to make such deceit no longer possible. The second important amendment is that when a man buys ground under Clause 16, he also will get two years&#x2019; grace before starting with the instalments. Under Clause 11 he gets two years, and only commences paying instalments in the third year, but anyone hiring ground under Clause 16 only gets one year&#x2019;s grace. That is very short for him to so arrange matters as to have sufficient income in the second year to pay the instalments and carry on his farming. I think that is not fair, and I therefore propose that Clause 16 should also allow two years. When we remember that most of the land issued under Clause 16 is ground situated at a distance, then it is no more than reasonable that two years&#x2019; grace should also be given here. Then there is another provision Hon. members will know that the law protects contracts for ten years, but we must make an exception in the case of the Land Bank and irrigation boards. They must have the right, when someone does not <span class="col_1431-1432" refersTo="page_0782"/>pay water rates, to sell the lease. Another important provision is with regard to irrigation settlements. Provision is made in the law for certain advances being made to settlers, but the further one is being made here that people on irrigation settlements, i.e., land where dams are constructed and a certain part is irrigated, who will not pay the water rates, can get help. They are usually poor people, and have not the capital to prepare the ground, and to wait until such time as it produces something. Most people go in for fruit growing, and the growing of lucerne, etc. The Bill provides for advances for these objects also. These people will be able to get advances for preparing the ground, the planting of trees and for their maintenance until they get something out of the ground. This is an important provision, and I shall move an amendment in committee to make one point still clearer with regard to irrigated ground. We further have the provision that when anyone obtains land from the state under the Land Settlement Act, he is obliged to occupy it personally and cultivate it. This makes it impossible for anyone who cannot live there personally to get such ground. We know that there are sheep farmers, especially in the Cape Province who, in consequence of drought, are compelled to trek with their sheep. If such farmers can get ground under the irrigation schemes and grow lucerne there, although they do not personally reside there, then they will be able to use it in time of drought, and thousands of sheep will be saved. I think that we must not only think of the settler, but also of the people. They can pay one-tenth or more under Clause 11. The law lays down that one-tenth is the minimum. Say such a farmer buys a piece of ground and plants lucerne which pays a little, he can then use the ground in time of drought. I think that this departure from the law as it now stands is justified. I am thinking chiefly of pieces of irrigable land that escaped and that the state does not want to take over. Another important alteration is that where land is taken back, if anyone&#x2019;s contract is cancelled and he is not personally to blame, but it is due to locusts or other misfortune, and the Minister is convinced that it is not the man&#x2019;s fault, then he can be discharged from the payment of interest, i.e., rent. This, however, only applies to people getting ground under Clause 16. My intention was to apply it also to people under Clause 11, but the legal advisers say that it will not apply to them. There are still a few administrative alterations about the land boards, etc., but I have mentioned the chief points. I think hon. members will agree that the alterations are necessary, and that they will be improvements on the existing law. There is still another important point which I nearly forgot. Under the present law the people who come on to Crown land, that they have bought under Clause 7, are in a very unfavourable condition. They also pay only one-tenth, and the rest is spread over 40 years, but in that case the purchaser not only has to pay one-tenth, but also has to commence immediately with the half-yearly instalments, and I think that is not fair. We want to give them two years&#x2019; time as well. A man who buys from a private individual gets two years, whereas the man who buys from the state gets no grace. That is unfair, and we are putting it right here. I hope the House will now agree to take the second reading.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I think this is a very useful little Bill, and I hope that the House will pass it as it stands. The clauses are nearly all administrative ones, tending to facilitate the administration of the Land Settlement Act, and they all tend in the direction of helping the settler. The only important innovation that I can see is Clause 9, and I think that will probably be found a very useful one, whereby the Minister, under certain circumstances, will be entitled to grant outside farmers a plot of ground in an irrigation area. I take it that that is the intention of the Minister. I do not think there is anything more I can add, except this&#x2014;that I would congratulate the Lands Department and the Minister on bringing forward this Bill, and I hope the House will pass it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>May I be allowed to add my congratulations to the Minister in introducing this Bill? I am very much struck with Clause 8. I think it is an extremely good clause. It gives my hon. friend the opportunity, in the case of suitable applicants, to make them advances for the purpose of bringing their holdings into a condition in which they can take advantage of the water supplied there. I was very much struck in Western Australia in seeing these small settlements. So anxious were the Western Australian Government to secure a suitable class of people on the land that in forest areas, where a great deal of felling of timber had to be done, the immigrants got &#x00A3;3 a week for three years for the purpose of allowing them to sustain themselves and their families while they were bringing the land into a cultivable condition and, as there were some cases of people who were not, perhaps, taking the full advantage that they should have taken of the opportunity of developing their land, a system was afterwards devised whereby their work was assessed, and they were given so much per acre for bringing the ground into cultivation and felling the timber, with the result that in Western Australia there are a large number of small holders, who had no capital, who received these advances from the state, establishing themselves as a thriving yeoman population. I think that is the idea that is influencing the Minister in trying to do something in the same direction here. If you have the land and you have the water, but you have not the wherewithal to bring that land into a cultivable condition, there is very little profit likely to be made out of it. The land in the cases to which I referred in Western Australia is given to the settler for nothing. I know that my hon. friend is desirous to see a certain amount of the land in the north-western districts developed. I know the late Mr. Merriman often stated that there are some portions of the north-western districts that it <span class="col_1433-1434" refersTo="page_0783"/>would pay the state to give to the settler for nothing, if he would only go there and develop the land. It is only by getting a pioneer population in that part of the world that my hon. friend will be able to develop the waste lands of the country. I congratulate the Minister upon introducing this Bill, which, as my hon. friend the member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) has said, will receive the support of both sides of the House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#vosloo">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VOSLOO</person>:</from>

<p>I want to heartily congratulate the Minister on the provisions in this Bill to remedy defects in the principal Act, and to remove difficulties. I support what was said by the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt), namely, that if there is ground which the Minister cannot sell, it would be better to sell it practically for nothing, or for a very low price to people who will work it. I am now thinking of a piece of ground which is practically covered with prickly pear. The ground is neglected, and later on it will cost more to clean it than to work it. I quite agree that where the ground can be sold advantageously it should be done. There is another point I would like to bring to the Minister&#x2019;s notice, namely, the difficulty of getting applications for ground approved. There are many applications from people in the drought-stricken districts, who would like to move into the irrigable places. They are not men of straw, but chiefly people who have been independent, and would like to become so again if the Minister will give them a chance. The difficulty, however, is that the works have not yet been inspected by the appointed commission, and have not yet been put on a firm basis. In the meantime the applications stand over, some for more than a year. I want to appeal to the Minister to assist these people. I hope the commission will put the irrigation works on a profit-showing basis as soon as possible, so that the people can go there to make a living. The Minister must have the farm inspected as soon as possible, and take care that the commission makes progress. I am not afraid to say what the commission&#x2019;s report will be. I know what it will be. All I want is an investigation. We have heard a good deal of the surplus ground under irrigation. The commission made a few good points about that ground. They are convinced that the works will not cover their cost as long as the surplus ground is not worked. This is one of the difficulties which is removed when the applications for ground are approved. I appeal to the Minister.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>I want to congratulate the Minister on the Bill. The country already has much to thank the present Minister of Lands for the legislation he has introduced on land settlement. We have a Bill here so fair to the poor people that they will be better assisted than in any other part of the world. The principal Act has already done a great deal of good, and now the Minister introduces a Bill which will provide for special cases. When the Minister comes to retire, it will be admitted that he has contributed very much to bringing the poor people back on to the land.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a second time; House to go into committee on 29th February.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vocational_education_and_special_schools_bill">

<heading>VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND SPECIAL SCHOOLS BILL.</heading>

<p>Seventh Order read: Second reading, Vocational Education and Special Schools Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_education">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF EDUCATION</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>The provisions of this Bill are almost self-evident, and for that reason it is unnecessary for me to make any lengthy explanation or to use any arguments. Let me just explain that under the Union Education Department there are four different classes of institutions. The first class comprises universities and university colleges. The second class consists of technical institutes and continuation classes. These continuation classes are allied to the technical colleges. The third class under the department consists of industrial schools established under the Children&#x2019;s Protection Act, and the fourth class consists of vocational schools and special schools which have been transferred from time to time from the provinces to the Union Education Department. As far as the first class is concerned, universities and university colleges, these are administered each of them by their own special Acts. As far as the second class is concerned&#x2014;technical institutes&#x2014;these are administered by an Act which was passed by my predecessor in office in 1923, so provision for proper administration there is provided for. As far as the industrial schools are concerned under the Children&#x2019;s Protection Act, they have been established under that Act and they are properly administered under that Act, so for the administration there is proper Parliamentary sanction. In recent years a class of schools, vocational schools and industrial schools and other special schools, have been taken over from the provinces, and the Bill which is introduced now makes proper provision for the administration of these schools. To a certain extent legislation with regard to these schools has already been passed by Parliament. For instance, in 1922 provision was made in the Financial Adjustments Act for power to the Union Government to take over such schools from the provinces, so when these schools were taken over when the financial relations between the Union Government and the provinces were revised a few years ago, there was legislative sanction for that in the Act. Under that power then given, immediately after certain institutions were actually taken over; for instance, the Technical Institute in Cape Town and the Technical Institute in Durban. Further, we find in 1925, under the Financial Adjustment Act of that year, provision was <span class="col_1435-1436" refersTo="page_0784"/>made that no member of the staff of any of these institutions taken over from the provinces should be placed after transfer in a less favourable position than that in which he had been placed before the transfer of these schools. As hon. members know, during the last few years Parliament voted the money necessary for the administration of these schools taken over from the provinces, but as far as the administration of these schools itself goes, they are still administered to-day under the provincial ordinances which applied to them when they were still under the provinces. The only change that has been made is that the Minister of Education takes the place of the Administrator; but the Minister must keep to the provincial ordinances, differing from each other, which had been in existence before these schools were taken over. Everybody will admit that this is a very unsatisfactory condition. These schools form part, or ought to form part, of one system under the control of the Union Department, and for this reason these ordinances have to be done away with, and they ought to be under one uniform Union law. It is also necessary to provide for the proper definition of the position of members of the teaching staff in these various institutions, because these schools, being part of one Union system, it is very often necessary for the department to transfer an officer from one school to another, and even from one province to another. The schools to which this Bill refers fall broadly into two classes; one, vocational schools, and the other, special schools. Vocational schools comprise industrial schools, commercial schools, agricultural schools&#x2014;as far as they are under the Union Education Department&#x2014;and domestic science schools. All these classes of schools existed under the provinces, and have been taken over by the Union Education Department. Special schools comprise schools for physical and mental defectives; for instance, the school for the deaf and dumb, and for the blind, in Worcester. The reason why schools of this character have been taken over by the Union Government under the powers given in 1922 was that these schools, as a matter of economy, should, as far as possible, be not provincial but inter-provincial; for instance, the school at Worcester should provide for the blind and the deaf and dumb, not for one province, but for all the provinces. This is the most economical way of setting about the matter. These schools have been taken over, and provision must be made in this Bill for their proper administration. There is another provision applying to these schools, with which the Bill deals&#x2014;the division into State schools and State-aided schools. State schools are such as we find at George under the Children&#x2019;s Protection Act, at Heidelberg, King William&#x2019;s Town, and various other places&#x2014;which stand solely under the Union Education Department&#x2014;and there are other schools which are State-aided; and under this class fall all special schools, as exist today; for instance, the school at Worcester for the blind, deaf and dumb&#x2014;which are not State institutions, but State-aided institutions. The Bill generally provides, in the first place, for power given to the Minister to establish, maintain and control such schools. All these schools are to be considered under this Bill as fee-paying schools, and special provision is made in the Bill to meet cases of indigent children, so that in some cases the fees can be reduced, and in other schools may be altogether free.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>Some of these schools are free at present.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_education">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF EDUCATION</person>:</from>

<p>Yes. Take the agricultural schools; there is one at Tweespruit in the Orange Free State, which is doing excellent work, but has provided so far for the child of very poor parents; others were systematically excluded, but the farmers in the neighbourhood came to me and said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Your are providing for the good&#x2014;fairly good&#x2014;agricultural education of the children of poor parents; what provision do you intend making for the better-to-do farmer? We want to send our children there too&#x2014;we appreciate the work done there.</block>

<p>We therefore lay down the principle that alt schools shall be fee-paying, but for the indigent child special provision shall be made. I think that is a sound principle generally.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#o&#x2019;brien">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">O&#x2019;BRIEN</person>:</from>

<p>Does that apply to Natal?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_education">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF EDUCATION</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, to all schools. As to the position of the staff, with regard to salaries and pension rights, members of the teaching staff will be generally taken as civil servants, and the salaries and pension rights will be determined as if they were civil servants; that is, we are getting a recommendation in the first instance, from the Public Service Commission, the Minister concerned agrees to that, and then it becomes operative. The officer&#x2019; pension rights will be determined on the same basis&#x2014;that is, as for the ordinary civil servant. This is also applicable to certain members of the teaching staff of State-aided schools. Let me take, as a particular instance again, the school at Worcester for the blind, deaf and dumb. It has been found that it is impossible for the church, which has begun that work, and carried on that work for many years, to make proper provision for the teaching at that school. The salaries paid were very low, and for that reason the teaching was very unsatisfactory&#x2014;certainly not on modern lines. There is another reason&#x2014;we wish as far as possible to use that institution for the whole of the Union. We thought it best that we should leave to the church the control of any boarding school in connection with that institution, and give the same right to other churches if they desire to establish their hostels in connection with that school to have the control of these hostels, but the teaching itself, so far as it is special teaching of the deaf, dumb and blind, will be <span class="col_1437-1438" refersTo="page_0785"/>the responsibility of the State. So the appointment of the teachers will be in the hands of the State, which will have the power to dismiss members of the staff, and have their control. That is the most economic arrangement, and it is certainly on sound lines. Those members of the staff whose salaries are paid solely by the State, we bring as far as salaries and conditions are concerned into lines with members of the staff of not exclusively State institutions. The Bill makes provision for the appointment and transfer by the Minister of teachers from one institution to another. It is necessary that we should co-ordinate these institutions as far as possible. There is a slight variation from the procedure followed in the case of ordinary civil servants. The latter cannot be appointed or transferred except on recommendation of the Civil Service Commission. We recognize that as far as teachers are concerned, where something more is required than mere knowledge, they have to form the character of the children and, therefore, they must have special qualifications. In these cases it is much better that the appointments and transfer of teachers should be a departmental matter. In this respect the teachers in the schools with which the Bill deals are placed on the same footing as members of the teaching staff of provincial schools, but so far as the fixing of the establishment and determining of salaries are concerned, that will be done by the Minister on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission and after consultation with the Treasury. So far as the extension of these schools is concerned, the increase of expenditure generally will be under the control not only of the Minister, but of the Public Service Commission and the Treasury. With regard to discipline, the middle way is followed between the Civil Service and the ordinary staff in ordinary schools, colleges and universities. Generally speaking, the members of the staff are brought under the Public Service Commission in regard to discipline, but in certain respects a little more latitude is given to prevent any restrictive interference with the duties of these teachers to form character, impart knowledge and lay the foundations of good citizenship. One more point. Under the Financial Adjustments Act of 1925, teachers were safeguarded against any reduction of salary or pension right as the result of the transfer of the schools from the provinces to the Union. This measure takes the place of that provision, under the Financial Relations Act, and for that reason teachers who were taken over from the provinces are given the option to retain unaltered their position, so far as salary and pension rights are concerned, under the 1925 or other Act, or they can voluntarily accept the conditions and benefits of this particular Act. This is merely a protection of vested interests.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>I have nothing to say against this Bill. It is part of the long and painful process by which we are getting out of the hopeless position that was created by the National Convention in regard to our educational system. We have been trying ever since 1910 to divide education by a horizontal division. It was laid down in the Act of Union that education other than higher education belongs to the provinces. That apparently simple division we have been trying to adjust to the actual necessities of people and the country. I do not know whether anybody can tell whether technical education, for instance, is education or education other than higher education. We have, at any rate, come to the conclusion that native education is higher education, because it has been taken away from the provincial authorities. We have decided that education of defective children must be regarded as higher education. The needs of the people demand that it must be done under the National Government. This is another stage in the long and painful process by which we are striving to escape from the hopeless condition laid down under the South Africa Act. As such, I wish all success to the Bill, and I wish we could take primary education away from the provinces and have a national system, but that I am not optimistic enough to expect to come at once, but it will come one day. It is not clear from the Bill whether the term &#x201C;special needs&#x201D; is meant to include mentally as well as physically defective children. Will it include the Alexandra Institution? Then the definition of special school as being a school for defective children only intends to include physically defective children. According to the definition which I overlooked, defective children means physically or mentally defective other than those certifiable under the Mental Disorders Act of 1916. I take it, therefore, that special schools will deal with mentally deficient children who are not certifiable under the Mental Disorders Act. Such children, while not being certifiable are yet mentally deficient and are not fit to associate with ordinary children in ordinary schools. The ordinary schools do not want them and the institutions for mentally defective persons cannot take them because they are not certifiable, and we do not know what to do with them. I hope the Minister will get one or two schools to deal with children of that kind. I take it that under vocational schools will go ordinary technical colleges.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_education">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF EDUCATION</person>:</from>

<p>No, they are under the Act of 1923.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>So this Bill will deal with schools for vocational education which have not yet attained to the status of technical colleges.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_education">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF EDUCATION</person>:</from>

<p>Industrial schools like that at Oudtshoorn and Uitenhage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>Well, I have nothing against the Act; it is another stage in a progress which I hope will be rapidly accomplished and, as such, I support the second reading.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>I appreciate what the Government has done to tackle technical and vocational schools which in the past were <span class="col_1439-1440" refersTo="page_0786"/>neglected between the provinces and the State. The late Government, when in office, did a great deal of talking of what they were going to do for vocational and technical education. Lately they are doing very little talking because they see the error of their ways. They realize now there is a Government with a policy, and in that policy they are holding out a helping hand to the mentally defective.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>What about mentally defective members?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>Do you want personal assistance? Let us deal with a few figures. This Government, on taking office, took over the technical institutes, then under the control of the provincial authorities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>Who took over the Cape one?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>I did a little bit in the Government taking over the Cape one. As a former member of the provincial council, let me say we gingered up the Government. The Nationalists and Labour parties worried the administrator of the Cape so that he began to worry Mr. Burton, then the Minister of Finance.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>And the Government then took you over.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, and the Government took me over too, and I believe they were wise in their action on account of the work I had done in the provincial council in the interests of technical and provincial training.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deane">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEANE</person>:</from>

<p>Why didn&#x2019;t you stay there?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>The people preferred me to be here. In the provincial council we forced the hand of the late Government. When this Government took office they had 3,841 students only, we have over 16,000 at the present time, showing an increase of over 12,000 students at technical institutes. We have not finished yet.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>Haven&#x2019;t you?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>This Bill does not deal with technical institutions. You have evidently not read it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>It goes a good deal further. In this Bill we are taking over schools which the late Government were using as a kind of brake to pacify certain individuals. Whenever there was an outcry about blind and mentally defective boys, the late Government worried the churches to take them over. This Government is altering that. We are also taking over agricultural institutions. I am sorry in this Bill the Minister does not go a step further in regard to the status of teachers. Why are the teachers on a lower status than the teachers in the universities. It is wonderful to think that the teachers of dead languages or theology are termed professors, but those who instruct boys to be practical and useful citizens and valuable assets to the State, they are called teachers, and must rank on a lower status.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Give us the figures.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>Let me quote a few more figures. The hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger), who is an expert on figures, will find on an analysis, that we have a long way to go before we play the game to the youth of this country in regard to technical and vocational training. Even if this Bill is passed, as I hope it will be, we shall still occupy a lower status so far as equity to the wage-earning class is concerned than any other country on the face of God&#x2019;s earth. If we leave out primary education and take the money that is spent on other subjects, that is technical, vocational, scholastic and theological, what do we find? In Great Britain out of each &#x00A3;100 of State funds they are spending &#x00A3;6 on university subjects and &#x00A3;94 on the technical and vocational training of the youth of the country. Let us take Germany. I am quoting the figures prior to the Great War. In Germany for every &#x00A3;21 they were spending on university subjects, out of State funds, they were spending &#x00A3;79 on vocational and technical subjects. We acknowledge that Germany has turned out efficient tradesmen, in fact, tradesmen second to none in the world. What happened in France? France spent &#x00A3;18 out of each &#x00A3;100 of State funds on the scholastic subjects taught by the university which the hon. member for Rondebosch (Mr. Close) and others had the advantage of. France, however, spent &#x00A3;82 on technical, vocational and other subjects which made the youth of France better men. I have nothing to say against university education. I am sorry I did not have it. Nevertheless there are few openings for men who have gone through the universities compared to the openings that exist for boys who have passed through the technical and vocational institutes. Now what happens in South Africa? Out of each &#x00A3;100 provided by the State, we are spending &#x00A3;81 on university subjects, compared with &#x00A3;19 on technical, vocational and mental institutions. I say it is a crying shame that in South Africa we are so backward. It is true that this Government has done a great deal. I acknowledge that in the three-and-a-half years this Government has been in office it has done a great deal. Nevertheless we have to realize, as members of Parliament, and as representing the people of South Africa, that we have to try and build up the country on a sure foundation. For that reason I think the Minister should go a step further and say that when we have teachers employed in these technical, vocational, mental and other institutions, that they, at least, should be put on the same basis as those who are teaching in the universities, who are teaching subjects which it may be are beneficial for the few, but for the greater benefit of South Africa are not to be compared with the institutions I have mentioned. I dare say the Minister expects a great deal from these teachers. He has told us that at least these teachers should be put on a better basis than is even laid down in this Bill. I shall not weary the House on this occasion, because the rest of my speech would be in appreciation of the great work the Minister has done in the cause of education compared with what previous Ministers did.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from><span class="col_1441-1442" refersTo="page_0787"/>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>I want to say a few words on the subject mentioned in this Bill. The Bill authorizes the taking over of the Deaf and Dumb Institute at Worcester. It is only our duty to say here what a great debt we owe to the Dutch Reformed Church for what it has done in connection with the education of the deaf and dumb and the blind in Worcester. In the old days the State took practically no direct interest in the establishment of such an institution, and the Church established one there which is a great honour to our country, and which has proved of great assistance to the blind and deaf and dumb children. We certainly ought to express our thanks here to the man at the head of the institution, Mr. de la Bat, a man who has given up his whole life for an honourable cause. He has now retired after lifelong devotion to this honourable work. To-day he has left the service with a very small reward for what he has done. The State was unable to add anything to it. The Minister was not able to increase the pension. Mr. de la Bat is a man of high character, who will not come to Parliament to ask for an increase of pension. If, however, the Government, as an appreciation, and not as reward for the work that he has done, should introduce a motion to give him a pension as acknowledgment of all the good he has brought about, then I am certain such a motion would be unanimously passed as an acknowledgment of the work of which South Africa will for many years yet reap the fruit. I am certain that there is a feeling in the House amongst all parties that if the Minister proposed to acknowledge the services of Mr. de la Bat to South Africa, the motion would be received with approval in the House. The taking over of the institution by the Government is a wise step. It is a national matter and ought not to be controlled by the Church. The Minister now admits that the State has a great duty to such institutions. The taking over is therefore also an honour to our Church. The State can now carry on the good work of the Church. I got up with the object of bringing these points to the notice of the Minister. There is another matter, vocational education. In my constituency it is being felt more and more, especially at Elgin, where the fruit industry has spread very largely, that there is a need for an institution to acquaint boys and girls with the knowledge of handling fruit. There are quite 200 young people working on one farm to-day packing and sorting fruit. According as the industry extends, the work is becoming more and more technical, and the farmers are beginning to think that a school ought to be established, connected with another school, or separate, where the young people can be trained to acquire a proper knowledge of this branch of the industry. The fruit industry is already one of the largest in our country. The packing, sorting, and thinning out of fruit, and the pruning of trees is becoming more and more technical. Instruction must be given, not necessarily by a great agricultural expert, but preferably by a man of experience who can teach the boys to sort and pack. Capable sorters and packers get &#x00A3;1 a day on the farms plus board and lodging. This kind of work will probably be a good way out for our sons. We then keep young people in touch with the countryside, and it is a matter which deserves support, we talk a lot about the extension of the industry. I am a supporter of it, but I already see the time coming when there will be no further extension possible, and that there will be no extension of the field of employment. The cultivation of the earth is, however, unlimited. The field of employment in the countryside is unlimited, and the future of the sons of South Africa is in farming. Our country is meant by providence for the development of the earth, and that is the great industry which our people will build up. If the Minister can take steps in the direction mentioned, if he thinks he can establish such a school, then he can start with it at Elgin, where the boys from Villiersdorp and Drakenstein can also come. The Minister of Agriculture has already a petition asking him to train the young boys in this department in the interests of the country. The Minister saw them work there, and it pleased him to see 40 boys and girls in a large room employed in packing fruit, and he even addressed them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_rensburg">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN RENSBURG</person>:</from>

<p>I am certain that the House is thankful to the Minister for this Bill. From the day this Government took over vocational education from the provincial councils, we have waited for it to introduce legislation to encourage vocational education. The boy on the counrtyside has little opportunity to-day, after leaving the ordinary school, to continue his studies. Proper provision is never made for vocational training, and the boy who wants to have a profession has all the facilities. The primary school exists to train for the secondary and the secondary for the university, but the child who wants to go in for a trade has much trouble. There is another point that I want to call the Minister&#x2019;s attention to. It is in connection with housing at the existing schools. At Jacobsdal, e.g., very poor provision is made. I hope the Minister will also give his attention to this matter. I am very glad that in the Bill he meets parents who cannot pay for the education. There are various people who will now be enabled to benefit by the exemption of the part payment. It gives many of our boys a chance of continuing their studies. I am only sorry that the Minister has not gone a little further in this free education, because in the Free state and Transvaal we have free education up to matric. Now the parents who want their children to take vocational training must pay. This again gives the child who wants to take a profession a privilege over the child learning a trade. The last point I want to mention is Clause 14. I think it goes too far. It is only said that a parent or a guardian is responsible for all expenses in connection with a pupil, if he leaves the school without permission of the department, but par. 2 goes so far as to say that such a person can be fined, and even imprisoned. I think it goes too far. The parent possibly has a good reason for taking the child out of school, while the department <span class="col_1443-1444" refersTo="page_0788"/>does not consider it a sufficient reason. I can agree with the provision that the parent should refund the expenses, if there is no reason for the removal of the pupil, but the penalties are too great. I hope the Minister will withdraw this clause. I rose to say that the country is very grateful to the Minister for this Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I am glad about the powers the Minister is obtaining to establish vocational schools, and I want to express my thanks for the special power he has taken to establish special schools. This Bill provides for two kinds of children. The one kind consists of children with physical disabilities, and the other of mental deficients. The poor children with physical disabilities had no other refuge in the past but the ordinary school. There they found things rather difficult. Nevertheless, many of them made a success of their lives, but most of them did not have an opportunity of making an independent living. It is felt that there should be separate schools for such children. It is just as necessary for the sub normal children. We have already made provision for mental deficients in our country. A few years ago, moreover, provision was made for mental deficients, but there is another class, namely, the sub-normals who really lack the gifts to follow the lessons in the ordinary schools. The children generally get the undeserved blame of their teachers, and are accordingly discouraged and go into life disheartened, and then often turn out failures. The Bill makes provision for this very class, so that in future there will be less failures than before. We have made tremendous progress with the education of sharp-witted and normal children, but we have done nothing yet for the subnormal, although it is the duty of the state to also provide for them.</p>

<p>Business suspended at 6 p.m. and resumed at 8.6 p.m.</p>

</speech>

<debateSection name="#evening_sitting">

<heading>Evening Sitting.</heading>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I was speaking at the adjournment on the necessities of less gifted children, mentally and bodily deficients. Provision is made here for special schools, but, fortunately, we go further and make provision for institutions for vocational and trade education, and without going into details, I think it is necessary to go into the factors which assist in meeting the great need for this class of school. The great question of the removal of the countryside population to the towns is partly the result of economic conditions, but also partly due to the normal supply on the countryside which cannot be absorbed there. And this factor does not at all receive sufficient attention. Fortunately, we have now proceeded so far as to get legislation. Another factor is the continuous increase in the unskilled artizans who cannot take up industries. We heartily welcome the development of our industries, and it is our duty to train up our young people for them, but there is another class of people who require vocational training to meet the needs of the countryside. I distinguish between industrially trained boys and girls, who go from the industrial schools to the countryside, and those we require on the countryside, educated people to attend to our trades. A large factor weighs with me very much, and doubtless also with the Minister, namely, the training of our girls. I am not so much thinking of the young girls, of the better-off town class, but of the less privileged countryside dwellers, and the need in that respect is felt more and more, because the development in South Africa forces the conviction more and more that there is a defect in the preparation of the country girl for life. We want to prepare our daughters for the actual requirements of life, and if we carefully look at the tragedies which take place we come to the conclusion that they are often the result of insufficient training to keep house, to form the means of doing so. This insufficient training is the result of the increasing economic pressure, or poverty and of the consequential drifting from the countryside to the towns. They are driven to surroundings where they are not properly prepared for their lives. We appreciate, of course, that we do not expect the state to give every girl a training for her life&#x2019;s work. In the report for the year 1928, mention is particularly made of the training of girls, and I think that the draftsman is aware of the tremendous task in this connection. I therefore think it is the duty of the Minister to make a commencement departmentally to establish something where girls can be trained. The state alone cannot do so. Therefore, I hope the department of the Minister will enter into communication with the provincial administration to establish a course at any rate for such training and to meet the great need that is felt. In the past many of our surplus girls took up higher education, but I think there is no longer an opportunity of employing the surplus. It is possibly an artificial surplus, but the statistics collected by the Minister of Education two years ago show that the field of employment for our university-trained people is becoming smaller, and that more and more attention must be given to trade school education. In 1926 the number of students at the University of Cape Town was 1,663, at the University of South Africa 2,500, in Stellenbosch 883, and on the Witwatersrand 3,352; total, 6,653. They have been trained for higher jobs, of which the field of employment has quite been filled. The number of students in Cape Town for law was no less than 75, and in 1926 17 students graduated in it. As for the medical faculty, we find the astonishing figure of 243 for Cape Town, and 217 for the Witwatersrand; total, 460. Now the question arises in what direction the Minister will use the powers which we want to give him. The report of the Secretary for Education mentions the need of more provision for girls, and the data in the report suggests the serious inference that there are to-day about 12,000 committed children looking to the state for care in the matter of education, as a result of neglect poverty, etc., and it appears from the report <span class="col_1445-1446" refersTo="page_0789"/>that in 1926 there were about 900 prosecutions for cruelty to children, and this brings us to the terrible conclusion that there is a serious leakage somewhere in the constitution of family life. I do not want to hold the state responsible for all the faults in the world, but if we look at the figures with reference to neglect or poverty or cruelty, then I think it is time, not only for charitable people, but also for the state to enquire into the causes of these terrible manifestations. Therefore, I am glad that an opportunity is being given for a training for life. We have the need for educating people on the countryside who are not intended for industries. In the past we had shoemakers, waggonmakers, blacksmiths and harnessmakers on the countryside, but they have disappeared, and the Europeans have been practically driven out of the countryside. I do not want to go into the causes, but I think the Minister feels the need for industrial schools, not only for factory hands, but also for people who attend to the needs of the countryside. Our endeavours&#x2014;I now come to another point&#x2014;in connection with vocational schools in agricultural matters must in future not aim so much at getting people with diplomas. On page 32 the report of the Secretary for Education gives surprising figures, and he says there that he has compulsorily come to the conclusion that something must be done for the 17,000 children who annually leave our schools after Standard VI, not to speak of the children who have already before passing Standard VI been withdrawn owing to circumstances. The minimum, therefore, for which provision is being made is 17,000, of which at least 8,000 are country children. If we say that half of them are girls, then there are 4,000 boys on the countryside who leave school every year at Standard VI. Of these a large part are less privileged children, who cannot be employed on the farms, but who must work with a view to making a living day by day. I am glad the Minister is no longer striving to get more certificated instructors for farmers, but to give those 4,000 boys an education which will give them a chance in life. We must work in that direction, and make the best use of the money available for the purpose. As for the training of children hitherto, the feeling is, I think, general that the training in the existing industrial schools was not sufficient to make good agriculturists. I think with regard to the spending of public money on that, and the courses which are available there is a feeling of disappointment with what has hitherto been turned out. It has not come up to the expectation of the taxpayers. We must keep an eye on the establishment of vocational schools on that point. They must have such capacity that we are certain that when a boy leaves the school he will not only be an ornament, but will be able to maintain himself in an independent way, and may be a germ for new family life. With what equipment are our boys and girls entering life? They have certain development and technical capacity when they leave school, but as far as I know, there is no connection between them and the school. I think that when the boy and girl come to leave school the needy amongst them ought also to have a chance to obtain tools to start an independent life. After the training it is necessary that the person trained should keep in touch with the industrial centre. When I criticize the inspection of existing industrial schools I want to say at once that I am not acquainted with all the details, but I have investigated in two directions and got the impression that the inspectors of trade schools are not themselves trade men, with proper knowledge of the trade they are enquiring into. The department ought, however, to become aware by means of expert inspectors of the conditions in the schools, and provisions must be made to obtain tradesmen to keep the department informed as to the development of the trade schools. A last idea in connection with the complaint we have heard to-day about so much money being spent on training for higher education of students. To my disappointment, I find that the report on page 39 gives figures showing that with one exception the costs of the existing industrial schools per unit are particularly high, namely, &#x00A3;56, &#x00A3;57, &#x00A3;56, &#x00A3;50, &#x00A3;49, &#x00A3;50, &#x00A3;55. In this case the argument does not hold water that the cost of higher education is so much higher, because the cost of trade schools is practically just as high. Is there an explanation of the fact of the cost being so high, and can it not be reduced? I do not wish to touch the question of status, but just to let it be understood that as for me the technically-trained people are no inferior than those who have had higher education. I want again to congratulate the Minister on this forward step.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fick">

<from>&#x2020;*The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FICK</person>:</from>

<p>This Bill is certainly an important step in the right direction. It provides for the establishment of vocational and special schools. If we had had more of them long ago the poor white question would not to-day have been such a burning one. Hitherto we have only been accustomed to treat all the children alike, to send them all in the same direction. If ever an educational fault has been made, then it is this. Every child has not received the same talents, there are (children who cannot learn at ordinary schools, but who would possibly be very good with practical education, and what is the result of this? Because the child is backward in his class and has a feeling of inferiority which will injuriously affect his future. I know from experience of cases in our parts how useful it is to train a child according to his talents. I know of an orphan after the Second War of Independence who was 17 or 18 years old, and his guardians said he makes no progress in the ordinary school, he is not fitted for farming, let us give him a practical education, and the result is that that child is to-day a vocational master in the trades school at Potchefstroom, where he was trained himself. Others who enjoyed that training are to-day shining as experts in their trades. I regard this Bill as a step in the right direction, but I want to ask the Minister if he will not go a little further. <span class="col_1447-1448" refersTo="page_0790"/>We do not only require vocational training, but also the choice of vocation. It does not apply only to children practically trained, but to all who do not want to enter one or other of the professions. In the whole world there are to-day bodies and persons who advise children as to the profession or trade or technical work they should study for. When they undergo the training the young people are given a lead and told what they should start with. Such a lead is indispensable. We already have the intelligence tests to-day. We are trying to separate the children into those who are normal, weak-minded, or subnormal. We have those tests, but they do not go far enough. We must give a lead to the children, we must fix their grade of intelligence and thereafter advise them what they will probably succeed at. I ask the Minister whether the time has not come for us to commence this, and we should not send a few young people from our universities who show aptitude for this work abroad to be trained for that important work which they can do for our people? As for the special schools, I understand the children in institutions to-day will come under the Education Department. The weak-minded, mentally defectives, and subnormal children are to-day all in the same institution. A parent in my constituency came to me, and asked why it was necessary for his child, who was not mentally defective, to go to the institution at Witrand. The higher class of weak-minded children are there not all, indeed, in the same building with mentally defectives, but they are all in the same place. I think the intention now exists to have this class of child no longer under the Department of the Interior, but to put them under the Education Department. I do not know how far the Minister intends to go, whether it only refers to subnormal children or also to others. There is a class of feeble-minded children who are not mentally defective, and of whom with good training something can yet be made. The hon. member for Hopetown (Dr. Stals) spoke about the training of our vocational teachers, but I think that the whole success of the feebleminded education is good teachers. We must have the most efficient teachers for that class of work. They must be people who thoroughly understand their job. There is another matter which does not exactly come in here, but in the technical schools in the large towns we have teachers who teach the pupils in their own language. Now you have the poor child, and the teachers must impart something to him in a language which he possibly does not well understand. I ask whether it is not time that we should carry out bilingualism here, because sometimes there is much lacking in this respect. The teacher must not only speak the language of the child, but understand the child. As for the special schools, we must Have the right teacher to do this difficult, severe work, and we must try to give the teacher assistance. I do not know whether this has been provided for, but we must do something to give those people hints for their work. I believe that there are many children in institutions who we think capable of learning nothing, but who may yet become of real use to the community. In this connection I want to refer to Henry Ford, who says in his book that he always thought that there was a certain class of inferior and also useless person, but from his experience in the factories it appears that they are very useful. They have long introduced a system in the factories of testing a man&#x2019;s intelligence, when he enters the factory, to be able to tell the foreman for what work he is fitted. There is always certain work for a man, even if it is only to drive in a screw. Henry Ford states that his experience is that those people who are considered inferior and useless are indispensable in his factory. They work in a certain groove, doing a certain little job with which they are satisfied, and do not always ask for more salary or for a change. We also have people in our country less intellectually equipped. We do not know how far the sad condition of our poor whites who cannot be regarded as mentally inferior is not to be attributed to the bodily neglect of these less privileged people, because we must not forget &#x201C;A healthy mind in a healthy body.&#x201D; If one of us had to go through what those children have to suffer in the modest houses, with bad food, we should not last a week. We should not be able to bear it. There are many children who are not feeble-minded because they are ipso facto inferior, but have become so. I believe the time has come for us to devote our attention to the training of those children at special schools. As the hon. member for Hopetown (Dr. Stals) has said, we must also have people who can conduct a proper inspection as to whether the teachers are doing their duty. They also are merely human. The teacher must go to the parents and tell them: You must look after and feed the child better, otherwise I cannot do my work. It is not the case with all, but there are teachers who merely attend their school and then have a holiday. They must get the co-operation of the parents. The hon. member for Hopetown spoke about the lack of training in trade schools. It is, however, generally experienced that a person cannot complete his training of any trade in a school. One cannot get on without experience. The young man has to pass his apprenticeship, and then serve for a time as an improver with someone who is qualified in his trade. In Germany the training time for a trade is seven years. Thereafter he has to work for a time under supervision of a man who knows the trade to acquire more practical experience. There are certain difficulties, as, e.g., the trade unions, who will not allow too many apprentices to be employed. Notwithstanding the difficulties we have to meet, the tradesmen must learn not to be so jealous of others who also want to carry on their trade. If you want to teach a child agriculture you cannot do it at school. Experience shows that even the pupils of the agricultural <span class="col_1449-1450" refersTo="page_0791"/>schools have sometimes become poor farmers. For some education we require a man who knows the practical side. I have brought these points to the Minister&#x2019;s notice, not because I think I know more about it than he does, but because we want to do our best to make this law a success.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>I appreciate that we are here perpetuating a position which is unpractical, non-educational and very artificial. We are validating a step which was taken by the Government a few years ago and which cannot remain as it is. I mean the separation of vocational education from the ordinary secondary education. I think that no one can justify it on a logical education basis. A child who is taking the Junior Certificate and Senior Certificate and agricultural or commercial subjects as well comes under the provincial administration. The boy who after Standard 6 goes to a technical school comes under the Education Department. It will be difficult to show that that is not an artificial division. I fear that it is a dangerous step. The fact that we are separating a part of our secondary education shows that we are going from the extreme in the past to the other extreme to-day. We have had too much provincialism. There was a waste of money and energy. Now we are going to the other extreme. If a day comes for education simply to be placed under the Minister of Education just as vocational training is, then I fear that it will be a sad day for education in our country. Instead of finding the golden mean and creating proper co-ordination we have now gone too far in the other direction, and want to centralize everything in Pretoria. I feel very sorry for the parts of our country that are far from Pretoria, but still more for the parts that are close to Pretoria and that are possibly in disfavour with the Government of the day. I fear that if we go further in this direction we shall simply turn education more and more into a party political plaything.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>You did not say that in the past.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_merwe">

<from>&#x2020;*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER MERWE</person>:</from>

<p>We are now going more and more in that direction. The danger is that all education will be centralized, and the Minister will have all the say. The Minister without intervention of the school board or a similar body or even of the public service commission can remove any principal of a school and transfer him where he wishes. I fear this will open the door for malpractice in the future, and that the party politics will play a part. We know what the results will be, and how the pot will probably reproach the kettle for being black. I do not think it is necessary to centralize everything. What we need is that legislation should be introduced properly co-ordinating matters, that the right co-operation should exist between the various departments in so far as primary as well as vocational education is concerned. We are taking a very serious course, and I fear that education in South Africa is in danger. In my opinion, the financial position will not be improved either. Local initiative is being killed more and more. There are institutions built up by local sacrifice where a spirit has been created which the founders contemplated, and it will be suppressed. I think there is already adequate proof that Union education is not cheaper than provincial education of the same kind. I fear that the Minister is placing himself in a very thorny position with regard to the fees to be paid. We shall now have vocational schools to be half-paid. I am afraid of the effect of that. Experience shows that in the various provinces where we have discharged people who could not pay, or could only pay part, tremendous dissatisfaction and disapproval has been created, and the danger exists that the institutions will be confined to those that pay. The effort will be in the direction to make the schools pay as much as possible, and the heads of the institutions will refuse poor children who cannot pay or who cannot pay in part, if the schools are fairly full. I feel the need of a system by which people a little well-to-do will get the opportunity of sending their children to such institutions, but still I fear that in the end we will again have to return to the position that some schools are paying schools and others free schools. The figures quoted this afternoon by the hon. member for Liesbeek (Mr. Pearce) are not, I fear, very reliable. We always hear on the platforms in speeches on education what the hon. member for Potchefstroom (the Rev. Mr. Fick) has just repeated, that education in the past was so unpractical and that it was the cause of poorwhiteism. I believe the encouragement of vocational education is a step in the right direction, but I fear it may again lead to our attaching too little value to the formation of the understanding. I think the statement that poorwhiteism is due to an unpractical educational system is untrue, and I think it is due rather to a lack of education. People with properly developed understanding in whatsoever direction will not largely be found among the poor whites. The great point is that our sons and daughters should be properly developed mentally, and that we should not forget this in technical education. The hon. member for Liesbeek has quoted figures which show that we are doing too much for higher education. I believe that in many respects we are still far behind other countries, and that that is the reason many of our children still have to go overseas to study. The circumstances of our country cause higher education to be expensive, but to state that so very much more is spent on higher education than on vocational education is not true. Last year&#x2019;s estimates show that the hon. member&#x2019;s figures do not agree with the facts. Perhaps he quoted old figures in stating that 81 per cent. was spent on higher education, and only 19 per cent. on technical education. Last year&#x2019;s estimates show that about &#x00A3;500,000 was spent on technical <span class="col_1451-1452" refersTo="page_0792"/>education, in which I include agricultural education, and only about &#x00A3;337,000 on higher education. The hon. member, of course, did not take into account what was being done by the provinces themselves. It is also unfair to draw a comparison between our figures and those of other countries. We are a young country, and cannot be compared with the old countries, where by legacies in past centuries, etc., strong private institutions have arisen to which the State in some instances contributes nothing. I am glad that the Minister is also meeting private institutions. He talked, e.g., of the Worcester institution which is being taken over. We feel it is unjust that a part of the population which has put its hand deep into its pocket to establish educational institutions for the education of its children should also contribute to the taxation for other State institutions. I only fear that when the State intervenes the benefits which are connected with the private institution will be lost. I am thinking of a spiritual or moral atmosphere created in such an institution. As soon as the State enters, everything is without sentiment. Everything must be neutral and colourless, and we have various institutions which in the course of years have acquired a separate character. If the State comes in, everything will have to be uniform. I fear that such an institution as the one at Worcester will suffer in consequence, and I doubt whether it will be such a success as it was before. The Minister surely ought to see that institutions so built up by private persons should still have a majority of persons on the directorate, so that the same spirit can be continued in the institution. I am glad that the boarding establishments of the institutions are being continued as private establishments, and that influence for good can continue to be exercised there. I hope the Minister will consider some of the suggestions I have made, and will provide proper co-ordination, so that the various provinces may reach proper co-operation for the benefit of education.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kentridge">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KENTRIDGE</person>:</from>

<p>I desire to express my thanks to the Minister for the Bill that he has introduced, and we feel it will do a great deal towards vocational education. I think no one will gainsay that any expenditure in connection with vocational education is well spent, particularly in this country. Any money the Government is in a position to spend will be spent, not only to the advantage of the pupils, but to the advantage of the State, because it will make the young men and young women who undergo this training more capable of doing their work. We desire to become more and more self-supporting as time goes on, and as we become more industrialized it becomes more necessary to see that our young men and young women are able to do their work efficiently when they go into these industries, not only for their own advantage, but for the advantage of the country as a whole. It is not possible, nor is it desirable, for everyone to go to a university. I believe it is of the utmost importance that everyone who has the ability and desire for a university education should be able to have it. My complaint is that to a great extent a university education to-day is closed to children of the working classes, because although various facilities are given in the way of bursaries and so on, when one looks at the figures one finds that although nominally it is free, in reality the State is paying &#x00A3;5b for every student who attends the university. A poor student has not the opportunity to go to a university, because for every &#x00A3;56 paid by the State, the student has to contribute, by way of fees, something like &#x00A3;36. Taking that into consideration, together with the cost of requisites and maintenance, and together with the fact that during that time a student is losing the opportunity of earning, it must be evident that although a university education is nominally open to everyone, it is to a large extent closed to children of the working classes. It is therefore the more imperative to see that vocational training shall be open to the fullest extent, and that children shall have the opportunity of getting that training without any burden on their parents. We in the Transvaal have a certain, and I think just, grievance against the Minister. I believe it is desirable that vocational training should be uniform, but in making it uniform throughout the Union the principle that should have been adopted was that the conditions which applied in the province which was more advanced should be taken over by the other provinces, and not that the more advanced province should be brought down to the condition of the other provinces. In the Transvaal, for a long period, we have had free vocational training, and when the Minister took it over, instead of making it free in the other provinces, he penalised the Transvaal by making the students there having to pay, which is a considerable hardship to the working men and women there and makes uniformity unpopular, instead of popular. In the Labour movement, the general opinion is that the Minister should not have imposed fees in the Transvaal. I know it may be said that the child of a poor working man will have an opportunity, because if the department is satisfied that he cannot pay the fees he will not have to do so; but the average working man knows that out of State revenue the sons and daughters of better-to-do people receive &#x00A3;56 per head towards their university education, and he feels that they are entitled to have vocational training free without having to pauperise themselves to the slightest extent by having to ask that the fees be remitted. It is an unfair system to the parents. Clause 13 is sufficiently vague to justify me in expressing the hope that the Minister will reconsider doing away with this principle of paying fees&#x2014;or he should make them purely nominal. Under Clause 4 provision is made for the appointment of advisory committees. I hone the Minister, if he has to deal with the matter, will have due regard to the principle of consulting those people who have practical knowledge of the matter, and that he will consult the trade union movement to a <span class="col_1453-1454" refersTo="page_0793"/>large extent in setting up these committees, and seeing that it is adequately represented on them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. A. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I also welcome the Bill, and it is not necessary to say much. I am glad to see that in Clause 17 the Minister has provided that there shall be no stamp duties on applications that have to be made. I know that ten applications were made recently, and that each had to bear a 1s. stamp. It is unfair to make the poor people pay for the stamps. Only four of the ten applications were accepted so that the six other parents got no benefit at all from the stamp. I should like to know whether church schools will receive Government support while remaining church schools without being taken over by the State. The hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige) spoke about children who have to help packing fruit. He wants the Minister to establish a school for that. I think we can attain that object in an easier and more practical way if we follow the practice in other countries. There the students go to work during the vacation. A nephew of mine, who was at school in Ireland, went to help the farmers during his vacation in planting potatoes, and earned quite a lot of money. If the Minister gets into touch with the fruit farmers and does what is the practice in America, viz. fixes the vacation at a time when the fruit season is on. We shall attain a two-fold object in this way. The child earns something, and at the same time learns a trade which he cannot learn in school. It is useful. A child must not go too long to school without doing practical work. If he does so, then he thinks that he must study and do nothing else. When he leaves school with his diploma he knows little of the world, but imagines that he need not work with his hands. If a child learns to use his hands as well, then it is very good, and he becomes a useful member of the community. Much help is necessary during a part of the year, particularly in fruit and tobacco farming. If there is collaboration between the Minister and the farmers, then the vacation will be so arranged as to allow the children to work on the farm without its being a burden to the department.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I welcome the Bill, for it fills a gap and helps to form a trinity of educational establishments. We have had a distinction drawn between the universities and technical schools, but there need be no antagonism between them, for both supply a very distinct want in the body politic. While cordially in favour of the object of the Bill, I wish to know why it is that special and vocational schools are linked together in one measure. The special schools should be dealt with on their own basis. The Bill defines a school as an establishment under the Act for vocational education, or a special school or any school to which the provisions of the Act have been made applicable. We have very large technical institutions in various parts of the country, but I can see no definition of a technical institution. I take it that technical institutions will not come under the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_education">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF EDUCATION</person>:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>In that case there will have to be some amendment in the definition of vocational education, which covers a number of studies which are dealt with in technical institutes. The Cape Town Technical College imparts instruction in handicrafts, trades and industries. If the vocational schools are all on the same footing as the Knysna, Oudtshoorn and other institutions in the Cape Province the Government is doing very good work indeed in giving whatever assistance it can in the development of these institutions. The George, Knysna and Oudtshoorn schools are doing good work for the children of poor white people, training them to become very fine specimens of manhood and useful members of the community. Clause 3 of the Bill seems to require some modification, for under it the Minister may, at any time, declare the provisions of the Act applicable to any school then existing to which the provisions of the Act do not apply, and such schools shall thereupon be deemed, for all purposes, to be a school established under this Act. I take it that does not mean that the Minister can autocratically declare that any school he wishes shall come under the provisions of the measure. I take it the Minister does not intend to take the power autocratically to apply this power, but only to schools which desire to come under the Act.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_education">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF EDUCATION</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister has already got that power under the Financial Adjustments Act. The power is not a new one.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I hope members of the House will not set up any antagonism between the institutions to which the Bill would apply, and the universities. There is the utmost room for developing both without antagonizing them. As to the observation of the hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge) that the universities were practically closed to working classes, if he enquires more closely into the subject he will find that, thanks to bursaries, many brilliant students at the universities are people of the class he mentioned. It is unnecessary, therefore, for the hon. member to raise this bogey. I wish the Bill every success.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mostert">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MOSTERT</person>:</from>

<p>I welcome the Bill, but one thing is not quite clear. Provision is made for vocational schools, industrial schools, etc., and the Minister is given large powers. In Namaqualand we have a good many boarding houses and they are almost exclusively in the villages where the children are taught reading, writing and arithmetic. They are countryside boys and girls from the farms, but when they leave school they know nothing of farming. They only come to the farms during the vacation, and then they do not want to work, but to have a holiday. I should like to know if the Minister would agree to create boarding houses in the country instead of in the villages. The Minister can buy farms and establish educational institutions there. The boys will be able to learn just as much there as in the villages, <span class="col_1455-1456" refersTo="page_0794"/>and also something about farming. They can sow, milk cows, reap grain, etc., and such institutions can make a profit. In the villages they learn to read and write, and to love the towns and to despise the countryside and their parents. We do not get value for our money. The independent schools get &#x00A3;18 per year per pupil; for 100 pupils it is &#x00A3;1,800, and at 6 per cent. that is the interest on &#x00A3;30,000. Let the Minister buy a large farm for that sum and give the children a chance to learn something about farming as well. The first requisite for a child on a farm is that he shall be careful. That he does not learn in the town. He sees there how a letter is sent to a shopkeeper, and the goods are sent to the house. He learns to run into debt, and that is a wrong state of things. The boarding schools in the villages are out of date. They may be good for girls, because they can learn domestic duties, but the boys require practical training. Every child needs a proper training for his future work, and our farmer children do not get that training. They merely assist in keeping the villages alive. We spend thousands and thousands of pounds on irrigation schemes, but there are few people who can lead water, and as long as that is so the schemes will always end in failure. There is, however, no chance for our children to learn such a thing. They do not learn what is most necessary. When they return to the farms they cannot even inspan a horse, and they are fond of the towns. The Minister once wrote a pamphlet about the flow from the countryside to the towns. Now he sits on the Government benches and must end it. Farming is also a vocation and must be learnt just like any other. The children must be educated to earn their bread, then poor whitism will vanish.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>I am pleased the Minister has introduced this Bill. It is not perfect, but it is a step in the right direction to put vocational education on a proper footing in this country. In paragraph 4 he takes power to appoint an advisory committee, and I hope his interpretation of that clause will be to see that the governing body is composed of men of practical experience. I remember on the Witwatersrand, prior to the Government taking over the technical institute, the advisory committee was composed of practical men, master builders and operative builders, master engineers and operative engineers, and the training was of a practical nature, and some of the finest boys were turned out, but after the change there was a down grade because on the new advisory committee there was too much theory taught and too little practical work. For years we have had to import our mechanics to South Africa, but we have now reached a stage where we have splendid material, which, if properly trained, will turn out mechanics that can go to any part of the world and hold up their heads. It will depend upon the training and this will depend upon the advisory committee or the governing body. In the disciplinary clauses the Minister delegates powers to the head of the department, but he does not say who the head of the department is. If it is the Secretary of Education, good and well, but if it is the people at the head of the technical college on the Witwatersrand, then those who are actually teaching in the school will be under the control of those immediately over them without being in direct touch with the Secretary of Education, and, through him, with the Minister himself. I want the lower grade to have contact with the Minister through the Secretary of Education. One further point about the schools being free. Money spent on vocational training is not expenditure, but is an investment that will reproduce itself over and over again in this country. In Germany, Italy and Holland vocational education is free, and there is a certain amount of compulsion, and the result is these countries are forging ahead rapidly as far as skilled tradesmen are concerned. I welcome the Bill. In the Transvaal prior to the Union Government taking over, vocational training was free, and I think the Minister ought to reconsider it and to view it not as a treasury expenditure, but as the treasury investing money in the training of these boys, so that South Africa in future will benefit from this vocational training.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_broekhuizen">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN BROEKHUIZEN</person>:</from>

<p>Some Transvaal members have made a few remarks here, but I think the tendency of the Bill is to remove defects in our system of education. So I understood the Minister, at any rate. What is the system with which we have to struggle in our school boards? Formerly I was a member of a school board at Stellenbosch, and afterwards for years in Pretoria, and we struggled for years to get certain things altered in the education law. I therefore welcome the position which is being taken up by the Department of Education of the Union. I differ entirely from the hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) as to the dangers of centralizing education in Pretoria. On reading the Bill carefully we clearly find the principle which is the basis of it. The Bill clearly says that the Minister may establish vocational schools and special schools. The misfortune in our system of education is that it is entirely directed towards the matriculation, and that object must be changed. There are thousands of children who go to school inspired merely by the idea of passing the matriculation, and therefore I feel the Bill is a good one, because a change will certainly be made in that regard. The effect of this Bill will be that the eye will be less directed to the matriculation only, and that children will be more encouraged to learn a trade. Seeing that trades are so very remunerative, it is absolutely necessary that when thousands of children are annually being put onto the market they should be skilled in the labour market as men who know their trades and are not unskilled. I believe the object of the Minister and his department is to change the system through which we in South Africa have absolutely lagged behind other countries. Holland and Germany have been mentioned. We know how enormously the system there differs from that in South Africa. I am very sorry that some hon. members clearly spoke without <span class="col_1457-1458" refersTo="page_0795"/>having heard the speech made by the Minister in introducing the Bill. He said that the poor children at schools like Tweespruit, e.g., should also have an opportunity, and not merely the privileged children. I welcome the principle that people, who can, should pay for their education, and it is one that the House ought to support. Let us adopt it where technical schools, trade schools and agricultural schools are established. Then I come to the second point in the Bill, that the State shall have the right of saying where education shall be paid for. The hon. member for Winburg spoke of the damage which would result to schools which have hitherto been private schools. I am certain that the Education Department will not be so foolish as not to try to maintain the standard if those institutions have attained a high moral level. The department will see that it is maintained, and will see that the teachers can understand them, so that the children can get the best possible training. I want to add something about the supervision commission. I hope the Minister will tackle the matter, because the commission which knows local circumstances, will not merely be a fifth wheel to the coach, but, if it gets adequate authority, will really through its supervision contribute to the children obtaining proper education. I remember that long ago the late Mr. John X. Merriman asked me at Stellenbosch what I thought of the school board. I said that it was a fifth wheel to the coach, and he agreed. I therefore hope that the Minister and the department will see that the supervising committee has sufficient capacity not to be a fifth wheel. The hon. member for Winburg expressed the view that education would become a party political plaything. I cannot see the danger. No minister of education in South Africa will make the education of our children a plaything of party politics. I think it is an exaggeration to think so. The department is surely there to make the education of our people as good and thorough as possible. Unfortunately, there were not sufficient men in the various provinces hitherto who understood the actual requirements of the people with respect to education of our children. A change was pressed for by school board committees, and at congresses, but we struggled on year after year until the Minister now has the courage to tackle the matter, and wants to give South Africa an educational system suited to the children. Thus, the question we must ask is whether the system in South Africa actually means that the intellectual development of the child is receiving sufficient attention. Has not the system up to the present been too much one of pumping in, and too little a system of intellectual development? I fear that it was so, and I am therefore grateful to the Minister for this Bill. Hitherto in the Transvaal it was more of a pumping in system, and I doubt whether it was very different in the Free State. I well remember years ago the Minister wrote that after all the degrees he had obtained in South Africa he was now ultimately beginning to think for himself. What a commentary on the system of education! I feel, however, that as this Bill is an attempt to train children for trades, and not to pass the matric., we are doing something of value to South Africa. I am sorry that comparisons have been made between higher and technical education. They have nothing to do with each other. We must encourage higher education, and cannot do so enough, but we must provide for children who do not take up higher education, obtaining training in the vocation they choose. I am glad that the deaf and dumb institution at Worcester is to be taken over, and I want to emphasize the thanks which were given to Mr. de la Bat for his work at the institution. I am certain that the Minister and the department will see to it that the spirit of that school is maintained.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#allen">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALLEN</person>:</from>

<p>I just want to correct a wrong impression which may have been left by the hon. member for Rondebosch (Mr. Close) when he referred to the hon. member for Troyeville and said the hon. member was trying to create differences of opinion as between technical education institutions and universities. The hon. member for Troyeville (Mr. Kentridge) did nothing of the kind. What he said was that seeing the Government contributed something over &#x00A3;50 per annum to the education of each university student, he could not see why the children of poor parents who could not afford to send their children to universities should not be given free vocational education. The position in the Transvaal is that the South African Party executive in the Provincial Council gave away the privilege of the people of the Transvaal, which would not have been given away had the majority in the Provincial Council been consulted. Neither the majority in the Provincial Council was consulted, nor were the trade unions of the Transvaal. The whole system and principle of free vocational education was given away without the consent of the people. When we make a claim for the restoration of that principle we are asking the Minister to return something which has been taken away without the free voice of the people expressing willingness thereto. The anomalous position in the Transvaal is that you have free secondary education, whereas vocational education has to be paid for. Surely that is an anomaly which must rather outrage one&#x2019;s sense of what is fit and proper. I would not like it to be understood from the remarks of the hon. member for Rondebosch that the hon. member for Troyeville or any member on these benches is against this expenditure on university education. We do not want expenditure by the Government on university education curtailed in any way. We would rather have it extended. We are in favour of this expenditure provided it is made available for everyone who requires it. I want to refer to Clause 15, sub-section 2. The method hitherto in operation of finding out whether the parent or guardian is able to pay these fees is one which does not commend itself to anyone who knows how it operates in fact. I have in mind the case of a deaf and dumb girl of 17. Simply because these people will not <span class="col_1459-1460" refersTo="page_0796"/>allow themselves to be certified indigent that child is not being educated. She is clever, but she cannot get education because her parents will not allow themselves to be described by the magistrate as indigent. I put it to the Minister whether parents, without the indignity of being pauperised, should have to take the responsibility of sending their children a far distance and at a cost which makes it prohibitive. The Minister ought to be able to find a better way by using the school board or some other body which is in closer touch with the circumstances than the magistrate. I am not casting any reflections on magistrates. They have regulations to observe and the ordinary routine to follow. The magistrate is a man of all work, especially in a country district, and he generally discharges his duties very well, but in a case such as this, a magistrate cannot be expected to know what the circumstances are. The father is earning an artisan&#x2019;s wage and supports his family very decently, but he cannot afford to send this child away. If he wants to do so he must be certified as indigent. He is not indigent. This clause will become inoperative if there is not the machinery to inform the Minister or those acting for him what the merits or demerits of a ease may be. As to the co-operation of the trade unions, it is not necessary to impress that further upon the Minister. He has been very generous indeed in soliciting the co-operation of the trade unions in all matters of vocational education. I am sure he will be the first to say that the co-operation rendered by the trade unions has been invaluable to him.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_education">

<from>&#x2020;*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF EDUCATION</person>:</from>

<p>I thank hon. members for the way they have supported this Bill. I do not think anyone has spoken against it. Seeing the Bill has received so much support, it is not necessary to reply at length. A good deal was said which would be more appropriate on the Estimates. It has nothing to do with the Bill, but rather with the way in which the existing laws and schools are administered. I suppose that much of what has now been said will be repeated. It will be better to refer to it when the Estimates come on. I say that in connection with the general remarks touching the education policy, the question of whether we are doing too much for higher education, touching the desirability of more schools of the kind referred to by the Bill. This all is more at home on the Estimates. I am glad that the hon. member for Caledon (Mr. Krige) has expressed appreciation of the work of the Church in connection with the education now under consideration, and that he has drawn the attention of the House to the services rendered to the country by certain persons, such as Mr. de la Bat, the principal of the deaf and dumb institute at Worcester. We admit that the Church has taken the lead in establishing such institutions, and has realised its responsibility. Even now that the work has exceeded the powers of the Church, and the State has to intervene, we should be doing wrong to forget the work done by the Church. The hon. member for Caledon is apparently under a misapprehension. We are not taking over the deaf and dumb and blind institution at Worcester. It is now coming under the State-aided institutions. It will remain as it is to-day, but the State holds itself responsible for the salaries of the special teachers. Otherwise things remain unaltered. Because the State is becoming responsible for the teachers&#x2019; salaries it will get certain powers it did not have before. Where, however, a committee is appointed in connection with the institution, account will of course have to be taken of the Church that has built up the institution. The hon. member for Caledon further said that education should be given at Elgin in connection with the fruit industry. We must, however, be very sparing in connection with the establishment of agricultural schools. We must be careful not to encroach on the work of the department of Agriculture. There is a dividing line, and we must keep to it. The work he referred to more properly comes under the short agricultural courses which are given by the Agricultural Department, and which are shorter, better and more effective. The hon. member for Boshoff (Mr. van Rensburg) thinks that a certain clause imposing punishment on a parent for taking his child out of school without permission goes too far. He favours the parent paying back all the expenses of the State, but he is against the further penalty. The trouble is not so much with the parents who can pay, but with the one who cannot pay, and the further penalty is necessary to reach the latter. If the State spends money on such a child, and the child is taken away, the money is wasted. The penalty which is here imposed is not unknown to the Education Acts. It is not a new principle. The hon. member for Winburg (Dr. van der Merwe) objected to the direction which the Education Department was taking; he calls it over-centralisation. His great and initial mistake is that he thinks that the school under the Union Education Department is the same as that under the provincial administration. The latter is of a more local nature, and therefore, power can be given to the parents to exercise greater supervision. But the schools under this Bill are not of a local kind. They serve a much greater area, a whole province or the whole Union. It is unified in its extent. Even in primary education this position is not unknown. The vocational schools where teachers are trained are not of a local kind, nor do they come under local supervision, but under the control of the province. As far as possible we meet the requirements of local control by the appointment of committees who will have direct supervision over the schools. The question of free education has been raised here. This Bill has nothing to do with free education. Free education at the technical institutes has been referred to, but the Bill has nothing to do with the institutes, which come under the Act of 1923. If we are to comply with the demand for free technical education it will cost thousands of pounds. We already find difficulty in meeting the expense, and if we have to spend thousands of pounds more on it, I think technical <span class="col_1461-1462" refersTo="page_0797"/>education will suffer seriously. When we took over the technical schools we demanded payment from not a single child who received free education at that time, for the whole duration of the course. We only make the children who enter the school later and know that they would have to pay, do so. This does not take away from the fact that we nevertheless provide for free education for needy children. The hon. member for Colesberg (Mr. C. A. Louw) asked about stamp duties. His complaint is not directed against this Bill. It applies to the schools under the provincial administration, and if there is a mistake that administration must put it right. He also asked whether church schools will be supported under this Bill. Yes, in so far as the schools are acknowledged by the State. The hon. member for Rondebosch (Mr. Close) noticed a few mistakes in the Bill. He wants to know why we have dealt with the two subjects in one Bill, and why we have not introduced two Bills. We have so much trouble in getting one Bill passed that it will be still more difficult with two. He wants to know why a distinction is drawn between technical institutes and the trade schools. I will go into it, and if confusion is possible, then it will be most easily obviated by providing that by those schools the institutions that do not come under the Act of 1923 are intended. He further thinks that the Minister is getting too much power if he can annex a school under the provincial system. This is not a new power, which is now being given to the Minister. It is one he already has under the Financial Relations Act. It establishes the existing state of affairs. If a border line is to be drawn between schools, then it must not be done by the provincial administration, but by the Union Government.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a second time; House to go into committee on 29th February.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>We have had a very long day, and I suggest that the House should now adjourn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_education">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF EDUCATION</person>:</from>

<p>On general grounds I have no objection to an adjournment, but as the hon. member knows, the Food, Drugs and Disinfectants Bill is a very important and necessary measure which has been standing over from last year, and chambers of commerce and other bodies would like to see it on the statute book this year, but I am afraid that with other important measures, this Bill has not much chance of passing unless it is read a second time soon and sent to a select committee. There will then be an opportunity for the House to go into the details.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#food_drugs_and_disinfectants_bill">

<heading>FOOD, DRUGS AND DISINFECTANTS BILL.</heading>

<p>Eighth Order read: Second reading, Food, Drugs and Disinfectants Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_public_health">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>As was the case with the previous measure I introduced, the case for this Bill is very self-evident. Legislation of this nature is certainly long overdue, and should have been passed long ago. The Bill proposes to remedy defects in the legislation with regard to adulteration. In the absence of amending legislation, the public is imposed upon and seriously defrauded. As matters stand at present, we have conditions deleterious to health and the honest trader in the country is at a disadvantage. The existing laws with regard to the adulteration of food and drugs are unsatisfactory. There is no uniformity, and the existing laws are old, obsolete and totally inadequate to deal with the position. The most recent legislation we have in regard to this matter was that passed by the Free State in 1906 and by Natal in 1901, so that the most recent legislation we have in two of the provinces is in one ease 22 years old and in the other 27 years old. Even then the legislation is much older than it appears to be, because the adulteration laws in these two provinces are based on the Cape Act as it then existed, and this was passed in 1890, so that in reality in these three provinces the adulteration laws are 38 years old. Even this age is not correctly described, because the Cape Act again is practically the same as the English Act passed in 1875, so that our anti-adulteration legislation in this country is really no less than 53 years old. In the Transvaal there is really no legislation at all in regard to this matter, and the few enactments in connection with adulteration which have been passed were passed 33 or 34 years ago, and the enforcement of these anti-adulteration measures have been left to the municipalities. In some cases the municipalities have enforced them, but that is only true of the few larger municipalities. Practically there is no legislation in the Transvaal with regard to that matter, and since these laws were passed great changes have taken place in the trade in the country. Some say honesty generally has suffered amongst the trading community, but I will not say that, but there is so much adulteration going on in the country that it justifies Parliament in taking action to amend the law. Let me quote official figures. In various years large numbers of samples have been taken of foods and drugs and have been analysed. Of all the samples taken in one year, the number found to be adulterated was over 5 per cent. In another year over 6 per cent., another year 6&#x00BD; per cent., another year 7 per cent., and in one year over 10 per cent. That shows there is a serious position in the country with regard to adulteration. Apart from that, the existing laws only try to prevent harmful adulterations. There is adulteration going on in recent years of quite a different nature. Not so much is it harmful to health, but articles sold are spurious and mis-described, and in that way dishonest traders defraud the public by adulteration, and it is high time that against that sort of thing <span class="col_1463-1464" refersTo="page_0798"/>the public should be protected. Take, for instance, butter in the market in Cape Town. Recently 22 samples have been taken of butter sold on the Cape Town market. Of the 22 samples, six were found to contain from 11 per cent. to 23 per cent. of foreign fat. It is not harmful, but it is defrauding the public.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>Is that not against the definition of butter in the Dairy Act? They can be prosecuted for that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_public_health">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, I think that is so, and that is the position to-day. Take, for instance, coffee, a subject in which every member takes a special interest. The digestion of members of Parliament depends upon being supplied with the proper stuff, and upon the digestion depends the temper of Parliament. Take coffee. No less than 17 kinds of coffee are sold in the country as first-class coffee, and they are all made of a cheap kind of Rio coffee, and in some cases, as an hon. member said, might not contain coffee at all. We have no legislation to deal with that position. Take disinfectants. The Bill provides for anti-adulteration methods in the case of disinfectants. The public health depends upon whether disinfectant bought as such has disinfecting power. If a hospital buys disinfectant and proves it has not got disinfecting powers, it might create a dangerous position in the hospital, and it was only right to bring under the law disinfectants for which there is no provision in the country today. What I have said is enough to show that unless we amend existing laws the public is defrauded, and we get a position deleterious to health and a position which is unfair to the honest producer and the honest trader.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>Do you take powers to deal with old and obsolete tinned stuff?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_public_health">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, I think so, in this Bill. I need say very little about the general clauses of the Bill. It has been drawn up after a careful study of the legislation in other countries, particularly Australia, New Zealand and the United States of America, and it has been introduced at the definite request of the chambers of commerce in the country and also the chambers of industry and the Union Council of Public Health and all the larger municipalities and last, but not least, on the insistent demand of the Board of Trade and Industries. The demand for legislation of this nature has been very general and very insistent during recent years. The Bill, after it had been drawn up, has been sent to all these bodies and has been approved of. If there were any differences, any criticism, it was only on minor points, but in general it has been approved of by all these bodies concerned. All I can add is that I propose after the second reading to move that this Bill be sent to select committee, and that select committee can deal with it and take any evidence it likes, and I hope, seeing that this measure has been so long overdue, that it will go on to the statute book during this session.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>I do not want to delay the House and I shall not do so I only wish to say that I entirely agree with what the Minister says, that this Bill or a Bill of this kind is long overdue, and it will certainly be to the advantage of the public of South Africa if this Bill can be passed into law during this session. As the Minister has stated that he proposes to send this Bill to a select committee after the second reading, it does not seem to me that we need spend much time discussing it on the second reading, because most of the points arising in the Bill are points of detail which can very properly be discussed in select committee. The only point that occurs to me in looking through the Bill is whether sufficient provision is made for carrying the Bill into effect. I see that in Clause 3 it is proposed that. [Clause read.] But, after all, local authorities are not too anxious as a rule to incur any additional expenditure which does not bring them in a corresponding revenue, and I would like to see that adequate facilities are provided for enforcing the Act in these local authorities where the Minister entrusts to the municipality, or whatever it may be, the duty of carrying out the Act. And also, what is to be done in regard to areas outside the local authorities, because it certainly is important that this Act should be enforced not merely in the larger towns, but also in the smaller towns and the country districts. That was the only point on which it seemed to me the Act was not very explicit, but otherwise we are all agreed on the principle of the Act, and I think in select committee we can bring this Bill into a form in which it will be of great advantage to the public. There is no doubt whatever that a Bill of this kind is long overdue, and I certainly have no objection to the second reading.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I want to detain the House for a few moments in the hope that the select Committee may deal with two points which occur to me as a result of representations made in reference to two clauses of this Bill. In the first place the definition of &#x201C;inspector&#x201D; may lead to rather unsatisfactory results, because he is defined as any person who is authorized to carry out the duties. He might be without any particular qualifications. It has been pointed out to me that by defining &#x201C;inspector&#x201D; in this way we may be putting this work into the hands of absolutely unqualified persons, and it has been suggested that the definition of inspector instead of reading &#x201C;any person authorized&#x201D; should read &#x201C;any qualified person authorized&#x201D;. It is a matter that arises in connection with the status these men have been fighting for, and to some extent met in the amendments passed in the Medical, Dental and Pharmacy Bill. I hope, at any rate, the department will give the point fair consideration. I have advised them to put their case before the select committee. The other point is in regard to Section 15, which affects those engaged in the dairy trade. Representations <span class="col_1465-1466" refersTo="page_0799"/>have been made to me that if this is carried out literally it will entirely kill the trade in what is called skimmed milk. They say that skimmed milk is the milk the poor man buys. It is brought round to his door and sold much cheaper than the fresh milk. If you are going to compel them to deliver that milk by means of a separate delivery, they will simply have to give up the trade. They make representations that if you want to prevent adulteration you can do it in another way, i.e., if you made the same provision here as there is under Section 16, providing that the container, on the cart as well, should bear this conspicuous label. That would meet the case without destroying their trade. I hope their case will receive the earnest consideration of the select committee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I entirely agree with the Minister in the necessity for introducing this Bill, and while there may be a great deal to be said for what the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander) has drawn attention to, the main object of this Bill is that the poorer classes shall not be defeated when they think they are buying a food product. The value of the Bill is the protection of the public so far as the food qualities of an article are concerned. It is the poor man who needs that protection. If a dairyman carries about skimmed milk in his cart, and he is selling fresh milk as well, there may be a tendency without supervision for the skimmed milk to enter, by accident, into the receptacle which is supposed to contain the fresh milk. I am glad my hon. friend has referred to coffee, and I hope he will draw the attention of the internal arrangements committee to the coffee sold to hon. members and have it analyzed, because very often I am under the impression that the beverage which they think is coffee contains a large proportion of chicory plus, of course, the water that is added; because, although people may desire chicory or ground acorns or dried&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_heerden">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. P. VAN HEERDEN</person>:</from>

<p>Carrots.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>Carrots, barley and products of that sort, I think people who buy a beverage should have protection and get what they think they are buying; they should really know what they are buying.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>What about whisky?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>An admirable Act was passed in the Cape Parliament in which whisky and brandy were defined. I think we were the only country in the world in which these were defined; but we are not now thinking of the stimulation of the population, but of nutriment. The Minister will be supported from both sides of the House in passing the measure through as quickly as possible, because if there is one thing more necessary than another, it is that foodstuffs and their nutritive characteristics should bear the correct labels. I would like to draw attention to Act 16 of 1918, and I hope the Minister will put his officers on the track of those who are selling samples of the butter to which he referred. [Definition of butter in Act 16 of 1918 read.] As far as butter was concerned, provision was there made to try to prevent adulteration. I hope my hon. friend will see the law is enforced in all its severity&#x2014;if such samples of butter are sold as those to which he referred. I hope the Bill will not take long in committee, and will soon be placed on the statute book.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#close">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CLOSE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not know if I shall be able to eat much more butter, after the definition just read out by my right hon. friend. I would like to know, does the Bill deal with tinned stuffs, which may be sold in all good faith by a shopkeeper without any knowledge of their age. We know that under certain conditions tinned food as it grows older may take very dangerous forms indeed. I heard complaints of the evil results following the consumption of food packed in tins, jars or glasses which have been in stock for a very long period, the full extent of which is unknown both to the seller and to the purchaser. If the Minister has not the power, will he secure it, to insist that the date of packing shall be clearly marked on such food receptacles, for if that is done it would be a very great benefit to the community and assist in safeguarding its food supplies.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_public_health">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF PUBLIC HEALTH</person>:</from>

<p>I will remember that point.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a second time and referred to select committee for consideration and report, the committee to have power to take evidence and call for papers.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1928-02-27T22:48:00">10.48 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

