---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol10 - MONDAY 20 FEBRUARY 1928'
layout: debate
year: 1928
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>MONDAY, 20th FEBRUARY, 1928.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

Mr. SPEAKER took the chair at <recordedTime time="1928-02-20T14:21:00">2.21 p.m.</recordedTime>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#s.c._on_port_beaufort_grant_amendment_private_bill">

<heading>S.C. ON PORT BEAUFORT GRANT AMENDMENT (PRIVATE) BILL.</heading>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>,</from>

<p>as Chairman, brought up a special report of the Select Committee on the Port Beaufort Grant Amendment (Private) Bill, as follows:&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Your Committee has specially to report to the House that it desires leave to amend the preamble of the Bill as follows:&#x2014;</block>

<ol>

<li>(1) By omitting all the words in lines 12 and 13;</li>

<li>(2) by inserting the following words after the word &#x201C;access&#x201D; in line 29: &#x201C;and of unyoking cattle on such unoccupied land as shall be fixed upon for that purpose and the right of the Governor-General to resume any portion of the said land for public purposes, subject to the payment of compensation which, failing agreement, shall be fixed by arbitration&#x201D; and</li>

<li>(3) by inserting the following words after the word &#x201C;repealed&#x201D; in line 32: &#x201C;and that the said Mercantile Establishment shall be deemed to be dissolved.&#x201D;</li>

</ol>

<p>Such amendments being necessary to cover amendments proposed to be made in certain clauses of the Bill.</p>

<p>Report considered and agreed to; leave granted to amend the preamble in accordance with the report.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railways_and_harbours_service_and_superannuation_amendment_bill">

<heading>RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS SERVICE AND SUPERANNUATION (AMENDMENT) BILL.</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to call attention to the new clause of the Railways and Harbours Service and Superannuation (Amendment) Bill which has been inserted by the Select Committee on Railways and Harbours. The subject of this clause (which is to amend a section of Act No. 24 of 1925 making provision for continuity of employment for pension purposes in the new fund) was not included in the Bill as read a second time but is, I think, sufficiently relevant to certain of the main provisions of the Bill to allow of its insertion by means of an instruction. The select committee should therefore have applied by special report for leave to insert this clause. Seeing, however, that the Bill has now been set down for committee stage, I would suggest that the Minister in charge of the Bill should move the instruction to the Committee of the Whole House.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#industrial_conciliation_amendment_bill">

<heading>INDUSTRIAL CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT) BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Labour to introduce the Industrial Conciliation (Amendment) Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time.</p>

<p>On the motion that the Bill be read a second time on 27th February,</p>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>You ought to give more time for it. It has to circulate all over South Africa. How can we have it carefully considered in that time? We have to carefully watch Bills of this kind.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_labour">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LABOUR</person>:</from>

<p>I don&#x2019;t mind. The hon. member need not get alarmed. There is plenty of time. Put it down for a fortnight to-day.</p>

<p>Bill to be read a second time on 5th March.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#liquor_bill">

<heading>LIQUOR BILL.</heading>

<p>House In Committee:</p>

<p>[Progress reported on 16th February, Clauses 53, 54 and 63 standing over.]</p>

<p>On Clause 76,</p>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 62, after &#x201C;gallons&#x201D; to add &#x201C;or shall be contained in an unbroken case containing twelve reputed bottles of a total capacity of approximately two gallons&#x201D;.</block>

<p>This is simply to give effect to the purpose for which the Cloete Act was originally introduced into the House to enable farmers to sell good wine in the manner indicated in that Act. It will lead to no abuse whatever, and the Minister ought to have no objection.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 46, after &#x201C;licence&#x201D;, where it occurs for the first time, to insert &#x201C;or&#x201D; in lines 46 and 47, to omit &#x201C;or a brewer&#x2019;s licence&#x201D; <span class="col_1169-1170" refersTo="page_0651"/>to insert the following new sub-section to follow sub-section (2):</block>

<p>(3) The quantity of liquor to be sold or delivered by the holder of a brewer&#x2019;s licence shall not be less than one gallon to be delivered at one time in receptacle or receptacles securely corked or stoppered.</p>

<p>and to omit sub-section (5).</p>

<p>The scope of the amendment is to make the amount to be sold under a brewer&#x2019;s licence one gallon instead of two gallons. There is one brewery in South Africa, the Stag Brewery, which has disposed of its right of sale to the licensees of the &#x201C;Amalgamated,&#x201D; and there are a number of brewers who find it difficult to get their beer to the licensed houses owing to the ties we have in South Africa, and there will be small brewers who may come into existence at a later stage. The small men have made representations that it would be better to sell in one gallon instead of two gallons. We know, of course, that in the Transvaal, as far as beer is concerned, it is not one of the matters which is subject to the illicit trade. I do not think what I propose will cause any harm, but will give the small brewers a chance in the market of South Africa. As far as the big brewers are concerned, they have so many houses with which they deal that this is not necessary, and they have no substantial objection to the course which I propose being adopted, and which, I understand, they regard as fair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 61, to omit &#x201C;four&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;two&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Hitherto we have always had the right in the Cape Province to order a case of twelve bottles of wine from a farmer. It can surely not be said that the motion to allow an order of twelve bottles instead of twenty-four will increase drunkenness.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naud&#x00E9;">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. S. NAUD&#x00C9;</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 52, after &#x201C;one&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;half&#x201D;.</block>

<p>The clause will then read half a pint instead of a pint. I move it so as not to compel the poor man by law to buy more liquor than he requires, than he can afford, and in consequence of which women and children will suffer loss. I have a pamphlet in which Mr. Cook recommends the committee not to pass the amendment. That ought to be enough to make the Minister accept it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>It would be interesting if the hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal) would explain the reason for his amendment. I can hardly understand any ordinary wine farmer desiring to sell wine in a smaller wooden receptacle than one holding four gallons. Perhaps the hon. member desires that the wine should be sent out in paraffin tins. &#x201C;So long as the farmer is carrying on a legitimate occupation, no one desires to hinder him.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I wish to call the attention of the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) to the fact that there is no definition in the Bill of &#x201C;unbroken case&#x201D;. I have never yet heard of a reputed bottle, although I have heard of a reputed quart. Surely the amendment is not in order.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I support the Minister&#x2019;s amendment. I know the circumstances of the particular brewery he mentioned, and I am satisfied that its trade is a perfectly legitimate one. As to the amendment of the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie), we are proposing to make the proprietor of a bottle store pay an initial licence of &#x00A3;200, and afterwards an annual licence of &#x00A3;100, while the wine farmer will pay only &#x00A3;1 a year. The hon. member for Worcester proposes that the wine farmer should be allowed to sell his produce by the bottle. Nothing could be more contrary to the spirit and intention of the wine farmer&#x2019;s licence. The whole idea is that the wine farmer should sell wine in bulk, and it would be unfair to the trade to permit him to sell by the bottle. The amendment of the hon. member for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal) is foreign to the whole idea of the wine farmer&#x2019;s licence. We were pressed in the select committee by trade representatives to lay it down that the wine farmer should be allowed to sell only to the wholesaler, and the latter only to the retailer. We rejected that suggestion. The amendment of the hon. member for Wakkerstroom (Mr. A. S. Naud&#x00E9;) is dangerous, for if you allow liquor, especially brandy, to be sold in half-pint bottles, you will, play into the hands of the illicit dealer. Fancy a bottle store registering the sale of a half-pint bottle!</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>It has been argued that if any individual is licensed to distribute a particular article, he should be protected. That is a very dangerous argument. If the argument is good that the wine farmer should be prevented from undertaking a reasonable distribution of his produce, because certain other individuals are licensed to sell wine, you could argue that because a butcher is licensed to sell meat, a sheep or cattle farmer should not be permitted to sell meat direct to the public. If the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) could show that the system has been abused by the wine farmer, then he would have a case. People who pay licences certainly should have a fail-measure of protection, but the first person to be considered is the producer and not the distributor. There is a guarantee against abuse, because a wine farmer is compelled to keep books showing his sales. There is a tendency on the part of some members to confine dealing in liquor to the big merchants.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>I understand that in the interests of temperance a farmer should not be allowed to sell his wine direct to the consumer, but must sell to the wine merchant. It is a question of selling direct to the wine merchant, and it is to the interests of the liquor trade to sell to the wine merchants. My view is identical with that of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell), and I do not see why this House, in the interests of the wine <span class="col_1171-1172" refersTo="page_0652"/>merchant, should insist on the farmer being handed over to a body of merchants, and have to sell his product to them willy nilly. We should leave the farmer free to sell to those from whom he can get the best value. The amendment of the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) is a question of selling by the case, and I think this House should accept the suggestion of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout that, if it is necessary, in order to control this trade, a register should he kept by the farmer of the persons to whom he has delivered his wine. That would be perfectly fair and reasonable. I have been rather astonished at the objection to the half-pint bottle suggested by the hon. member for Wakkerstroom (Mr. A. S. Naud&#x00E9;). The half-pint bottle has been a way to temperance.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>No, only a half-way.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stuttaford">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STUTTAFORD</person>:</from>

<p>There are hundreds of men to-day who have a nip of wine at their meals and it does them a great deal of good. If it were not for the nip they would have to take a pint bottle. I cannot, therefore, see why anybody should object to the innocent nip. My only suggestion to the hon. member who has moved this amendment is that he should delete the words &#x201C;twelve reputed&#x201D; in order that any size bottle may be used provided that the total amount of liquor in the case shall not be less than two gallons. I move, as an amendment to the amendment proposed by Mr. Heatlie&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit &#x201C;twelve reputed&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I thought my amendment was so reasonable that it would be accepted by the House, and I must say I am surprised at the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell). The Cloete Act was originally designed to make provision for sales of this kind. Mr. Cloete made a high-class wine which he wished to bottle and sell to the public. To that there would have been no objection, and if it had been confined to that we should not have had the opposition to the Cloete Act, but, afterwards, amendments were introduced giving them power to sell in casks and other receptacles. I am asking you simply to sell in cases properly bottled and cased. Anyone understanding the casing business will know it is an expensive operation, and would not be carried on by anyone only people of standing making a high-class wine. I am not interested in the further amendment, but I hope my amendment will be accepted because it makes provision for the farmer selling high-class wine. There were only two wine farmers I knew who sold bottled and cased wine, and they were the late Mr. Henry Cloete and the late Mr. Merriman.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>I am prepared to withdraw my amendment in favour of that of the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) which is better. That proposes to continue the rights we had in the past. They have never been abused.</p>

<p>With leave of committee, amendments proposed by Mr. de Waal, Mr. Stuttaford and Mr. Heatlie, withdrawn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to support the amendment of the hon. member for Wakkerstroom (Mr. A. S. Naud&#x00E9;). It is the law to-day in the Free State. The bottle stores-may sell a half-pint, and it is largely a benefit to the working class that it should remain so. If you do not allow it, they are compelled to buy a whole pint bottle and often cannot afford it. I have a letter here from a wholesale firm to show that it is a popular custom here in the case of stout. This firm says they can sell nips wholesale, but not through the bottle store. Doctors may order nips of stout at different times, and it would be unfair to say the patients must take pint bottles. The amendment says the bottle stores may sell by the half-pint, but, of course, it is better for the bottle store to sell by the pint. The object of the opponents may be to see that a man does not get it at all, but that is unreasonable. It is a great public convenience. In the Cape we have been in the habit of selling these nips of stout in the way mentioned above, and this is a good opportunity of limiting the amount to half-pints in the case of bottle stores.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I think the whole objection that has been discussed in this House on various occasions to the Cloete Act was that the Cloete Act allowed four gallons of wine to be sold in an open receptacle, and the result was some people sold wine in a paraffin tin, and it was taken a short distance away and was drunk on the roadside, and you saw disgraceful cases of drunkenness. This Act makes provision that in the wood the farmer shall not sell less than four gallons. The ordinary wooden receptacle holds five gallons, and the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) moved two gallons, and that is why I opposed it. Casks are very expensive things, but there is something in the contention of the hon. member for Worcester that the legitimate farmer should be allowed to sell two gallons bottled and properly cased. The idea, so long as you have not prohibition in this country, is, if possible, to make this a wine-drinking country and not a brandy-drinking country, and under those circumstances I consider that the sale to which the hon. member refers, the sale, for instance, by the estate belonging to the late Mr. Cloete and the estate belonging to the late Mr. Merriman, and now belonging to Mr. Nicholson, is a business that should be encouraged People who live up-country and desire to buy a pure wine, should have the opportunity of ordering it direct from the farmer where it is properly bottled and securely cased. The whole idea of this legislation is to prevent the abuse of drink and do everything we can to stop these orgies which were constantly carried on so long as you were able to buy 4 gallons of wine in an open receptacle. I can well understand a certain section of people objecting to this, but I say that in the interests of the wine farmer&#x2014;and it certainly is not against the interests of <span class="col_1173-1174" refersTo="page_0653"/>temperance&#x2014;while it is lawful to sell 4 gallons one ought to be allowed to sell 2 gallons in a properly closed case.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>As far as the amendment of the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) is concerned, and what was said by the hon. member for Newlands (Mr. Stuttaford), there is nothing in that amendment to make it clear that it means 12 bottles of the same type of liquor. It speaks about 2 gallons contained in these bottles, but does not say whether they shall contain the same kind of liquor. I have no objection to the amendment provided it reads in this form: &#x201C;or unbroken case containing 12 quarts or 24 pint bottles of liquor of the same kind.&#x201D; I think that is the intention of the hon. member. In regard to the pint and the half pint, I have no knowledge of any misuse of the half-pint. The half-pint was a form which was very popular, especially a few years ago. It has perhaps been losing in popularity since. I have not seen so many of these &#x201C;nips&#x201D; for some years. As a matter of fact, I was privileged to see one of these bottles on the table here, although I did not partake of it, and I must say looking at the shape of the bottle, from an artistic point of view, it seemed to me there was a lot to be said for having a half pint of this class. I have not heard of any abuse as far as the half pint bottle is concerned, and personally I have no strong objection to that amendment being carried into force.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>I will move my amendment In the terms suggested by the Minister. That amendment carries out my intention, and I therefore move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 62, after &#x201C;gallons&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;or unbroken case containing 12 quart or 24 pint bottles of liquor of the same kind&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>If the wine farmer wants to sell by the bottle, he is competing with the wholesale dealer. There is no objection to his competing with the wholesale dealer if he does so on equal terms, viz., he must apply for a licence and pay for it. Why should the wine farmer pay &#x00A3;1 and the wholesaler &#x00A3;100?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>We always treat the farmers rather differently.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I appreciate the enormous amount of attention which my hon. friend (Dr. H. Reitz) has given to this Bill, but he has evidently not given the same attention to this particular section as he has to the other sections. If he studies the wine trades all over the world, he will find that the great wines of the world are made by the producer in his own cellar. The fact that we have not made so much progress with our wine industry as we might have done, is owing to this,&#x2014;that the farmer sells his product to other people, who manipulate it. If you are going to have a really good wine made in this country, you must encourage the man who makes the wine to treat it and manipulate it himself in his own cellar, and if he is going to get any financial consideration for doing that, he must have an opportunity of selling that wine in cases direct to the consumer. What is the difference between the wine farmer and the grain farmer and the sheep farmer? They all must have a right to sell without abuse their product to the consumer and it is on that account that my hon. friend (Mr. Heatlie) has moved that the wine farmer who matures his own wine, puts it in the bottles and cases. He should have an opportunity of sending it over the country to legitimate buyers, who will have an opportunity not alone of getting a good article, but also an opportunity of getting it at a cheaper price. The other sections of the trade to which my hon. friend (Dr. H. Reitz) refers, are sufficiently strong to look after themselves. It would be a very serious thing for this committee to prevent the producer from selling his product in the very best possible way, in which he can put it on the market.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to ask the Minister whether the wine farmers&#x2019;s licence deals only with the produce of that wine farmer. It does seem to me that there is something in what was said by the hon. member for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz). Would there not be <i>a</i> danger of a wine farmer going and buying wine from other people and selling it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>He can only sell his own product.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Is that in the law?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>It is provided for in Clause 88.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by Mr. A. S. Naud&#x00E9; and Mr. Heatlie put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On the amendment proposed by the Minister of Justice,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>What is the idea of this amendment&#x2014;because this Bill elsewhere makes stringent provision that an on-consumption licensee shall not sell for off-consumption. This sub section 5 appears to be to carry out that idea. If this is going to be taken out then it seems to me that the licensee will be able to sell larger quantities, and that seems contrary to the idea of Clause 80.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>There are other provisions in this Bill dealing with that matter, but it won&#x2019;t do any harm to leave this clause in.</p>

<p>Last part of the amendment proposed by the Minister of Justice withdrawn; first part put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 77,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#gilson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GILSON</person>:</from>

<p>I have a small amendment here, and I hope it will appeal to the Minister. Apparently this clause lays down, and is intended to lay down, that liquor shall only be consumed in the dining room or the bar. It seems to me that to make a restriction like that is not going to prevent any abuses. I have not heard of any abuses through drink being consumed on a verandah, for instance, or in the sitting room of hotels. This is just <span class="col_1175-1176" refersTo="page_0654"/>one of those irritating little clauses. I asked the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) what was the intention of the committee in drafting this clause; was it that liquor should only be consumed in the bar or the dining room, and he answered in the affirmative. Is there any objection to a man having a drink on a verandah, or to a man who hires a private suite of rooms having a drink there? It is irritating to put in clauses of this description, and I hope the House will say that liquor may be consumed anywhere on licensed premises; I care not whether it is the sitting room, the dining room, the verandah or the bar. I have never heard of drunkenness occurring through men having a drink on the stop. I hope the Minister will accept this amendment. It would meet the reasonable wishes of the public. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit all the words after &#x201C;premises&#x201D;, in line 71, to the end of sub-section (1).</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It is very essential to maintain these words for this reason, that there are certain cases in certain localities in which there may be a, suspicion that some part of the premises may be used for illicit trade. You may have a back yard, or back rooms, and where there is a particular type of house of that kind, although it cannot be proved up to the hilt, it may be useful for the licensing board to have the power to cut down part of the house in which liquor may not be supplied.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>What is the present law?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>The whole of the premises are licensed, but now they are to have the power to say that some portion is the only portion on which drink can be supplied. They may restrict it to the bar and dining room, or to three rooms. But I think it is a very necessary power to place in the hands of the licensing board, and I do not think that is one of the things that would he abused by the board.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I do not quite agree with the Minister. There are many men who do not go into a bar, and who would like to be served in other rooms. A board might apply this to the best hotels, which would be absolutely fatal to them.</p>

<p>Amendment put and negatived.</p>

<p>Clause, as printed, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 80,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>The trouble about Clause 80 is this, that if you take sub-section (2) that hangs together with Clause 63, and therefore as Clause 63 is standing over I should imagine the best way would be to let this clause stand over. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the consideration of this clause stand over.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Clause 63 stood over simply because it provided one, particular remedy for this vexed question of off sales. If the Minister wants further time to consider the ultimate solution he intends adopting for this problem, none of us would object.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>The trouble about discussing it is that I feel strongly that the way of dealing with this matter is to allow hotels to keep their off sales for a length of time. The amended form of Clause 63 will be to give that right for a length of time. What we might put in would be that sub-section (2) is subject to the provisions of Clause 62 We might leave it over, so that the two can be dealt with together.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 81,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 45, at the end of sub-section (1) to add &#x201C;: Provided that no such restriction or condition shall apply to persons registered as voters for the election of members of the House of Assembly.&#x201D;.</block>

<p>I think that the attitude I have adopted in this House has shown that I have always been desirous of seeing the coloured and the native people of this country as temperate as you can possibly make them, and I do not think it is right in an Act dealing with the supply of liquor, by a side issue, to take away from a certain class of people rights which they have held for over 75 years. In Act No. 39 of 1887 the late Mr. Hofmeyr introduced a measure which has ever since been known as the Hofmeyr Act. Hon. members of the committee who took an interest in the Native Administration Act of last year will remember that I then brought that question prominently before the House, because I considered it most unfair and injudicious to take away from people rights which you had given them, which were embodied in the old Cape constitution, and further entrenched when the Cape franchise was altered in 1887 by the Act introduced by Mr. Hofmeyr, which made special provision that natives who had qualified themselves as voters should have every right that the European voter possessed. It was unnecessary for these voters to come under the Location Act, to carry passes and things of that sort, and I know from experience that even the tampering of this Act in the native Bills of last year has caused much unrest in the native mind in this country. If there is one thing the native appreciates more than another, it was the Act of 1887, which Tengo Jabavu and other leaders of native opinion have called the Magna Charta of the native; that is, so long as he raised himself in the scale you make no difference between him" and the European voter. I know there are certain classes of people who are advocates of temperance reform who consider that if an amendment of this nature is carried it will do damage to the cause of sobriety. I do not agree with that, because those people who sell liquor illicitly are not native registered voters, but very often European registered voters are the <span class="col_1177-1178" refersTo="page_0655"/>main source of the supply of illicit liquor. I would like my hon. friend, the Minister, to say that we should not draw a colour bar in this Bill, which we have drawn often enough. If the amendment is accepted, I will move the deletion of Clause 82 for the same purpose, and in Clauses 95 and 96 propose to substitute a new clause. I am not personally in favour of Government liquor shops, and I shall vote against them when they come before the committee. I hope the Minister will accept this amendment. I can assure him and many other hon. members who know the native people know that they are viewing with suspicion a clause of this character. I do say a principle of that sort is unjust and unrighteous, and is bound to have a most deleterious effect on the native mind. If my hon. friend the Minister sees the character of these native voters in the Eastern Province, he will see it is an injustice to put them on a worse footing than Europeans, and those Europeans who have not raised themselves to the same scale of civilization that our native voters have done.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I said last year when we had the Native Administration Bill that a discrimination based on whether a man is a registered voter or not is an absurd one, and the Hofmeyr Act is a ridiculous Act. All that remains of that Act is that a man who is a registered voter has a right to drink; all the other points have disappeared and become obsolete. All that remains of the &#x201C;Magna Charta&#x201D; is the Magna Charta with regard to drink. This is the most extraordinary Magna Charta in the world. I have never heard of a more absurd one. I would not like any Act of mine to go down with such a stupid provision in it. I would not have anything to do with the Act if a clause like that is passed. The colour bar means a discrimination as far as the economic position of different sections of the population is concerned. The colour bar does not refer to matters where one is trying to save a section of the population which may have a temptation owing to its standard of development to consume too much liquor. If we use the issue of the colour bar for such a thing, we are simply causing feeling by loose terminology. We have just passed a discrimination. Read Clause 78, sub-section (2). If that was not meant for the natives and coloured population, I do not know to whom it refers. Now we are told there must be no discrimination, and that we must not take away rights which the natives and coloured people have had for 75 years. What about the tot system which the farmer has practised for 100 years? Or is it the position that we must not take away rights from the native and coloured population, but we can take them away from the European population? There is a special clause (No. 103) which provides that exemption be given in certain cases. We can deal on a larger scale with this exemption in the Cape Province than we can in the other provinces, for it can be given to everybody of decent character. That is the only possible way of dealing with the problem. There is not the faintest idea of discriminating against the native or the coloured population. This, however, is discrimination entirely in their favour. I have no doubt that this will be used to influence the native and coloured vote in the Cape Province, but I want to make my position perfectly clear. I believe that these sections are going to assist the coloured and native population much more than any discrimination based on a man&#x2019;s being, or not being, a registered voter. I have seen very many drunken voters, and I challenge anyone opposite to say that they have not seen drunken voters in the Cape Province.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>White or coloured?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Of all types. It is ridiculous to say that if a man has a certain educational or financial status, he is going to use his liquor better than a man who has not those qualifications. The whole thing is absurd. The only honest and straightforward way of dealing with the matter is this: are we prepared to say that there should be a discrimination in favour of the coloured people? If we do not wish to take up that position, the next thing to say is: allow the present position to continue and allow them to have drink as they are allowed to have it to-day. Don&#x2019;t let us have by side winds which are really intended to influence the next election in the same way in which we had discussions&#x2014;[&#x201C;No.&#x201D;]&#x2014;Oh, yes; in the same way, but to a greater extent than in the discussion in the initial stages of this Bill. Will hon. members opposite deny that this whole matter was settled in their caucus? The intention in bringing out this amendment was merely to make political capital out of the whole matter. I don&#x2019;t want party lines on this subject. I have said that from the start, and no one can accuse me of wanting to extract political advantage. Will hon. members opposite deny that they held a caucus meeting on this matter? There is not a single section of the Bill that I have asked my party to hold the caucus meeting about. The whole Bill in its general lines was placed before the Nationalist caucus 18 months ago, but I have not placed any section before the caucus. We should secure, as far as humanly possible, the best possible Bill without thinking about party advantage. If one reads the Hofmeyr Act, one sees that it contains internal evidence that the different parties at that time sparred with each other for party advantage. Were it not for political advantage, an Act of that ridiculous nature would never have been passed. If you read it, you would think it impossible for anybody to have put it on paper. It disgusts me to think that the Act should be pinned to the name which fathers it. We cannot have better provisions on this subject than the provisions already in the Bill. If we are going to have discrimination, we must have it, and if we have it plus exemption, nobody can suffer. <span class="col_1179-1180" refersTo="page_0656"/>I was much impressed by the arguments with regard to coloured wine shops in the Transvaal, and I have given notice to deal with that clause. I have discussed the matter with respectable coloured men in Johannesburg, and they told me that they had no desire to have unrestricted opportunities of obtaining liquor, but they wanted at certain times to be able to buy a bottle of liquor. Your decent coloured man will be dealt with under the exemptions. What is good enough for them in the Transvaal should be good enough for them here. Here they will have a right which they have not in the Transvaal. Your ordinary decent coloured man is going to be satisfied with this provision, and so far as the Cape Province is concerned we are not going to take away the right of a decent man to get his liquor from the bottle store. That provision is quite sufficient for all these purposes. I don&#x2019;t say that we should not use that provision in as sparing a way as in the north, but give it to every decent man who will not misuse it. Otherwise we shall have somebody outbidding the right hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt); then you may have party advantage displayed somewhere else. I am not going to outbid the right hon. member. I am going to stand by the section which offers the best possible solution of the difficulty. Either we are going to assist a section of the population or we are not. If we are not it does not matter very much whether the amendment is persisted in or whether there is an outbidding amendment to keep the position exactly as it is to-day. Last year the House repealed the provisions of the Hofmeyr Act, but they were restored to a certain extent in another place. If that Act was repealed last year, I have no doubt the House will be of the same opinion this year. It may be that another place believed it was wrong, but I should imagine that this will not change this House from the opinion which it expressed so clearly last year.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think my hon. friend has made a careful study of the Hofmeyr Act. The whole principle was to encourage the native who became civilized and became a registered voter by giving him certain privileges others of his race did not possess. The proposal in this Bill is to take away those privileges. The Minister may scoff at the late Mr. Hofmeyr as much as he likes, but when the Minister arrives at the same political scale as the late John Henry Hofmeyr arrived at, he will be in a more exalted position than merely the leader of the Nationalist party in the Transvaal. I am as anxious as the Minister to see that drink is kept away from a large section of the native and coloured people of the country. No one knows better than I do the fearful scenes on Saturday evenings in various towns and their vicinities throughout the Western Province and the Cape, but the Bill itself makes provision for exempting special classes. It makes provision for drink to be refused to particular classes of people, whether native or coloured, and you have no right in a Bill of this character to take away from the native people rights they have possessed for 75 years. The franchise gave them the same status before the law as the European, and it is unfair and unjust to take these rights away. I can afford to put on one side the cheap sneers of the Minister. If he has used his influence in the country for political consideration irrespective of his convictions, there is no reason why anyone else should do it. I have always maintained the right of the registered coloured voter, and I want the committee to thoroughly understand that so far as drunkenness and insobriety are concerned, the Bill, as it stands, can put that down. It is not the native voter that is causing a lot of this trouble in the Western Province, but it is because a certain class has a perfect right to get as much liquor as it desires. All my amendment says is that the rights you have given to the native people for 74 years, rights which they prize very much indeed, should not be taken away by any side issue. If you propose to take them away do it in a straight way which everybody knows the meaning of.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I am surprised the Minister has charged us with looking at this Bill from a party point of view.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>No, I said this section.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Even this section. There has been no question of party. Cleavages have cut across all parties. The Minister has no right to ask us what happened in any caucus. If they had a caucus in this House&#x2014;a Labour caucus&#x2014;would not the Minister be breaking his vows of secrecy if he stood up and told us what was said? I will tell him every word of what happened in our caucus if he will tell us what happened in the Labour caucus of late, but let me say this, in no caucus which we have held have we discussed this Bill from a party point of view. It would be nonsense to say that we have not discussed this Bill. What are we here for? But we have not discussed it from a party point of view, and it is not right for the Minister to demand from us what was done in caucus. To do so would break every canon and law of secrecy imposed upon us, and I am only sorry the Minister even referred to it. The Minister need only watch the divisions to see that on this side of the House, and I am satisfied it is the same on that side of the House, there have been no party divisions. My difficulty with regard to Clause 81 is this: I realize there are black spots, especially in the Western Province, but I think this clause has too wide an application. It applies all through the Union where these difficulties do not exist. Assuming the Wynberg Licensing Board made Wynberg a restricted area. What would be the result? Are we not going to have the same piebald patchwork we should have under local option? Assuming Wynberg closed the place <span class="col_1181-1182" refersTo="page_0657"/>down to coloured persons, should we not encourage bootlegging and illicit liquor selling? Section 56 of this law seems to meet the case, and I do not see why you should have sections 81, 96 and 102 at all, because they all seem to deal with the same thing. Under this section the liquor court has ample power to deal with the black spots. The Government is now practically indicating to the liquor licensing courts in the Western Province that they have to impose what is tantamount to local option in the Western Province, and I am afraid you are going to have a piebald result, and that bootlegging and illicit dealing will take place between the open sections and the closed sections. I admit there are cancer spots for particular classes which require to be drastically dealt with, but I am not clear how you are going to do it. In view of the American example, we must think carefully as to the manner in which we are going to deal with these black spots. The question to me is whether we are not going to make the position worse than before. We have a lot of drunken ness amongst certain classes, and now we are, in addition, to make criminals of them in the bargain. I doubt if section 81 is going to deal with these black spots, and therefore I do not think what we are doing will meet the trouble.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry the Minister has made reference to what took place in the caucus, because I think that if he was going to place any reliance upon what happened there, he should have waited until some decision has been come to before criticizing, or before making up his mind to sneer at us. I was one of those who brought up this question, but, and before the caucus could discuss the matter, the Minister had already made up his mind not to consider the position at all. The Minister is very particular about his caucus, and if he is so particular about his caucus he should have said to those who brought him the information that he would not listen to tale-bearers, but would at least wait until a decision had been come to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I did not speak to any South African party man.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>&#x2020;Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>It is very strange that a South African party man came to me before we came to any decision, and said that the Minister would not accept it. I have been consistent in this matter throughout. I have always opposed any colour bar, and I am proud that as in this instance I have always opposed it in every possible way. If the Minister had taken the trouble to see that large section of the coloured community here who desired to see him, he would have understood their viewpoint. I presented a petition signed by 10,334 coloured people, amongst whom there are a large number who are strong temperance advocates. I have spoken to these temperance advocates since then, and their main point is that, while they want everything done to prevent drunkenness amongst the coloured people, they do oppose, and oppose strongly, that we should legislate in regard to colour and colour alone. I think the House should know the terms of this petition. [Petition read.] I would like to draw attention especially to the last clause, which reads&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Your petitioners are desirous that the aforesaid Bill be amended in such a way as to render the provisions applicable equally as far as the European and coloured sections of the community are concerned, and not to give the licensing board power to discriminate between white and coloured persons.</block>

<p>We are asking for nothing more than that. If the Minister can propose a method by which he object he has in view can be gained without introducing a colour bar, we shall be prepared to accept it. We do say that there is nothing easier than to eliminate all reference to colour. It is perfectly simple, and I do not understand why the colour bar should be introduced here at all. I want to appeal to the Minister to consider the position. I wish to help him in every way to diminish the evils which we know of, but these evils are not confined to the coloured people alone. We have a large number of poor whites flocking into the town. If anybody would take the trouble to go to, say, District 6, where these men are congregating now, he would find that there is as much evil amongst the poor whites as you would find anywhere in the province amongst the coloured people. If the Minister would agree to eliminate the colour bar and make his provision applicable to white, coloured and black alike, we will support him in every possible way, but while that colour bar exists, we in principle must oppose him as far as we possibly can.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. B. DE VILLIERS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In lines 42 and 43, to omit &#x201C;to persons of a particular class, including women or any particular class of women&#x201D;.</block>

<p>My object is to try, if possible, to see that there shall be no trouble in regard to off sales by hotels and bars. The idea of this amendment is that a person shall be able to get liquor in quantity as may be supplied by bottle stores, and hotels and wholesalers, but on producing this particular permit, and this permit must be granted to persons whom they do not suspect of illicit liquor dealing and the like. What you are aiming at in connection with this Bill is to do away with drunkenness. I have told the farmers time after time that unless they step in and put an end to the drunkenness which we see about the streets of Paarl. Wellington, Worcester, Kuils River and a good many other places in the Western Province, they are going to have trouble with the teetotalers. What is the reason for this state of things? It is, firstly, on account of women having been supplied with drink. Under this permit system women will not be able to secure these permits so easily. In the second place, my view of a farm like that of the hon. member for Stellenbosch (Mr. J. P. Louw) is <span class="col_1183-1184" refersTo="page_0658"/>that I do not see why a boy on the farm who receives his tot should be supplied with a permit to obtain liquor in the town. That is why I am moving this amendment and why I am moving in Clause 81 to delete these words. These coloured people have been with us for many years, and Asiatics have been allowed to come into this country, and their children have grown up with us and have no other domicile. The same with the Cape coloured men, they have been born with us, they live with us, they are part and parcel of us, and I say we should not discriminate. When I say they are part and parcel of us, I mean they want to be treated politically and economically on the same lines, but they do not want to be one of us socially. These people are born and bred in our very midst, and they should have the same opportunities as we have.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>A very important principle is undoubtedly at stake. The reason the natives look upon this Act as their Magna Charta is this. You laid it down that to become a voter you must be able to do certain things, and it was said to the native, &#x201C;As we are admitting you to equality with Europeans as far as the vote is concerned, you will not in any future Act of Parliament be treated differently from the European voter.&#x201D; That is the basis of that Act. Let me disabuse the Minister&#x2019;s mind of one thing. The coloured people all over the Union, except for certain temperance sections who would like to do away with drink altogether, the coloured people of Natal, the Transvaal, the Free State and the Cape all feel this is a stigma upon them. The Minister may think it is absurd, but when you are dealing with questions of stigma in regard to race and colour, the feelings of the men concerned are most important. I have a resolution here from the African National Bond in the Cape. These are coloured voters who have joined the Nationalist party. This is a resolution passed at a meeting held in Cape Town on the 13th of February, and this resolution was carried unanimously&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That this meeting of coloured citizens feels strongly incensed at the restrictive colour measures in the Liquor Bill now before Parliament. Although fully agreeing that the liquor trade generally should be under better Government control, same should not affect the dignity and rights of a section of the community which can have only a lowering and dangerous effect. We coloured citizens therefore appeal to Government and Parliament generally that the clauses be deleted from the Bill.</block>

<p>As far as the coloured people supporting the Nationalist party in the Cape are concerned, they unanimously ask the Government not to leave these restrictive clauses in. I had a deputation to-day from Port Elizabeth, East London, King Williamstown and Queenstown representing the natives in those areas. They are dead against these provisions. They say, &#x201C;It is a degradation of our status as natives,&#x201D; so the natives feel degraded and the coloured, people feel degraded. There is a deep-seated, feeling of resentment in the minds of both the natives and the coloured people against this clause. At least let the Minister understand that. They feel it very seriously indeed, they feel it is a discrimination. You have no right to deal with races in this way. You have no right to say that the native is to be prevented except by special pass from taking his glass of wine. You have no right to say that any coloured person cannot take his bottle of wine home. If you want to discriminate, you must discriminate against individuals if they do not behave themselves, not against a race. Last year in regard to the Native Administration Bill I took up the same attitude. There is an important principle at stake here, and that is as to whether you have any right to brand a whole body of people belonging to a particular race or colour under a liquor law and say that if a man is white&#x2014;he may belong to the poor white class, and through no fault of his own has sunk in the scale&#x2014;&#x201C;We are not going to deprive you of liquor,&#x201D; but when it comes to the natives they are not to have liquor without special permit, and to the coloured men they must not buy it for off consumption. We know exactly how it is going to apply. There is no particular class of whites which is going to be singled out by the licensing board not to have liquor, or we should have serious trouble. I know perfectly well that, as far as the whites are concerned, this particular law is not going to be applied at all. It is going to be applied solely to the natives and coloured people. I say the remedy here is worse than the disease. The hon. member for Barkly (Mr. W. B. de Villiers) has come forward with this heroic proposal that we must all get permission from the magistrate before we can have our glass of beer. It has one advantage that we cannot have colour restrictions, and it is improving the clause. But it is practically total prohibition at the whim of magistrates of South Africa, and I do not know whether we have arrived thus far. If you consider a man is fit to elect the men who pass all the laws for the country, surely he can be treated for the purpose of this law the same as any European. In fact, we have been told it is the policy of the Government to take in the coloured man with the European. Apart from the prohibitionists or temperance party of the coloured people, they protest against unfair discrimination.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I cannot understand why this discussion is raised in this form on this section; if my hon. friends from the Cape had reserved their fire until Clauses 82, 95 and 96 were reached, I could have understood it. On the face of it, this section applies to all the provinces of South Africa, and in three out of four the coloured people by law are prohibited from obtaining liquor. Then it goes on to refer to women and classes of <span class="col_1185-1186" refersTo="page_0659"/>women. There might be certain bars which confine themselves to poor whites who are better kept out of them. I know of a bar in which hundreds of poor whites, when they obtain their pittance of a wage, have spent it in that manner by purchasing liquor. I can understand the licensing board saying it will cancel the licence if the bar sells to those people. The bar can have its ordinary trade. The licensing board may say&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">We will not have you serving women of the prostitute class, or any women.</block>

<p>In regard to the poor whites, and I am not using the term as a reproach, you might have invidious position of saying that you are not to serve any of these gentlemen unless they are on the roll. Whether they are on the roil or not, the mischief will be equally great, if they are served with liquor. If women obtain the franchise, a woman may be a street walker and say she is on the roll and wants a drink. The state of affairs in the Western Province in the country districts may be such that the provision may be applied to a class. In dealing with the broad principle raised by the amendment by the right hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt), I stand with the Minister entirely on this clause, and whatever may be said about the feelings voiced by Dr. Rubusana and others, one of the greatest exponents of native opinion, and universally recognized as such, is Senator Roberts, chairman of the Native Affairs Commission, who gave evidence before the committee (question 286, page 61). Senator Roberts was asked&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Would you treat the natives in the Cape Province as regards liquor on precisely the same footing as the rest of the natives in South Africa?</block>

<p>To this the reply was Yes. The chairman asked him whether a native has a vote or not, and the reply was Yes. The chairman said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">You know that is a legacy from the days of Saul Solomon.</block>

<p>He replied&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">I consider we have reached the time when we can depart from that policy.</block>

<p>It is suggested because a native is a voter by the mere accident of registration, that as such he becomes a man not imbued with temptation in regard to liquor&#x2014;not only himself, but his compatriots. We have in the Transvaal natives quite as civilized as the coloured men in the Cape, but no one proposes to give the former liquor. I have evidence that many a native in the Cape Province has become registered as a voter simply in order to obtain the privilege of obtaining liquor. That point was put to Dr. Roberts (page 99). He was asked by Mr. Blackwell&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Do you think native opinion in the Cape would approve of prohibition?</block>

<p>and his reply was&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">I am certain amongst the more thoughtful natives they would do so, provided they get kaffir beer.</block>

<p>He was asked by Mr. Barlow&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Do you think that natives deliberately put their name on the voters&#x2019; roll to get liquor?</block>

<p>He replied&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">I have heard that statement again and again, &#x2026; but I know that no native would do that, because if they are living near natives who are voters they can get plenty of drink from natives who are voters themselves.</block>

<p>He was asked&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Are you in favour of total prohibition for white people?</block>

<p>His reply was&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Yes, in the long run it must come.</block>

<p>The views of Dr. Roberts as a member of the Native Affairs Commission are entitled to respect. It is perfectly obvious that though we have to take drastic steps to put an end to the existing state of affairs in the Cape Province, we must see that a respectable coloured man has an opportunity to purchase liquor. Clause 103 was never drafted for that purpose, but for giving individual exemption by the Minister in rare cases, and it refers only to light wine and beer. The Minister should say that he is prepared to accept something on these lines&#x2014;that magistrates in the Cape Province may grant a certificate of exemption to any reputable coloured householder, the certificate to last for a year and to be renewable unless there is good reason to the contrary. I agree with the Minister that it is ridiculous to talk about this as a colour bar. In any case the Bill is full of colour bars, against which no Cape member has voted up to the present.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_zyl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. B. VAN ZYL</person>:</from>

<p>We say, don&#x2019;t prevent a man having a right to obtain liquor on account of his colour.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Will the hon. member vote against the existing prohibition in Natal and the Free State?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#william_macintosh">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILLIAM MACINTOSH</person>:</from>

<p>My hon.</p>

<p>friend said he did not know why the right hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) introduced his amendment, and then he proceeded to give excellent reasons why it should be introduced in this case, showing clearly that this was the first clause on which the matter could be dealt with. I am against the drunkenness of the coloured people or any drunkenness. I sat on the 1918 select committee which dealt with drunkenness in the Western Province, and I still retain vivid recollections of the evidence given before that committee. If you are going to recognize a man as a man, you must recognize his status as a man, but I can understand how difficult it is for a Transvaaler <span class="col_1187-1188" refersTo="page_0660"/>to comprehend how keenly the Cape coloured people feel on this matter. Much as I detest drunkenness, I am not prepared to get away from the fact that when you give a man the franchise you accept him as a man.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>What about the Transkei?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#william_macintosh">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">WILLIAM MACINTOSH</person>:</from>

<p>The words quoted by the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) lose some of their value, for Dr. Roberts&#x2019; chief knowledge is of the tribal native. The native in the Cape who lives in urban areas is entirely different from the tribal native. This Bill cannot stand by itself, and how can you say in one measure that coloured men and natives are granted full rights of statesmanship and manhood when they reach the standard the Cape legislature set up&#x2014;a standard that was subsequently accepted by the Union legislature&#x2014;and when they reach that standard can you say to them on the one hand you are men entitled to all the rights and privileges of manhood, but when it comes to liquor we shall treat you as children. That is why I support to the full the amendment of the right hon. member for Fort Beaufort, believing that is the only sound way to deal with the problem.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>According to the amendment of the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt), as I read it, he has no objection to a colour line being drawn between those who are or are not to get liquor. He has no objection to that. He only wants the alteration that if the natives are registered voters this provision shall not apply to them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>Coloured people also.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#conradie">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. CONRADIE</person>:</from>

<p>Very good, that is worse. It is strange that after all the speeches by other hon. members, the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander) has also ended in a protest against a colour line. But the amendment of the hon. member for Fort Beaufort makes no protest against a colour line; his protest is one between colour and colour, between people of the same colour. Only the coloured person who is not registered will be affected, but registered voters may not be excluded. The whole debate, however, later developed into a discussion of a colour line between coloured and white people. I agree with the hon. members who say that we must not draw a colour line and give, in connection with the sale of liquor, something to some coloured people and not others. If the hon. member had moved the deletion of the whole clause, I might have supported him, but the hon. member only wants registered voters to have the right of obtaining liquor, and not other coloured persons. The deputation from Port Elizabeth, which the hon. member for Hanover Street mentioned, also came to me. They told me that they were total abstainers, and I said it was remarkable that they could advocate the sale of liquor and that only certain people would be excluded. That is another matter, but my point is that a registered voter has to have certain qualifications, viz. to be able to write his name, do work that brings him in &#x00A3;50 or occupy a room worth &#x00A3;75. Ought those qualifications now to serve to give a man leave to drink? Hundreds and thousands of people who have them are just the ones not to have liquor. There is many a blackguard on the voters&#x2019; roll who ought not to have drink. I said so to the deputation, and I told them that I had found natives in Basutoland and Kaffraria who were more respectable than some of those on the voters roll. The distinction of being able to obtain liquor should rather rest on moral grounds, and not on a signature or a wage of &#x00A3;50. Undoubtedly, as the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) said, if we provide that liquor shall only be sold to registered voters, many coloured persons and natives will struggle to get on to the voters&#x2019; roll to be able to drink themselves or buy drink for other natives. Cases occur where nonregistered persons pay enrolled voters for obtaining liquor for them. They are really nothing but illicit liquor dealers. I am not throwing undeserved blame on them. A white person often will not do it for nothing. I can, therefore, not agree with the amendment of the hon. member for Fort Beaufort, which distinguishes between people of the same colour.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I am strongly in favour of any reasonable measure which will tend to the decrease of drunkenness, especially amongst the coloured people, but I am against any measure that gives unnecessary discrimination against one people as against another. I, therefore, ask the Minister, what is the necessity of Clause 81 at all? Clause 55 gives the licensing board greater powers than those contained in Clause 81. Remember we have amended Clause 56 and it gives the liquor licensing court power to place any restrictions subject to proclamation, and so the net result of Clauses 81, 95, 96 and 102 is to give the coloured population an idea that they are being specially discriminated against. They pile indignities upon them&#x2014;like piling Pelium on Ossa&#x2014;it is rubbing it in, so to sneak. What then, is the necessity for Clause 81? Perhaps the Minister will explain. The hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) says it is not directed against any particular class, but the whole trend of the debate shows it is directed against the coloured population. There are sections of the coloured community where restrictions are required to stop the disgraceful scenes we see round here, but you have given the licensing court the powers necessary to deal with the matter without leaving the coloured man to labour under a grievance. If you will remember, in the Indian Agreement the Indians objected to being discriminated against by name, and the Minister of the Interior accepted that principle. The decent coloured man feels the same. He feels it humiliating to be discriminated against by name; so I ask the Minister why Clause 81 has crept into the Bill at all, in view of Clause 56, which does not discriminate by name? I think the licensing board should have the light to discriminate against these plague spots, but leave it with the power given under <span class="col_1189-1190" refersTo="page_0661"/>Clause 56 and then there is no need for this clause at all. You can leave it out altogether.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) states that poor whites can also be included under the word &#x201C;class,&#x201D; and that that is actually intended. If it is true, I should like to know why the Minister should have the right to prevent people from getting liquor just because they are poor. According to the Minister the word &#x201C;class&#x201D; only refers to coloured people. Now I do not know who is right, but assume that the provision is only intended for coloured people. Then I ask why, at the whim of the Minister, coloured people as a class should be deprived of the right of getting any liquor. Is it only to injure the wine farmers? There are many respectable coloured people who are accustomed to drink a glass of wine in their homes. Is that now to be stopped? The result will be that you will compel such coloured persons to obtain their drink illegally. As the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander) has already mentioned, the Afrikaanse Bond, which surely consists of the best class of coloured people, has objected to that provision. They regard it as a slap in the face of the coloured people. I agree with the Minister that the Hofmeyer Act must be repealed. But the natives have always had the right of making and drinking beer. It cannot be said that the native is robbed of the right of obtaining liquor. The coloured people are becoming more and more civilized, and do not deserve to be treated as barbarians. Moreover, you would merely be promoting illicit drink traffic in that way. I move the amendment standing in the name of Mr. Heatlie, and which he presumably does not wish to propose.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Do you want to make the amendment applicable throughout the Union?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_waal">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE WAAL</person>:</from>

<p>I shall meet the Minister and so amend it as only to apply to the Cape Province. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">At the end of sub-section (1) to add &#x201C;: Provided that no condition shall be imposed in the Cape Province which seeks to discriminate in any manner in respect of the supply of liquor between Europeans, coloured persons and Asiatics&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>If the Cape members wish to have no discrimination whatever between these classes, of course I cannot stand out against their wishes. They will create a much worse position in the Cape Province than ever existed before. If they want it, why should they not have it? They are all doing their best to hamper the provisions we are inserting in this Bill to make the position better. If they want to go on that line, let them do so; so long as we keep the Transvaal, Free State and Natal clean, I am satisfied.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What about the tot system?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>If I am going to be hampered in trying to put through this Bill, let it be bad as far as the Cape. Province is concerned, and good as far as the other provinces are concerned. Then we do some good. I am certainly not going to try and protect a community that does not want to be protected. The wider provisions under section 56 went through quite easily, but the narrower section the House is boggling at.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Why not drop it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It refers to a somewhat different state of affairs. It gives rights to deal with that particular licence as far as these classes are concerned. If this test disappears, the way is opened to allow a reversal of the present position of the tot system in the Cape Province. A further result would be that the Bill would be dropped. Unless these sections are passed which are lying in front of us, the Bill will be dropped. I may say that the one thing that impresses me is that there will be sufficient provision for coloured people to get liquor for on-consumption, but especially as far as the coloured community is concerned I wish to make a further provision and introduce a further section to follow 103. The point has rightly been made that we should not deal with the coloured people of the Cape Province by means of exemptions, and I am prepared to introduce a section to follow 103, laying down that your magistrate may give annual licences to reputable coloured persons in the Cape Province, and under these annual licences they can obtain as much drink as they like at bottle stores. I do not think we can confine that to householders. It would have to be such men as the magistrate considered would not abuse the privilege. I am not prepared to go further than that. No compromise seems to be possible in this House. Everybody wishes to have one extreme view this way and one extreme view that way. I want to have a middle course and that middle course is having a very bad time. I certainly shall welcome an opportunity of dropping the Bill if the House gives a wrong judgment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister has shown such a great deal of patience during the long period of time in which this Bill has been under discussion, that I am rather surprised that, on a very important question of this sort, on which people hold very strong opinions, he should show signs of a certain amount of irritability. I do not think it is fair to the committee, or fair to the House, and even if we cannot go the whole way with this Bill, we realize that it is a good measure, perhaps one of the best measures which the Minister could have introduced into the House. There are members of this committee who hold very strong views. I am anxious to see every possible restriction placed upon the abuse of liquor, but I want it done in this Bill, as it can be done, without unnecessarily interfering with the class feeling of people by introducing particular specifications of natives and coloured people. The hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell)&#x2014;and I am sorry that the hon. member for Gordonia <span class="col_1191-1192" refersTo="page_0662"/>(Mr. J. G. Conradie) did not understand him&#x2014;made it clear that particular classes might include a class of people who are white, as well as native people or coloured people. With that I am entirely in agreement in trying to prevent the abuse of liquor by a large class of people. I also feel, as this country has felt in its negotiations with other states, that it is inadvisable to use terms which have a tendency to make a particular class of people feel that there is a stigma cast upon them. If you can do that without placing a stigma upon a class, then that is the proper way to do it. Will the Minister tell us, in a clause of this character&#x2014;I am not going into the question of whether my amendment should have been moved here or somewhere else&#x2014;will he tell me, in the Cape of Good Hope or any other province where you can really draw a colour line? When you begin to draw any colour bar line in this country then you must touch very nearly large numbers of people who hold most respectable positions in this country. It is not fair in a Bill of this character dealing with the liquor traffic, that you should draw a particular line against that class. If it is not your intention to touch the European voter, then it should not be your intention to touch the coloured voter. There are coloured voters many of whom are just as respectable as many European voters. My appeal to the committee is not to put a stigma on these people. You preserve all the powers that you preserve at the present time, that no aboriginal native shall get liquor in the province of the Cape of Good Hope, and that applies also in the northern territories, and there is no intention of doing away with that. But when a man has arrived at the standing at which he is entitled to be a voter you should not put a stigma upon him. You have encouraged these people to rise to this scale, and it is only fair that the rights which the Europeans have they should have as well. By all means, make any possible restrictions you like upon any class, but do not single out as you do in this clause and other clauses, people by name of coloured, native and Asiatic. If the Minister will agree to delete Clause 82, which refers particularly to certain sections of people, then I would be prepared to withdraw my amendment. I am fighting for a great principle, and notwithstanding the way in which the Minister said I am doing it for political purposes, I have fought for it so long that it is unnecessary for me to try and repudiate that. I feel very strongly it is not right or fair to single out a class of people because of the colour of their skin, it is not fair to make a difference between them and the European voters. I am offering a compromise to the Minister if he will agree to the deletion of Clause 82. My objection is to the manner in which it is worded. I am trying to meet the Minister in every possible way. Clause 102 definitely proposes to delete Act 37 of 1887, the Hofmeyr Act. That I am entirely opposed to. I want the Minister really to understand that I am not moving this for political purposes, but to preserve the feelings of a certain class of people who appreciate extremely the right they have to send members to this House, and if they have that right they have equal rights with every European in other directions.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>If we are only dealing with Clauses 81 and 82, I have no objection to withdrawing Clause 82, but I want to make it quite clear that I will resist any amendment in regard to the definition clause. I do not want it afterwards said that I misled the committee in regard to the definition clause. I also want it clearly understood that I do not think the right hon. the member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) and I will ever bridge our difficulties in regard to Clause 102. I wanted to make those two points clear so that the committee will know, when we come to them, what my intentions are.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>If the Minister agrees to the deletion of Clause 82, it very largely meets the difficulties I have mentioned. As to the definition of &#x201C;class&#x201D; it seems to me that must be left to the licensing courts. I do not see how we can take that power out of their hands. I am very pleased the Minister has agreed to delete Clause 82, because that was the offending clause which discriminates by name.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I would be prepared to withdraw my amendment on Clause 81 if the Minister will agree to withdraw Clause 82. Then afterwards, we can discuss the other position. There are coloured people in this province who hold just as respectable positions as very respectable white people, and I do not want these people to be put to the indignity that if they desire to have wine in their house or to use it as European people do, that they must place a stigma upon themselves by getting permission.</p>

<p>With leave of committee, amendments proposed by Sir Thomas Smartt and Mr. W. B. de Villiers, withdrawn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not want to be under any misunderstanding. I understood the Minister to say he will agree to withdraw Clause 82 on the condition that the committee at a later stage agrees to the definition of &#x201C;class&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I made no conditions.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. de Waal put and negatived.</p>

<p>Clause, as printed, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause 82 put and negatived.</p>

<p>On Clause 83,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit this clause and to substitute the following new clause:</block>

<ol>

<li>83. It shall be a special condition of every wine farmer&#x2019;s licence that no liquor shall be sold thereunder save to an European who holds and delivers to the licensee a written permit in the form set out in <span class="col_1193-1194" refersTo="page_0663"/>the Fifth Schedule to this Act, signed by a member of the police of or above the rank of sergeant.</li>

</ol>

<p>This, in effect, is the clause as drafted by the select committee, which I hope the Minister will agree to accept. I do not regard his clause as a sufficient safeguard against the evils which it is intended to cure. As to what those evils are, we know them very well. Under the Cloete Act of unhappy memory, which is now repealed, under this, a great deal of trade between numbers of wine farmers&#x2014;not all of them&#x2014;and the consumer, coloured persons, had grown up, and we know of the evils of that trade. The intention of the Minister&#x2019;s clause and of my amendment is to put an end to that trade. If a wine farmer gets an order from a person for the supply of wine, according to the clause, he has apparently to satisfy himself that that person lives 25 miles away from him, or is the owner or occupier of property worth &#x00A3;200. Of all cumbrous, impracticable, unworkable proposals, this is the worst. How is the man to know? Most of the trade of the wine farmer is done with the Transvaal. A great deal of illegitimate trade is done by those who purchase liquor from the Cape. The wine farmer is bona fide. A coloured person (or a European acting on behalf of a coloured man) has only to find out which wine farmer lives 25 miles from him and he can get a barrel and have an orgy. My amendment is intended to cure that. We have already accepted the principle that any person who conveys two gallons in bottles in a case or above that, must have a permit. In my amendment I would rather move at the moment &#x201C;to a person&#x201D; and not &#x201C;European,&#x201D; until we decide later on as to off-sales. The machinery of my clause means that a person who wants to buy from a wine farmer in four gallons and a larger quantity must get a permit. If that is not done you will have no effective check on the illicit liquor sellers in the North. The whole scheme of this section is to impose such a check. We have set out in this Bill to try to check the evil of unlimited drinking amongst coloured people in the Western Province, but the Minister&#x2019;s clause leaves too many loopholes.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member will see from the Order Paper that he has moved this as a new clause, therefore, he can move this only if this clause has been negatived. The hon. member will understand that if this clause is not negatived, he cannot move.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Am I allowed to amend it so that it will read &#x201C;to a person&#x201D;?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#deputy-chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">DEPUTY-CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>No, because the amendment is not before the committee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>Has the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) got one title of evidence for his statement that wine sold by the wine farmers goes to the Transvaal for the illicit trade? It is one of those extravagant statements which are unsupported by any evidence. Why should the wine farmer be placed in a worse position than the wholesale dealer who can supply in any quantity from two gallons upwards? It would be a gross injustice to stop the wine farmer from selling while you allow the wholesaler to do so. The wine farmer must keep records of his sales, and his licence can be cancelled without a day&#x2019;s notice if he sells liquor to undesirable people. No respectable wine farmer would cause offence in this way. There are many wine farmers who live in outlying districts far from police and magistrates, so how on earth can they obtain permits? I hope the Minister will not accept the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I want to congratulate the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) on his amendment, not because I agree or sympathize with it, but because it is such a clear example of the unholy alliance between the total abstainers and the wholesale dealers. In the select committee the proposals for restricting and obstructing the wine farmers did not come from the side of the abstainers, but from the wholesale dealers. This is quite comprehensible because the wholesale trade is interested in getting all the trade into its hands. Now the people who are not in favour of the sale of liquor come and want to give the wholesale dealer the right to sell only. I hope the Minister will in no case accept the amendment. The amendments being proposed by the hon. member for Bezuidenhout are all intended to interfere with the producer. The other man who makes a profit out of the produce is protected. The producer is subject to the fluctuations of the market and of the industry, and his market has now to be so controlled and restricted that it practically amounts to prohibition. The hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) has already pointed out that the permit system practically means that the farmers who have a licence must keep books. I have already quoted Clause 108 this afternoon to prove that the farmers must keep books. It provides&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">Every holder of an off consumption licence shall keep in the English or Dutch language a stock book clearly showing at all time the additions to, takings from, and present condition of his stock, and a sales register showing in respect of every sale of liquor by him&#x2014;</block>

<ol>

<li>(a) the date of sale.</li>

<li>(b) the name and address of the purchaser;</li>

<li>(c) the quantity, description and price of the liquor sold; and</li>

<li>(d) the fact, if such be the case, that the sale was made by virtue of a certificate or letter of exemption, permit or certificate, as the case may be.</li>

</ol>

<p>Entry of such particulars shall be made in the sales register immediately upon the completion of any setting apart or appropriation of liquor in respect of any sale.</p>

<p>The other sub-section of Clause 108 establishes a principle, and the wine farmer is at all time subject to police inspection, a thing that did not exist in the past. This, as the hon. member <span class="col_1195-1196" refersTo="page_0664"/>for Piquetberg (Mr. de Waal) has said is an unnecessary pin prick for the producer.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I want to ask the Minister to take no notice of the motion of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell). We have divisional councils in the Cape Province within a radius of 25 miles, and it is very easy for wine farmers to go to one and obtain a list of persons with immovable property worth &#x00A3;250 or more, and they can go to the municipalities and do the same thing. In the Transvaal and the Free State no liquor licences can be granted unless the other party, the purchaser, has a licence. The hon. member seems merely to want to vilify the wine farmers&#x2019; licences. There were two wine farmers&#x2019; licences in the Western Province, one held by Mr. Cloete and one by the late Mr. John X. Merriman. No one ever complained against those licences. They always sent their produce to the best class of people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>The wholesalers should be dealt with in the same manner as the wine farmers are.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>They have nothing to do with each other.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Wholesale licences will be issued only in urban areas. Therefore, the onus is on the wholesale merchant to get a permit, whereas, under the amendment of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell), the onus will be on the purchaser. Why should a man object to getting a permit when he wants to buy a large quantity of liquor? My submission is that the amendment of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout is much more practical and logical than the clause as it stands.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>The clause, as it stands, has been in force for a very long time in the Cape Province, and I know of no trouble. It is only a question of the delivery of wine, and not brandy and, therefore, it is not at all likely that the people in the Transvaal will order wine for illicit drinking. When you try to evade the police, you sell the strongest stuff, not wine. I do not think this particular clause has ever caused any trouble in the Cape Province, and, as it has been used here without any great objection, I do not like to have doctrinaire interference with it. Whatever its theoretical defects, it has worked well in practice, and I think we should allow it to go on. I do not like to put the farmer on the same basis as the wholesaler. The farmer is a producer and generally he has to shoulder all the troubles whilst the commercial man takes most of the profits. That is certainly our position in South Africa to-day. A much bigger proportion of commercial men are rich in proportion to farmers who are rich. We have never in our legislation placed the producer and the commercial man on the same basis, and I do not propose to start it now.</p>

<p>Clause put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 85,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To insert the following new sub-section to follow sub section (1):</block>

<p>(2) No licensee shall sell as a particular kind or brand or as the manufacture of a particular person liquor which is not of that kind or brand or is not the manufacture of that person.</p>

<p>We found in many cases whisky of an unknown brand was introduced into the country and is shoved by the conscienceless licensees into bottles of a superior brand, and the licensee sells the inferior article for the price of the superior article. It is the same in the case of Cape brandy. Bottles of well-known brands are used to house indifferent brands. I found a whisky was coming into this country named &#x201C;OO&#x201D;. I have never heard of it, and it is certainly sold under every other name except &#x201C;OO&#x201D;. I commend this amendment to the committee.</p>

<p>Amendment put and agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I should like some explanation from the Minister. Clause 91 provides for permits for liquor made from fruit or other produce. This clause refers, I think, only to wine and brandy, which come under the Wine and Spirit Act, but does not mention liquor made from other fruit besides grapes. I should like to know from the Minister how he will test the quality and purity of those other liquors.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I know of no way of doing it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>Then it is dangerous.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 87,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naud&#x00E9;">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. S. NAUD&#x00C9;</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 33, after &#x201C;licence&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;and of a restaurant liquor licence&#x201D;.</block>

<p>I move this to prevent other strong drink besides beer and light wine being sold in restaurants.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It is quite impossible for the committee to pass that amendment. Restaurant licences will only be granted in places with more than 5,000 parliamentary voters, and we must not forget that people who to-day have a loose bar licence can alter it within ten years into a restaurant licence. They will be getting into trouble because they may only sell liquor for two hours in the afternoon, and two hours at night. It is a very great restriction, and it would be unfair to go still further.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naud&#x00E9;">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. S. NAUD&#x00C9;</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister says that the provision applies to large towns. But we do not know what will happen in the future. There are some of the country villages which possibly within a short time will have that number of registered voters.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Then they are large centres.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#naud&#x00E9;">

<from><span class="col_1197-1198" refersTo="page_0665"/>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. S. NAUD&#x00C9;</person>:</from>

<p>I want to restrict the sale of liquor in restaurants to beer and light wine.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>I support the amendment of the hon. member for Wakkerstroom (Mr. A. S. Naud&#x00E9;). It is bad enough allowing wine and beer to be obtained in restaurants. Are we to go further and allow strong drink? It is the large towns as a matter of fact that we want to protect.</p>

<p>Amendment put and the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;25.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Henderson, J.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Tellers: Swart, C. R.; van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;64.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Allen, J.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, A. I. E.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Fordham, A. C.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Harris, D.</p>

<p>Havenga, N. C.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Hertzog, J. B. M.</p>

<p>Heyns, J. D.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Lennox, F. J.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Mostert, J. P.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>O&#x2019;Brien, W. J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, J. S. F.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J.</p>

<p>de V. Roux, J. W. J.</p>

<p>W. Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Steyn, C. F.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, I. P.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Watt, T.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R.; de Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Amendment accordingly negatived.</p>

<p>Clause, as printed, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 88,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 46, after &#x201C;association&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;or from grapes purchased or otherwise procured by such person or association of persons.&#x201D;</block>

<p>This provision already exists in paragraph 62 (a), where the farmer is entitled to manufacture wine from grapes procured or purchased from his neighbours. One at least of my friends who does extensive wine farming had not sufficient grapes for his own needs in consequence of the drought, and he had to purchase from his neighbours, and I think it is only fair that this should be inserted here as well. I do not see any harm that would accrue from it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>No, it is not the same thing; 62 (a) is dealing with sale without a licence to the licensee. As far as this section is concerned, it deals with a wine farmer&#x2019;s licence, which gives him special privileges as far as the prices of the licence are concerned, and otherwise, with regard to sale to the public, and it is only right that licence should be restricted to the sale of the article he produces himself. I do not think it fair to extend that as far as this article is concerned.</p>

<p>Amendment put and negatived.</p>

<p>Clause, as printed, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 89,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I would point out to the Minister the curious state of affairs that will result from Clause 89. Let me give an example; take the case of Messrs. Sedgwick and Company; under this clause they may not sell their own produce except to the holder of a licence, but they may buy unlimited quantities from someone else and sell them.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Unless they have a wholesale licence.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>They have.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Then they can do it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>On page 286 of the Votes and Proceedings, there is an amendment of mine which, it there states, occurs in Clause 87, to introduce a new sub-clause (c) into this clause. It is not my mistake. I move as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 17, on page 62, after &#x201C;and&#x201D; to insert the following new paragraph to follow paragraph (b):</block>

<ol>

<li>(c) the holder of a wholesale liquor licence may sell to persons other than holders of licences under this Act, but no such sale shall at any one time to any one person be in quantity less than two gallons contained in a receptacle or receptacles securely corked or stoppered; and</li>

</ol>

<p>The object of this is to enable a wholesaler to sell direct to the public. It is quite possible that even without this amendment he may do so, but I move my amendment to make it quite clear. That was the intention of the Bill as drawn originally, and also the intention of the <span class="col_1199-1200" refersTo="page_0666"/>commission. As Clause 89 specially goes out of its way to say that the holder of a wine farmer&#x2019;s licence may sell to various people, and the holder of a brewer&#x2019;s licence may do the same, it should he made quite clear that the wholesaler may also sell to others than a licensee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WESSELS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit all the words after &#x201C;may&#x201D;, in line 10, on page 62, to &#x201C;licence&#x201D; in line 12.</block>

<p>The object is merely to bring it into line with existing practice. It was never the practice to obtain the previous consent of the licensing board.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>If you part with the ownership of an article that will be disposing of it, so if you give a bottle of wine of your own make to a friend that will be disposing of it. Surely it is not meant to stop that. To overcome that difficulty, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 65, after &#x201C;shall&#x201D; to insert the words &#x201C;in the course of his business.&#x201D;</block>

<p>If you cannot give away a bottle of wine you cannot give away a glass, so if a wine merchant or farmer had anyone to dinner with them, they could not give them a glass of wine of their own manufacture. To make it perfectly clear you should insert the words after &#x201C;shall,&#x201D; &#x201C;in the course of his business dispose of.&#x201D; Then I move another small amendment. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">The following new paragraph to follow paragraph (c):</block>

<ol>

<li>(d) for the purpose of this section a person who blends wines or brandies shall not be deemed to be a producer or a manufacturer of liquor.</li>

</ol>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>What is the meaning of that? He surely should be subject to the same conditions as producers or manufacturers?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>A blender of wine or brandy may be a wholesaler and he will not be able to sell to anyone else in the trade. I am sure &#x201C;manufacturer&#x201D; was not intended to mean a blender of wine or spirit.</p>

<p>Business suspended at 6 p.m. and resumed at 8.7 p.m.</p>

</speech>

<debateSection name="#evening_sitting">

<heading>Evening Sitting.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 16, on page 62, to omit &#x201C;two gallons&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;one gallon.&#x201D;</block>

<p>This is really consequential on what we have already passed. It is merely to allow your brewer to sell one gallon as a minimum instead of two gallons. I do not think there is any need for the first part of the amendment of the hon. member for Worcester. In regard to the blender of liquor, I do not think we should except him, because after all, your blender is a manufacturer of liquor. He may not be a producer, but he is certainly a manufacturer of liquor. As far as (b) is concerned, I may say that in regard to the amendment of the hon. member for Frankfort (Mr. J. B. Wessels) we have already provided that your brewer must get his licence from the licensing court, and, therefore, whether these words are expunged or not does not seem to affect the position very materially. In regard to the amendment of the hon. member for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz), that is to a certain extent provided for in section 76 (2), but I think that it might for the sake of clearness be inserted at this stage too. I have no objection to that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>In regard to the matter of the blender of wines and brandy, if the amendment is not accepted you will have this position. You are going to have a blender who sells to a wholesaler. He will be able to sell this stuff wholesale if he has not blended it. If he has blended it, he cannot sell it to a wholesaler, and can only sell it to the retail trade. There are blenders of wine and brandy. A good many of your smaller wholesalers have a small household trade and these people will be cut out.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>They take out wholesale licences as well.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>Will they be covered under that? If a manufacturer is debarred from selling to anyone other than a licensee is he debarred from that? Then, of course, the wholesaler will be debarred with that portion of his stuff which he blends himself. You will be cutting out a great many of your smaller wholesalers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>If there is any doubt we can correct it at the report stage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think the hon. member for Worcester (Mr. Heatlie) understands, really, the intention of this clause. It relates only to the sale by a manufacturer or distiller or brewer, that is the actual manufacturer of liquor, and in his capacity as manufacturer he may sell without any licence under this Act provided he sells only to the trade. It may happen that the same person is also a merchant. In so far as that merchant wants to sell to the public, he must get a wholesale licence. This relates only to that. The amendment of the hon. member for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz) makes clear what is already clear enough in the Act, but it removes some doubts.</p>

<p>With leave of committee, amendments proposed by Mr. Heatlie withdrawn.</p>

<p>Question put: That the words, in lines 10 to 12, proposed by Mr. Wessels to be omitted, stand part of the clause,</p>

<p>Upon which the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;42.</p>

<p>Alexander, M.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Boydell, T.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Brown, G.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>Creswell, F. H. P.</p>

<p><span class="col_1201-1202" refersTo="page_0667"/>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Kentridge, M.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Marwick, J. S.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, A. S.</p>

<p>Papenfus, H. B.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Reyburn, G.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Swart, C R.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Waterston, R. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Sampson, H. W.; Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;41.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Boshoff, L. J.</p>

<p>Conradie, J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>De Wet, S. D.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Grobler, P. G. W.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Kemp, J. C. G.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Madeley, W. B.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Nathan, E.</p>

<p>Naud&#x00E9;, J. F. T.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Reitz, D.</p>

<p>Rood, W. H.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Wessels, J. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: Collins, W. R.; de Jager, A. L.</p>

<p>Question accordingly affirmed and the amendment proposed by Mr. Wessels negatived.</p>

<p>Amendments proposed by Dr. H. Reitz and the Minister of Justice put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 91,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In lines 26 and 27, to omit &#x201C;being in either case a European,&#x201D; in line 31, after &#x201C;fruit&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;as defined by regulations framed under this Act,&#x201D; and in the same line, to omit &#x201C;or other produce&#x201D;.</block>

<p>The object of my amendment is to delete the unnecessary provision in Clause 1 that anyone who gets a permit must be a European. Authority in this case is given to the magistrate to refuse or cancel a permit. A magistrate, who must act independently on behalf of the Government, will have sufficient knowledge of his district, and in any case the provision is superfluous. We can leave it to the discretion of the magistrate where the matter concerns non-Europeans. As for the making of brandy from fruit or other produce, my object is not in the least to impede the business of the producers of liquor from fruit. I should like to make it very clear that I have no grievance against people who make brandy from fruit or such like, but when we add &#x201C;other produce&#x201D; the provision goes too far. The clause deals principally with liquor which is distilled from fruit not coming from the vine. As we have laws with stipulations regarding classifications, purity, etc., of the produce of the vine, it is no more than fair for they should also apply to liquor distilled from other fruit. We have the Adulteration Act of 1913, which contains provisions regarding brandy spirit, with many detailed definitions but I do not know of an Act containing similar provisions about other produce. It will be fair for the other produce from which brandy is made to fall under the same severe provisions. The makers of brandy from grapes must divide it into three classes according to the grade of purity. The producer, or the distributor has to pay excise on the produce, viz., 22s. 6d. per gallon per Class A, 17s. 6d. per Class B, and 12s. 6d. for Class C. Why should the other fruit be excluded from any provision? I further think that it is dangerous for everybody to be allowed to distil brandy or spirits from any other products. The Minister said during the second reading that he was particularly interested in the making of skokiaan, and I think that we should be opening the door here for the preparation of liquor from all kinds of produce. It would be a dangerous provision, and, therefore, my amendment proposes to provide for all produce from which brandy may be distilled.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I hope this is a clause which the good sense of the committee will, with the concurrence of the Minister, delete from the Bill. The clause will enable brandy to be made from peaches, prickly pears and cereals, notwithstanding the fact that we already have in the country a legitimate industry which makes spirit from the juice of the grape.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>It is the height of selfishness just because the Cape happens to be a grape-producing province, to say that we must make brandy only from the juice of the grape. In the Transvaal we produce barley and mealies, and if we can make a good whisky from them, why should we not be allowed to do so? The hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) appears to be against peach brandy which he thinks is a poison. I took the trouble to investigate peach brandy, and I drank some of it, too, and with the aid of the Minister of Justice, I had a sample analysed by the Government analyst, who, in the course of his report, said&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">&#x201C;On analysis the specimen gave the following results: Alcohol by volume, 55.35; proof spirit, 96.9; degrees under proof, 3.1. The specimen is alcoholically stronger than spirits (whisky, brandy, rum, gin) are for retail sale, but this is a matter of no moment, because this peach brandy could be broken down with water (just as whisky, brandy, <span class="col_1203-1204" refersTo="page_0668"/>etc., are broken down after distillation) to the usual alcoholic strength of from 43 to 45 percent. by volume. So far as secondary products are concerned, the sample is somewhat similar to brandy. The sample is raw and immature, and for this reason does not compare favourably with properly matured spirit (whisky, brandy, etc.). Peach brandy cannot well be compared with whisky. Peach brandy like (wine) brandy possesses a fruity flavour and aroma which is absent from whisky. It is quite impossible from the examination of one sample of peach brandy to offer an opinion of any value on the merits of peach brandy in general. The value of the spirit for human consumption will depend upon careful fermentation of the expressed juice of the peach, upon the type of still used for the distillation of the spirit, and upon the method of working the still, and, probably most important of all, upon proper ageing or maturing of the spirit. On general grounds I would offer the opinion that a spirit made from peaches with as much care and attention as is bestowed on the preparation of whisky or brandy, and if thoroughly matured, would be as potable and wholesome as whisky or brandy, but, on account of the fruity flavour and aroma which it would possess (unless it were so highly refined as to become virtually a silent spirit) a taste for it would probably have to be acquired.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Why should we be debarred from making a spirit as potable and wholesome as any whisky can be?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>A very important principle has been raised. There are a certain number of non-European farmers in this country. What justice is there in saying that where there are two farmers living almost side by side, one because he is a European may grow fruit and manufacture wine from it and sell it, whereas his neighbour, not being a European, is not allowed to do the same. This would be unheard of class legislation and a blot on the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will not allow the provision to remain which prevents us in the Transvaal from making brandy from peaches. We only have peaches, maroelas and certain other fruit from which we can distil brandy, and why should our farmers be restricted? The hon. member for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz) has set out our position quite clearly. I think, however, that the amendment of the hon. member for Hopetown (Dr. Stals) is not quite correct. Why should farmers not have the right to use something other than fruit, as for instance, mealies or wheat, to distil brandy from? What difference is there in principle between distilling brandy from peaches or from mealies? There is a clause in the Bill which I trust will be passed giving the Transvaal farmers the same right that those in the Free State already have, namely, to give their natives a tot. Why then should we prevent the farmers from distilling those tots from their fruit? Why should our farmers be compelled to buy wine or brandy in the Cape Province for that purpose? The argument that wine brandy does not intoxicate so much does not hold good. I think the House must be liberal on this point. We have continually, where we could reconcile it with our consciences, supported the Cape Province with regard to viticulture, and the representatives of the wine district must also support us. As for the provision that one must be a white person to get a permit, I do not think it is worth much. The second paragraph expressly says that a magistrate, without giving any reason, can refuse or cancel a permit. I do not think a Transvaal magistrate will be so foolish as to issue a permit to anyone but a white person. I object, however, to the restriction on farmers regarding the distilling of brandy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I am rather surprised to hear this is not the law in the Cape Province, because it does happen to be the law in the Cape Province as far as fruit is concerned. I refer to the Liquor Licensing Act of 1883, section 2, sub-section 3. [Subsection read.] Therefore, the law in the Cape has not been so vastly different to the law in the Transvaal on this subject, although hon. members do not seem to know that they could make spirits from fruit other than grapes. They have just missed the opportunity that is all.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Hasn&#x2019;t that been repealed?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It may have been repealed at a later date, but I have not been able to find it. The Act was passed in 1883.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>You were very young then. Much can have happened since that time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think it has ever been repealed. It has been amended.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>The 1913 Bill&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>That was an amending Act, but the law under that Bill has never been acted upon. It has always been part of our ordinary law in the Transvaal that they may distil from peaches and other fruit and sell to a licensee. I am rather inclined to agree we should limit it to fruit and not take in &#x201C;other produce&#x201D;. If, however, we take out the words &#x201C;or other produce&#x201D;, I think we should take out the word &#x201C;brew&#x201D; in line 30. I have no strong feeling on the matter, and if the words are taken out the magistrates would give the licence as if the words were still in. Personally, I would rather say clearly what we mean instead of saying it in a roundabout way. As far as fruit is concerned, we should keep the right we have in the other provinces, and if you want an exception in the Cape, I have no objection to making that exception, but the right cannot be taken away from the Free State or the Transvaal where the people have their stills and where legally these spirits <span class="col_1205-1206" refersTo="page_0669"/>from peaches are being distilled and in the Transvaal are being sold to licensees.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>But you cannot distil peach brandy and sell it to a licensee. You can distil it for home use.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I am not quite certain on that point. Is it only for home use? They can legally distil and legally use peach brandy. When I think of it, I am certain peach brandy can be sold to the licensee because I remember they wanted a smaller amount to be charged in the excise on people who distilled brandy from peaches. In certain parts of the Transvaal I have used peach brandy and its effect is rather pleasant. The effects are evanescent, fairly fast in coming and fairly fast in going. If the effect passes off quickly hon. members will admit that is a perfect drink. We can take out the words the hon. member wishes, and I will also move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 30, to omit &#x201C;brew&#x201D; and also take out &#x201C;other produce&#x201D;.</block>

<p>I do not know the views of the hon. members for Natal, but I am prepared to restrict the operation of the clause to the Transvaal and to the Orange Free State. If the hon. members for Natal wish Natal to be included, I have no objection, but we cannot take away rights which exist to-day in the Transvaal and the Free State and, I think, in Natal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>I think the Minister is not quite correct in stating the law as regards the Transvaal, if I may with all deference make a submission to him The Liquor Licensing Proclamation provides that&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">&#x201C;It shall not be lawful for any person within this colony to distil spirituous liquors from any article save as is otherwise provided in the Customs Amendment Ordinance of 1906.&#x201D;</block>

<p>The Customs Amendment Ordinance of 1906 allows you to distil spirits from the produce of the vine for sale to licensees, but there is another section of the ordinance which says that the provisions of the last preceding section shall not apply to the owner or occupier of a farm or piece of land distilling spirituous liquors from grapes or fruit grown on such farm or land for his own use, but not for sale. The position will be, as I understand it, if this section goes through that the Transvaal farmer will now be allowed to distil peach brandy for sale to licensees.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I would ask the Minister whether he has considered the situation. I understand that after 1930 no brandy can be sold in this country that has been matured for less than three years.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HEATLIE</person>:</from>

<p>That only applies to the produce of the vine.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>That is what I am pointing out. We have already got brandy produced from prickly pear, sweet potatoes, etc. There was a discussion not many years ago as to the possibility of making alcohol for power purposes from sweet potatoes and things of that sort. I am perfectly certain that the Minister did not consider the situation that would be created when he allowed this clause to come into the Bill. I do not think at the present time, you can manufacture for sale brandy from anything except from the fruit of the vine. The Minister will remember many years ago during the Milner regime in the Transvaal over &#x00A3;200,000 was paid for the purpose of closing down the Hatherly Distillery and the manufacture of spirits in the Transvaal, largely due, no doubt, to the desire to assist the legitimate wine industry.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>No, to assist the imported article.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>It was largely for the purpose of legitimately assisting the wine industry in the then colony of the Cape of Good Hope.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>No.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I think if my hon. friend enquires he will find that what I say is correct. If this amendment is passed it means that while in the Cape you will have to mature your spirits, you will be able to manufacture a very inferior spirit outside the Cape Province which will not be subject to the same restrictions as the manufacture of spirits in this province.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I must confess that I find considerable difficulty in regard to the principle of this question. If a man can make brandy from grapes it is difficult, in principle, to say that he shall not make brandy from peaches, but we have passed a number of laws in this country trying to build up a decent wine industry here. We have for nearly two centuries been trying to improve our wine industry and I can conceive of nothing more disastrous to the success and future of a decent wine industry in this country than giving this new fillip to the distilling of peach brandy and other liquids of that sort. I certainly do not agree with my hon. friend the member for North-East Rand (Dr. H. Reitz) when he tells us that peach brandy is good stuff. I have tried it myself. I do not agree with the Minister that the effect soon passes off. The peach brandy I tasted had a delayed action, it took 24 hours to pass off. I am not talking about its effect on me. We tried it on somebody else. There is a clause later on in this Bill introducing the tot system into the Transvaal. This means that there will be a tremendous extension of this system of private stills. You will have &#x201C;moonshiners&#x201D; on every farm in the country. I think this is going to be the most disastrous clause in the whole Bill. It is going to ruin a great industry that we have taken infinite pains in building up, and I am afraid it is going to mean the ruin of the native, too. He is going to be fed on peach brandy and other villainous stuff of the same kind. Peach brandy is not the worst. There is prickly pear brandy, and, as I am reminded, you can make brandy from sweet potatoes. I find difficulty in arguing <span class="col_1207-1208" refersTo="page_0670"/>the principle of this clause, but its practical effects. I do believe, are going to be disastrous, and I hope this committee will pause before it passes this clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>The argument of the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) does not hold water, because if he says that liquor can only be made from grapes, then he must also object to beer which is made from barley and to whiskey, which is also made from oats or barley. The same applies to the argument of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz). Therefore their arguments are not quite logical. I am not prepared to support the proposal. They have the right in the Transvaal of making peach brandy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>*Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Not of selling it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN NIEKERK</person>:</from>

<p>No existing rights are taken away in this Bill. Everybody gets consideration. The man who makes brandy from peaches falls presumably under much stronger restrictions than the man who makes brandy from grapes. The latter can sell his produce to anybody if he has a licence of &#x00A3;1. He can sell his article to a licensed hotel keeper, and even to the public. Nothing in the law says that he may not be granted a licence. But with regard to brandy from other fruit it may only be sold to licensees, and the magistrate has the right without giving reasons to refuse a licence. The clause therefore is very drastic. Nor need hon. members be afraid that this clause will have the effect that the peach brandy will drive the produce of the wine farmer off the market. The man who buys brandy will want good stuff, and will not drink peach brandy in the hotel. I do not believe that there is a single farm where they sell peach brandy. It is only made for home consumption, to drink when visitors, for instance, come. I do not, therefore, see why we should not allow it. We must also be careful not to allow the manufacture of liquor only from wine grapes, because hon. members know that it is possible that all the vineyards may be destroyed e.g. by the phylloxera. I hope the House will pass the clause unaltered.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ANDERSON</person>:</from>

<p>The Minister raised the question as to what the legal position is in Natal regarding the distillation or brewing by the owner or occupier of land of liquor manufactured from fruit or other produce grown on such land. In my view Clause 91 is not in conflict with the Natal liquor laws. Clause 2 of Act 36 of 1899 reads as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">The words intoxicating liquor or liquor wherever used in Act No. 38, 1896 (the Principal Act) shall include any intoxicating or fermented liquor or liquid from whatever substance it may have been prepared.</block>

<p>Under this definition a licence holder is entitled to sell intoxicating liquor distilled from any kind of fruit or other substance, not necessarily the grape. If brandy of just as good quality as that produced from the grape can be made from some other fruit, I fail to see why it should not be made and marketed, and I also fail to see why the Western Province should enjoy a monopoly in the manufacture of brandy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I think the Minister has been much misinformed about the excise on the sale of peach brandy. This morning we had the commissioner for excise before us in select committee. There is no question that peach brandy in the Transvaal is only made for home consumption. It pays no excise, and it is not sold outside the family of the maker. Does my hon. friend know what he is letting himself in for? If you allow this to be made and sold are you not going to charge any excise on it? You charge it on the stuff made in the Cape and in Natal also, I believe. Are you going to allow this brandy to be made in the Transvaal and sold free without excise and without being matured? If so, then it can be sold all over the place, and what is going to be the state of affairs in the Transvaal if you also introduce the tot system and have this sort of stuff for sale? I remember in the early days of Union Parliament this very question of the sale of peach brandy came up in the House, and there was no bigger opponent of it at that time than Gen. Botha. He knew the tremendous harm it would cause to the people of the Transvaal if this was once set afloat and sold. It would damage more the people of the Transvaal than the whole of the stuff is worth by a long way. It has always been kept, up to now, simply for the consumption of the people who made it. It is a very serious thing in my opinion. You must eventually establish an excise and control over it, and then you must have tremendous paraphernalia in the shape of excise officers, and so forth. I strongly urge, not only in regard to that, but in the interests of the people in the Transvaal, that the Minister should simply leave the law as it is at the present moment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I do not know why it should be regarded as being in the special interest of the people of the Transvaal. I have again been through the different Acts in the Cape and, as far as I can see, that section has not been repealed by 91 or any other Acts, so that the Cape law is that you can do it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>It was never done.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It may not have been done, but I am only speaking about the law.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>It has never been acted upon, you must admit that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>No, I don&#x2019;t say it has, and that simply shows there is not this enormous danger. That is also the law in the Free State, and you can do it in the same way in Natal, so these three provinces and not the Transvaal, have full rights of sale. The one province that did not have the right of sale was the Transvaal, and now we are told it is especially on behalf of the Transvaal that this must be done. I say no. <span class="col_1209-1210" refersTo="page_0671"/>We have also practically passed that principle already in this Bill. If hon. members refer to page 10 of the Bill, sub-section (3) of Section 6 they will see&#x2014;[Sub-section read.] So we have already passed the principle.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>That is obviously meant for non-intoxicating drinks.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>No, cider is intoxicating.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>It is not on the same plane as peach brandy.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>There are some experts in the House, but I am not an expert on that particular type of drink. It is not meant for non-intoxicating drinks. Section 91 would not be non-excisable. Naturally it would be subject to excise. If there is any section that does not entirely cover the case, obviously the excise laws will cover a case of this kind. In the Free State the excise is a very large one upon this peach brandy, and I know for a considerable period the producers were trying to get that amount reduced by the Minister of Finance. I submit at the present stage, at all events, we should not extend to other produce&#x2014;we should cut that out. I do not think we should go in for the production of whisky and spirits of that kind at the present moment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Why not?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Because I think there is quite enough whisky and brandy about; but as far as fruit is concerned, that is the existing state of affairs, and the question is in a consolidating Bill of this nature whether we should take the law of three-quarters of the country or make an entirely new departure. I do not think we should make that entire departure at this stage, and I think such as Section 91 should be approved by this committee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>If we have ever discussed an important clause in this House, it is this one. I am glad that the Minister has agreed to the amendment with regard to the words &#x201C;other produce.&#x201D; In the past we have had enough misery in the Transvaal through the preparation of peach brandy, so that I am most strongly opposed to its being allowed again. Hon. members may possibly say that I am a Transvaal member and should not injure the Transvaal people, but as the hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) said, we have in the Cape tried to create a healthy wine and brandy business. If we are now to permit the making of brandy from peaches, then the misery cannot be overestimated. How can the Minister propose such a thing? He knows very well that there are thousands and thousands of people in the Transvaal who are against this &#x201C;Transvaal tot system.&#x201D; I must call it that because the farmers use the drink to give to natives. The Minister explained that the Transvaal people sold that peach brandy, but I think the hon. member for Lydenburg (Mr. Nieuwenhuize) will agree with me when I say that they only make it for home consumption, and they do not sell or export. The people come together and make their juice, of which they then make peach brandy. That brandy makes our country population worse. That is perhaps expressed a little strongly, but my experience is that this kind of drink is the cause of many poor whites in the Transvaal. The churches are also against it. Representatives of the churches are opposed to brandy being distilled from peaches. The hon. member for Pretoria (North) mentioned the delicious drink made from maroelas. I regard it as shameful to poison people with a drink like that. I am one of the last to agree that it should also be permitted in the Transvaal for brandy to be made from all sorts of fruits. As for me, I shall not allow anyone to make brandy from fruit other than of the vine. We have tried in the Transvaal to stop the making of peach brandy, because it has caused much misery. As viticulture in the Cape is on a good foundation and has been improved by co-operation, I think it would be the greatest mistake for us to allow peach brandy. I do not agree with the hon. member for Pretoria (North) (Mr. Oost) and other Transvaal members who spoke. I shall heartily support the amendment of the hon. member for Hopetown.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>We have heard a good deal about peach brandy. The first part of the amendment of the hon. member for Hope-town (Dr. Stals) has my full support. I should like to point out to the Minister that, in regard to fresh fruit, the Adulteration Act says that when anyone makes raisins he is not entitled to distil brandy. Though in Natal brandy is made from sugar, there is an excise on that sugar brandy as soon as it leaves Natal. If, on the contrary, we distil dop brandy in the Cape Province, there is also an excise against us. The excise in both cases is &#x00A3;1 per gallon. The hon. member for Klip River (Mr. Anderson) will therefore see that no injustice is being done. As soon as the articles are exported to another province they are dearer.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pretorius">

<from>&#x2020;*Lt.-Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">N. J. PRETORIUS</person>:</from>

<p>I am very sorry that the Cape members are not supporting us in connection with this clause. We were always ready to support them in growing grapes in the Cape Province, and we know that the old Government did much to encourage viticulture. We supported them through thick and thin, but now they have a prejudice against peach brandy. I know that the hon. member for Johannesburg (North) (Mr. Geldenhuys) is opposed to peach brandy being made, but he is privileged by having his farm next to the municipal boundary, and every peach he grows is taken away and sold for cash. But he now goes so far as to vilify our farmers, and that hurts me most of all. He said that we were smuggling peach brandy to the natives. I can assure the hon. member that in my district there are possibly one or two farmers who grow peaches, but everything is done in an <span class="col_1211-1212" refersTo="page_0672"/>orderly way, and I have never yet heard of those people smuggling to the natives. I take offence at the hon. member&#x2019;s remarks. During the last 20 years many fruit trees have been planted and large plantations laid out in the Transvaal. What are they to do with them if the farmers are so restricted? We are not in the same fortunate circumstances as the Cape Province. They can dry the fruit in the sun here, but when our fruit is ripe the heavy rains come and we cannot dry it. I do not make brandy, but I could probably make enough brandy from the fruit which drops from my trees. The market is flooded through the planting of trees, and people do not know what to do with the fruit. We do not want to compete with the Cape Province. It will never come to that, but why should our farmers be so restricted? The hon. member for Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) also spoke against peach brandy. He tasted it himself, and found it pernicious because he was doubtless thirsty and drank the afterflow.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>In regard to Clause 6, sub-section 3, the definition of intoxicating liquor is the same as that of liquor. I cannot understand the Minister being so illogical. He is quite prepared to swallow peach brandy, fruity flavour included, but he will not swallow whisky. I have not heard a single argument why we should not make whisky. The Cape used to make a very bad brandy which was called &#x201C;dop,&#x201D; and so bad was it that the excise on it was increased. I cannot understand what the Cape members are afraid of. Are they fearful that the Transvaal will make such good whisky or gin that it will interfere with the Cape produce? There is nothing to prevent the Government levying an excise on peach brandy and whisky. There is an illegal sale of peach brandy at present&#x2014;would it not be better to legalize it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fick">

<from>&#x2020;*The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FICK</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Johannesburg (North) (Mr. Geldenhuys) is protesting very much against all kind of drink, but I want to remind him that in his time he has also made good use of what he has given up to-day, and the hon. member ought to be a little silent, when others come who want to assist him a little.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GELDENHUYS</person>:</from>

<p>Did they send you to help me?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fick">

<from>&#x2020;*The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FICK</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. members for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) and Port Elizabeth (Central) (Col. D. Reitz) talk of peach brandy as a terrible poison, as if it were worse than kaffir beer, and as if it was made on such a scale as to compete with the grape brandy farmer. They have never yet come in contact with the thing. They do not know what it is. What is the cause of brandy being made from peaches in the Transvaal and Free State? It is because the yellow peaches grow almost wild in the Transvaal, and are too plentiful for ordinary use, hence brandy is made from them; but where is it laid down that brandy must only be made from grapes? Wine comes from the vine, but the best drink in the world, champagne, is made from fruit, from apples. Where is it said that a man must only make liquor from grapes? Let the people in the Transvaal use their surplus fruit in distilling it, and give them an opportunity to sell it if they wish, then they will make good brandy. To-day it is sold in an underhand way to natives, etc., but if they have the right of manufacture they will much improve the article. I agree with the hon. member for Pretoria (North) (Mr. Oost), who has much experience of the matter that the people will do their best if they are given the permission. I have also noticed in the Cape Province that brandy coming fresh from the still has almost maddened natives. That is the way with all liquor which comes fresh from the still, and the people who make peach brandy are not able to keep it long so as to improve. I am sorry to have to talk like this, but I want to be reasonable. If we are going to prohibit it, the thing will go on in any case, and we shall have criminals on a large scale. It is going on to-day by subterfuge. The Russian makes his vodka, the Scot his whisky, the Hollander his gin from other things than grapes. Why should the farmer of South Africa only be able to make good liquor from grapes? Let us educate the people to manufacture a good article by allowing them to distil. There is no danger of the peach brandy making becoming a permanent industry in our country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I am not going into the legal niceties of the position, but if this clause goes through as it stands the whole liquor position in South Africa goes by the board. Bad liquor is a curse to this country. On the argument of the hon. member for Potchefstroom (the Rev. Mr. Fick) you might as well allow them to drink methylated spirits. He has given to this House spiritual guidance of the worst kind, and I was very sorry to hear it coming from him. We have endeavoured to pass several laws to keep up the standard of the wine and brandy produced in this country and to prevent vile stuff from coming onto the market. Now we are going to open the floodgates, and we propose throwing this villainous peach brandy on the market without any attempt to keep up a standard. I ask the Minister temporarily to hold over this clause until some sort of standard of quality can be devised. I have drunk peach brandy made in Italy, and very decent stuff it was, but it was made under better conditions than it is here.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Let the clause stand over.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, that is what I mean, because I honestly believe the results of this clause are going to be deplorable. I know of no worse law that could be passed than to allow every farmer of the Transvaal to distil peach brandy of any kind. After living in the Transvaal my experience is that peach brandy has <span class="col_1213-1214" refersTo="page_0673"/>been the curse of the Transvaal, and, therefore, I ask the Minister to let this clause stand over and discuss this matter with experts, and try to devise the same standards of quality as provided for under Act 26 of 1924. We prevent the farmers of the Cape Province from ruining the insides of the people with bad brandy, yet we are going to throw this villainous peach brandy on the market without any kind of control. It is not the function of this committee to settle internal rivalries in the liquor trade, but it is our duty to prevent this country from being ruined by raw liquor. Is it not a fact that we have taken great trouble to lay a bond on the Cape wine farmer and to see that he shall not produce bad stuff? Then let the Minister devise a method of making good peach brandy which will not burn the insides of the people. I have drunk this peach brandy, and I say there is no good stuff of this kind produced. I am astonished at a minister of the church&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fick">

<from>The Rev. Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FICK</person>:</from>

<p>It is all right.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>It is all wrong. The hon. member is advocating throwing the worst type of alcoholic liquor on the market. I read this clause of the Bill in connection with the clause proposing to extend the tot system. You will find the poor whites will get nothing but peach brandy, a cheap and nasty stuff, and I implore the House to pause before it passes a clause like this. I, therefore, ask that this clause be allowed to stand over for a time in the interests of the people of the country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>There is no objection to this clause standing over until the end of the Bill, and I will see if anything can be done. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the further consideration of this clause stand over.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 94,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 31, on page 64, after &#x201C;bottle liquor licence&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;wine farmer&#x2019;s licence&#x201D;.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>Clause, as amended, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 95,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I do not want to cover the whole field again, but I would like to ask the Minister why he departed from the Bill in its original form. In the original form in which the Bill was introduced by the Government it simply applied to the provinces of Natal, Transvaal and the Orange Free State. That was taken out in the select committee. I do submit that the original intention of the Government was to preserve the rights of the Cape, and I want to move in the words that were in the original Bill, namely, the provinces of Natal, Transvaal and the Orange Free State. That would leave things as they are at present. Here in the Cape the position is that most licensing courts under the Act of 1898 have made severe restrictions in regard to the supplying of liquor to natives. It has been pointed out to me that in the north it has been the custom for farmers to send their messengers to get the liquor required for the household. I doubt whether that would be possible in future under this clause, because it distinctly prohibits a native from being in possession of liquor.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person></from>

<p>interjected a remark.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I would like my hon. friend to argue that matter. I would like to be on the other side when he argued that matter before the court. It is obvious that the words as they are there are open to two interpretations. The clause does not say: &#x201C;In possession for his own use.&#x201D; It says that no native shall be in possession of liquor. As far as the Cape, at any rate is concerned, it is entirely a new provision. We do not know what view may be taken of it. As far as the Cape is concerned, I think the Bill should be in the form in which it was originally introduced into the House. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To insert at the commencement of the clause: &#x201C;In the provinces of Natal, the Transvaal and the Orange Free State.&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_jager">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE JAGER</person>:</from>

<p>I would also like to move an amendment in this clause. I do not see any provision made here for any bona fide employer using his servant to purchase liquor on his behalf that he may require. I would like to move an amendment which will enable a farmer or anybody else who is employing a servant to send him along to get liquor which he may require and which he is unable to go and obtain himself. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 47, after &#x201C;Act&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;and save a servant in the permanent employment of a person entitled to purchase such liquor who is purchasing or has purchased such liquor on behalf of his employer under written authority signed by his employer&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>We went carefully into this matter with the legal adviser, and we were told on the commission that this clause would not operate in that way. The sending of a servant with a note to get a bottle of liquor, and his returning with a bottle of liquor does not in any legal sense place him in the &#x201C;possession&#x201D; of liquor.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>May I point out that I find that I was quite right in what I said on this point? [Gardiner and Lansdown, Vol. II, quoted.]</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>I move, as an amendment to the amendment proposed by Dr. de Jager&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit &#x201C;permanent&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think there could be much objection to accepting the amendment of the hon. member for Paarl (Dr. de Jager), but the trouble in the northern provinces is this problem of the illicit supply to natives. It is quite possible if you put in a provision of that sort that the native will produce <span class="col_1215-1216" refersTo="page_0674"/>a bogus letter authorizing him to have liquor handed to him. It simply provides another loophole to break down the laws which forbid our aboriginals in the north from having liquor.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>The production by a native of a letter written by an unknown person is not proof that he is sent by his master. If a native is caught, and he is brought before the court, he will have to prove, I suppose, that he was send by his master for the liquor.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will accept the amendment of the hon. member for Cape Town (Hanover Street) (Mr. Alexander).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I am against it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>As the hon. member pointed out, it was in the Bill as originally drafted by the Minister himself. What this amendment means is that the position existing in the Cape Province will not be interfered with, and the principle existing in the other three provinces will be preserved. I do not want to go over all the arguments again, but under the circumstances I think as it was originally in the Bill that the Minister might agree to the proposal of the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander). It is a consequential amendment. We allowed Clause 81 to stand over, but it stood over for the purpose of at a future period of the Bill considering the principles which had then been brought forward. This clause refers really to the same conditions that were raised on Clause 81.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Alexander put, and the committee divided:</p>

<p>Ayes&#x2014;32.</p>

<p>Anderson, H. E. K.</p>

<p>Arnott, W.</p>

<p>Ballantine, R.</p>

<p>Bates, F. T.</p>

<p>Buirski, E.</p>

<p>Byron, J. J.</p>

<p>Close, R. W.</p>

<p>Coulter, C. W. A.</p>

<p>Duncan, P.</p>

<p>Geldenhuys, L.</p>

<p>Gilson, L. D.</p>

<p>Heatlie, C. B.</p>

<p>Jagger, J. W.</p>

<p>Krige, C. J.</p>

<p>Louw, J. P.</p>

<p>Macintosh, W.</p>

<p>Moffat, L.</p>

<p>Payn, A. O. B.</p>

<p>Pearce, C.</p>

<p>Richards, G. R.</p>

<p>Rockey, W.</p>

<p>Roux, J. W. J. W.</p>

<p>Sephton, C. A. A.</p>

<p>Smartt, T. W.</p>

<p>Smuts, J. C.</p>

<p>Stals, A. J.</p>

<p>Struben, R. H.</p>

<p>Stuttaford, R.</p>

<p>Van Heerden, G. C.</p>

<p>Van Zyl, G. B.</p>

<p>Tellers: de Jager, A. L.; Nicholls, G. H.</p>

<p>Noes&#x2014;42.</p>

<p>Barlow, A. G.</p>

<p>Basson, P. N.</p>

<p>Bergh, P. A.</p>

<p>Blackwell, L.</p>

<p>Brits, G. P.</p>

<p>Cilliers, A. A.</p>

<p>Conradie. J. H.</p>

<p>Conroy, E. A.</p>

<p>De Villiers, W. B.</p>

<p>Du Toit, F. J.</p>

<p>Fick, M. L.</p>

<p>Giovanetti, C. W.</p>

<p>Grobler, H. S.</p>

<p>Hattingh, B. R.</p>

<p>Hugo, D.</p>

<p>Keyter, J. G.</p>

<p>Le Roux, S. P.</p>

<p>Malan, M. L.</p>

<p>McMenamin, J. J.</p>

<p>Munnik, J. H.</p>

<p>Nieuwenhuize, J.</p>

<p>Oost, H.</p>

<p>Pienaar, J. J.</p>

<p>Pretorius, N. J.</p>

<p>Raubenheimer, I. van W.</p>

<p>Reitz, H.</p>

<p>Roos, T. J. de V.</p>

<p>Sampson, H. W.</p>

<p>Steyn, C. F.</p>

<p>Steytler, L. J.</p>

<p>Strachan, T. G.</p>

<p>Swart, C. R.</p>

<p>Terreblanche, P. J.</p>

<p>Te Water, C. T.</p>

<p>Van Broekhuizen, H. D.</p>

<p>Van Hees, A. S.</p>

<p>Van Niekerk, P. W. le R.</p>

<p>Van Rensburg, J. J.</p>

<p>Visser, T. C.</p>

<p>Vosloo, L. J.</p>

<p>Tellers: Naud&#x00E9;, J. F.; Vermooten, O. S.</p>

<p>Amendment accordingly negatived.</p>

<p>Amendment proposed by Mr. Roux put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Amendment, as amended, put and negatived.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>If this clause is passed, a farmer in the Free State can allow his employees to obtain liquor for him. Will the position remain as it is in the Free State today?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>It is the same language as we had in the Transvaal all these years, and there has been no trouble about it The doubt expressed by the court has been removed in later cases, and &#x201C;possession&#x201D; does not mean mere physical possession, but bringing to his master. A later case has put that point straight, and there is no doubt about it.</p>

<p>Clause, as printed, put and agreed to.</p>

<p>On Clause 96,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit sub-section (3).</block>

<p>The reason for that is that as far as the coloured community in the Transvaal is concerned, the only point that they ever placed before me was that at certain times of the year&#x2014;Christmas week or other times of festivity&#x2014;they would like to be in the position of getting a bottle of liquor into their possession. That can be fully dealt with under the exemptions of section 103, and it is unnecessary to set up special wine shops for the coloured people. At one time I thought this might be done, but there is no great demand for it in the northern states.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit this clause and to substitute the following new clause:</block>

<ol>

<li>96. Save as is otherwise provided in this Act no person shall supply any liquor in the Provinces of the Transvaal or Orange Free State to any person to whom under the law in force in these provinces at the commencement of this Act the supply of liquor is prohibited and no such person shall in these provinces obtain or be in possession of any liquor: Provided <span class="col_1217-1218" refersTo="page_0675"/>that in the Provinces of the Transvaal and Orange Free State an Asiatic or coloured person may be supplied with liquor in a shop established under the provisions of section 143.</li>

</ol>

<p>It is necessary in connection with the discussion we had this afternoon, and also in connection with Clauses 102 and 143. I hope the Minister will accept it&#x2014;it really leaves in this province the position exactly as it is today. I am not moving the new proviso.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person>:</from>

<p>The right hon. member cannot now move a new Clause 97. Clause 96 will have to be omitted first. The right hon. member may, however, discuss the whole question.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020;The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>I move as an amendment&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">In line 57, to omit &#x201C;82&#x201D; and substitute &#x201C;81&#x201D;.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">That the following be a new sub-section to follow sub-section (2):</block>

<ol>

<li>(3) The holder of an off-consumption licence may in terms of his licence supply liquor to any person who is capable of recording in the sales register referred to in section 108 in a legible handwriting his name and address and liquor purchased by him.</li>

</ol>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will not accept that. If there is one curse in the Western Province it is liquor sold to persons who come to canteens and then take bottles with them on the way home. It is the biggest source of drunkenness amongst coloured people in the Western Province. This is just going to be a loophole. To say that they must sign, they will soon get them to sign, I have not the slightest doubt.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>It says only &#x201C;capable of signing&#x201D;.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will stick to his Bill. There is a great safeguard that they must not sell for consumption off the premises.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>I would like the Minister to reconsider his decision to delete sub-section 3. The necessity may arise for it later on.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Then we can have new legislation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reitz">

<from>&#x2020;Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. REITZ</person>:</from>

<p>All the clause asks is, to give the power to run these canteens for coloured people and Asiatics. We hope not to have to alter this Act for 50 or 60 years.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>That is a vain hope.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit all the words after &#x201C;person&#x201D;, in line 60, to the end of sub-section (2).</block>

<p>Section 1 introduces a drastic change in the Cape Province, but not before it was demanded by public opinion. I do not need to quote the evidence given before the Baxter Commission and the select committee to show that the shocking state of affairs is growing worse from year to year. A lot of talk has been indulged in regard to Worcester, Stellenbosch and Paarl, but we need not go so far afield. Let us go round the streets of Cape Town. I would like someone to give me a shilling for every drunken man I have seen reeling round the streets within a mile of this House. Cape Town is one of the most drunken cities in the world.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>Quote the figures.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#blackwell">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLACKWELL</person>:</from>

<p>Never mind the figures. The police don&#x2019;t run these people in. I will make this challenge to the hon. member. I will go with him next Friday evening and Saturday afternoon and evening, and we will count the drunken men we see. It is no use denying that Cape Town is one of the most drunken cities in the world, and the drunkenness is mainly amongst the coloured people. I don&#x2019;t want to cast a slur on any particular section, and I know that there are thousands of coloured people who are as respectable and as deserving of respect as any white person. As you radiate out from Cape Town for a distance of a hundred miles, you see sights that sicken and sadden you. You see people in all stages of misery and degradation sitting by the wayside indulging in drunken orgies. If the Minister passes the clause as amended, he will satisfy the national conscience. Instead of doing the coloured people an injury, we shall be conferring on them a very great benefit. The Minister agreed this afternoon to introduce a clause which will allow a magistrate to give to any respectable coloured householder an annual exemption from the restrictions of this provision. The degraded coloured section, which is a large one, will, however, never be permitted to obtain liquor. Of course, there will be some abuse of the new law, but I believe it will help to bring to an end a state of affairs which can no longer be tolerated. The clause lays down, in sub-section (1), absolute prohibition for Asiatics and coloured throughout the Union. Under the clause in the Cape and Natal neither the coloured man nor the Asiatic will be under restrictions as to obtaining liquor for on-consumption, but they will not be able to take liquor away with them. It is not a question of politics, but of the well-being of people who are being degraded to such an extent as to be an absolute blot on the country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#stals">

<from>*Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STALS</person>:</from>

<p>I think the House should give careful attention to the proposed clause. I want, however, first to say a few words in connection with the speech of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell), that the coloured people of the Western Province are so backward and degenerate that it is a blot on our history. I will not deny that there are individuals <span class="col_1219-1220" refersTo="page_0676"/>who are backward and degenerate, but I want also to state that the number is very small, and that the degenerates are not only amongst the coloureds, but also amongst the whites. The picture he has painted of the position is quite dishonest, and I challenge the hon. member to mention one class of non-Europeans in South Africa that is as civilized and advanced as the Cape coloured person. They are not only civilized, but they also develop along with the wine farmers, and there are many learned and civilized people among them. This shows the futility and emptiness of the argument of the hon. member, who speaks about a blot on our history. But as the clause now stands it is impracticable, because there is a discrimination which cannot be justified by circumstances. We want to control the sale of liquor, and I go further and say that those who have abused their rights should not again be allowed the opportunity of selling liquor. Many powers are granted in the Bill, as far as we have gone, to the Governor-General, that is practically the Minister, the licensing boards and local bodies and magistrates, and here a special exception is proposed with reference to coloured persons, which, in my opinion, is not justified in view of the civilization of the coloured people in many cases. They are allowed to take liquor in bars. There they can drink as much as they like, but the respectable civilized coloured person, the handicraftsman, the teacher, who owns his own house, will not have the right to have anything in his house unless he gets a permit from the Minister. Such a thing is incomprehensible to me and cannot be permitted. I therefore move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="#quote">To omit sub-sections (1) and (2) and to substitute the following new sub-section:</block>

<ol>

<li>(1) Subject to any restriction which a licensing board may impose, the holder of an on-consumption licence in the Province of the Cape of Good Hope or the Province of Natal may supply liquor in accordance with the terms of his liquor licence to an Asiatic of a coloured person subject to the provisions of Sections 76 and 94. The holder of a bottle liquor licence in the Province of the Cape of Good Hope or the Province of Natal may supply liquor to any adult coloured male who possesses the educational qualifications required for registration as a parliamentary voter and who has not been convicted twice or more often under any law relating to the sale or supply of liquor.</li>

</ol>

<p>I have discriminated in favour of two classes. I am not prepared to allow women to remove liquor from licensed premises. Only last week I saw a really painful sight and I am prepared to justify this attitude to the coloured people. I also wish not to make a difference between whites and coloureds, but merely to make the decisive factor the educational qualifications of voters in this instance. The qualifications in the Cape Province on the whole I regard as an educational test. There may be theoretical, but there cannot be practical, objections to it. Further, I do not want anyone who has been guilty of its abuse to be permitted to repeat it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will stick to this clause and will not accept the amendment of the hon. member for Hopetown (Dr. Stals). The hon. member throughout this discussion has endeavoured to weaken this Bill, but he has never tried to strengthen it in the direction of temperance. I want to support the position of the hon. member for Bezuidenhout, (Mr. Blackwell), because I have gone into this question. Take the fishermen of Muizenberg. If they get a little money they go straight to a bar or a canteen and get drunk and they either lie about the streets or go home and knock their wives about. I am surprised at any member coming from the Western Province opposing this clause. The Western Province is a disgrace to South Africa. Any man coming from the north country is struck at once by the amount of drunkenness here. We are told it is the wine farmer, but I do not believe it is the wine farmer, and let me also say I have never seen any drunken natives in Cape Town. The Bantu seems to be a sober man in Cape Town.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>He cannot get drink.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>He can get drink.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>My hon. friend is another who has done nothing to strengthen this Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>You have not been here half the time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>I have been in the chair a good deal of the time. I am also surprised that the hon. member for Cape Town (Central) (Mr. Jagger) does not try to strengthen this Bill. It seems to me they are born and bred amongst these people lying in the gutter, and they seem to think it is just an ordinary thing. Cape Town is the gateway of South Africa, the mother city, but it has nothing to be proud about on account of its drunkenness. People coming from America will tell you this is a drunken country. But I say it is not a drunken country. It is a sober country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>That is exaggeration.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>It is not exaggeration. Only the other day a doctor told me this was a drunken country. Can the hon. member tell me any other part of South Africa that is as bad?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Are you referring to the white people?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>No, I do not say it is the white people. I have not seen them, and I can only testify to what I have seen. I have not seen drunkenness among the white people, but I have seen great drunkenness among the coloured people. Your figures show that 25 per cent. of your people do not live to more than 21 or 22 years of age. Your medical officer brought it out the other day. What is that due to? Bad treatment by the wine <span class="col_1221-1222" refersTo="page_0677"/>farmer? No, I do not think so. Bad treatment by the employer? I do not think so. It is your rotten housing conditions. You have thousands of decent coloured men in Cape Town. I believe those men would be the very ones who would get up and say: &#x201C;You have got to stop liquor amongst the coloured people.&#x201D; It is a disgrace to South Africa, and I hope the Minister will stick to the clause. Of course, there are people who say: &#x201C;Give the coloured people in the Cape as much liquor as they want, and if the Western Province wants to be a drunken province, let it be a drunken province.&#x201D; We should not go so far as that. I congratulate the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell) on putting this clause in. Go up the De Waal Drive on a Saturday afternoon and you see women stripped to the waist fighting.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>One case in a thousand.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member there has not put anything into this Bill to strengthen the temperance side, and he is not likely to. He has tried to weaken this Bill from start to finish. I have tried to take a middle course on this particular Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the Minister will accept my amendment. We have again heard about all the drunk people roaming the streets of Cape Town. As long as I can remember&#x2014;now about 40 years&#x2014;I have never yet seen the necessity of closing a canteen or bar where coloured people went. But when the troops came through here from a country which I shall leave to someone else to name, on the way to Europe, all the bars and canteens had to be closed hours before they landed. They were not coloured troops but Europeans. If the canteens were shut the troops broke in through the windows and insulted the barmaids. Why have I not heard a word about that from the hon. member for Bezuidenhout (Mr. Blackwell)? The hon. member for Bloemfontein (Mr. Barlow) says I favour as much drinking as possible.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#barlow">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BARLOW</person>:</from>

<p>I did not say so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. P. LOUW</person>:</from>

<p>Then I withdraw. I am in favour of people drinking moderately and am opposed to abuse, and I shall always favour the educated coloured man being treated in the same way as the white man. There are many respectable coloured people, and why must they all be looked down upon? They ought to be treated on the same footing.</p>

<p>On the motion of the Minister of Justice it was agreed to report progress and ask leave to sit again.</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Progress reported; House to resume in committee on 22nd February.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1928-02-20T22:40:00">10.40 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

