---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol14 - WEDNESDAY 4 February 1914'
layout: debate
year: 1914
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>WEDNESDAY, 4th February, 1914</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the chair at <recordedTime time="1914-02-04T14:00:00">2 p.m.</recordedTime> and read prayers.</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#petitions">

<heading>PETITIONS.</heading>

<speech by="#chaplin">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. D. P. CHAPLIN</person> (Germiston),</from>

<p>from T. A. R. Purchas, chairman, J. W. Treu and H. O&#x2019;Kelly Webber, members, and M. McCormack, secretary, of the Rand Water Board, praying for leave to introduce a Bill to provide for a supply of water from the Vaal River for the Board, to confer further powers on the Board and to amend in certain respects the Rand Water Board Statutes, 1903-1906 (Transvaal) and the Rand Water Board Further Powers Act, 1909 (Transvaal).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#meyer">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. J. MEYER</person> (Harrismith),</from>

<p>from Phoebe Buck, president, and others, officeholders and members, of the Local Council of Women, Harrismith, praying that the age of consent may be fixed throughout the Union at sixteen years, for certain amendments in the Cape Contagious Diseases Act, and for legislation dealing with the White Slave Traffic.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. W. SMARTT</person> (Fort Beaufort),</from>

<p>from F. King, chairman, and others, members, of the Victoria East School Board, drawing attention to the low salaries paid to teachers in the Cape Province, and praying that the House may take their case into consideration and grant such relief as it may deem fit,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. F. W. STRUBEN</person> (Newlands),</from>

<p>from Agnes H. Foggitt and two others, members of the Women&#x2019;s Christian Temperance Union, Wynberg, praying for legislation providing for the Direct Popular Veto, whereby men and women may decide by ballot on the continuance, reduction or issue of liquor licences, or for other relief.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#laid_on_table">

<heading>LAID ON TABLE.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person>:</from>

<p>Principal Government Notices issued by Department of Justice, 25th March, 1913, to 10th January, 1914.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>Proclamations and statutory Government Notices issued by Department of Native Affairs, 11th June, 1913, to 8th January, 1914; returns of transactions approved by the Governor-General in terms of section one of the Natives Land Act, 1913, 19th June, 1913, to 15th January, 1914; return of stipends paid to Zululand Chiefs; copy of Proceedings of Pondoland General Council at Session of 1913, and Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for 1913-'14; copy of Proceedings of Transkeian Territories General Council at the Session of 1913, Annual Reports and Accounts for 1912, and Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for 1913-'14.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#chairman_of_committees">

<heading>CHAIRMAN OF COMMITTEES.</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person> moved:</from>

<p>That Mr. J. A. Neser take the chair in committee of the whole House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. W. SMARTT</person> (Fort Beaufort)</from>

<p>said he would like to say on behalf of members of his side of the House, that they agreed with the proposal which had just been made. He would like to testify, he thought, on behalf of members on all sides of the House, of the admirable way in which Mr. Neser&#x2019;s predecessor conducted the business of the House in committee. (Cheers.) The old Cape Parliament had been more than ordinarily fortunate in having such men as the late Mr. Theron and Mr. Van Heerden to preside over the deliberation, because greater consideration and greater courtesy had never been shown any legislature than was shown by those two gentlemen. He regretted exceedingly that, the hon. member for Cradock had vacated his position, and he would tell them why. It would be the painful duty of many members on his side of the House to have to deal with his hon. friend in a new position. He was perfectly certain that even in his present position, when his hon. friend received those little darts and thrusts which it would be impossible for him not to receive, he would recognise that they came in the course of ordinary debate, but they would never forget the good fellowship and kindly feeling that he had displayed. With regard to the new chairman, he could only hope that he would follow in the footsteps of Mr. Van Heerden. He seconded the motion.</p>

<p>The motion was agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#indemnity_and_undesirables_special_deportation_bill">

<heading>INDEMNITY AND UNDESIRABLES SPECIAL DEPORTATION BILL.</heading>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#second_reading">

<heading>SECOND READING.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person></from>

<p>rose at 2.15 to move the second reading of the Indemnity and Undesirables Special Deportation Bill. He said: Mr. Speaker, the country looks forward expectantly, and I might almost say anxiously, to the discussion which is opening to-day. It is unnecessary for me to refer to the importance of the issues which are involved. The crisis through which South Africa has passed during the last six months is, I think, unparalleled in this country, and the events which have taken place are in a large sense of world-wide importance. This movement of the general strike which we <span class="col_63-64" refersTo="page_0038"/>have seen in operation in South Africa within the last few months has nowhere else, so far as I am aware, ever been put into operation. By Syndicalists and anarchists all over the world it has been looked upon as their last great weapon, in fact it has been said that the general strike is to them what the Second Advent is to the Christian. It is the great thing they all look forward to, although it may never come to pass. But we have seen it come to pass in South Africa, this last great ordeal, this last judgment on society, and in the special circumstances in which it has presented itself in this country, which so often presents new developments for the interest of mankind, I think the House is bound to give it its fullest and most careful and impartial consideration. (Hear, hear.) How profoundly important these events are to South Africa is attested by the one simple fact that within the last month this country, in order to preserve life, to protect property, and to prevent the country from sinking into anarchy, has had to call out and mobilise a larger military force than was mobilised by the late Republics at the beginning of the late war. (Hear, hear.)</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#unprecedented_situation">

<heading>UNPRECEDENTED SITUATION.</heading>

<p>Hon. members will admit that we were placed, as a Government, in an unprecedented situation. The Government, as the executive authority of the country had, in the absence of Parliament, to incur very grave responsibilities. Not only had it to call out that enormous military force, but it had to suspend the ordinary law of the country in a large measure, and to declare Martial Law; and after operations of a very unusual character in times of peace, had to close the matter by deporting the leaders of the revolutionary band which had started and had directed the whole of that disastrous movement in South Africa. (Cheers.) We have at the earliest opportunity come to the House for ratification, for sanction of what we have done. Of course, we knew all along that in the last resort it would be for the people of this country and their representatives in this House to pass judgment on what had happened, and we quite confidently submit our whole case to the decision of Parliament. In doing so, I am afraid I shall have to traverse over a large ground, and I hope I shall not weary hon. members unduly. (&#x201C;No.&#x201D;) The incidents which have happened quite recently, which happened in January, do not stand by themselves, but are the culminating point in a great movement which has been going forward ever since Parliament was prorogued last year, and I therefore propose, without going into too much detail, to take hon. members back over the ground which has been covered since, to point out to them the salient features of the events that have transpired since Parliament was prorogued, and to point out how all these various incidents that happened fit into the great plan, which culminated in the incidents of last month. Whilst I shall have to cover a large area, I do not want to introduce any irrelevant matter, and certainly there are many questions of far-reaching importance which came to the front during that period with which I shall not deal at all. Questions of industrial grievances or industrial disputes have, I think nothing to do with the matter which is before the House.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#question_of_methods">

<heading>QUESTION OF METHODS.</heading>

<p>We have to deal with methods. We have to deal with the methods by which a large portion of the working population of the Union tried to seek redress for grievances which they had, and which may have been legitimate, or may not have been; but the legitimacy or illegitimacy of those grievances is not germane to the present discussion. I will take hon. members back to the events of last June. Whilst Parliament was still sitting last year, on May 26, a strike took place on the New Kleinfontein Mine, near Benoni. From that strike as apparently their proximate cause, have flowed all these evils which have overwhelmed South Africa since then. On the 26th May that strike occurred. I shall not go into the question of the rights or wrongs involved in that dispute. A Judicial Commission has gone into the matter, and hon. members have their report on the merits before them, and, as I say, these industrial disputes are not really germane to our present discussion. The Commission, I notice, in its report, has laid a certain amount of blame on the Government for not having been sufficiently early on the spot&#x2014;(hear, hear)&#x2014;to deal with the situation which arose there. (Hear, hear.) Well, sir, that may be so or it may not, but I am not going into that matter now, but this I know, that as soon as Parliament was prorogued I left for the Transvaal. My hon. friend the Minister of Mines was occupied here by important business, which did not allow him to go up at once. Parliament was prorogued on the Monday, and on the Tuesday I went to the Transvaal. On the following Thursday, on my arrival in the Transvaal I immediately met a deputation, with whom I discussed the difficulties that had arisen. (Hear, hear.) The Friday I spent with the departmental officials there in getting au fait with what had occurred during the previous few weeks since the dispute had arisen. The following day, Saturday, I met a deputation from Benoni consisting of, I believe, mostly representatives of the Chamber of Commerce at Benoni, who laid before me the extreme gravity of the position from the point of view of the commercial people of that township. They also pointed out to me that they thought it might still, although it was past the eleventh hour, serve a useful purpose if I immediately went to the spot and consulted with the strikers to see whether a way out of the difficulty could <span class="col_65-66" refersTo="page_0039"/>not be found. That was on Saturday morning, and I immediately arranged for an interview, and on the next day, Sunday&#x2014;I hope I shall be forgiven for having spent Sunday on a mission of peace&#x2014;(hear, hear) &#x2014;the next day I spent in interviews with the mining people on the one hand and representatives of the strikers on the other. The whole day was spent in a most honest and searching attempt on my part to get these people together and, if possible, eliminate the difficulty that had occurred. The whole of the morning I spent with the representatives of the mine owners, the employers, not only of Kleinfontein, but of the neighbouring mines and other areas on the Rand, and in the afternoon I met representatives from the miners who had gone on strike, not only at the New Kleinfontein but at the Van Ryn, the Modder and other mines in the immediate neighbourhood, that had either gone on strike or were on the point of striking. It became to me perfectly clear that it was impossible to get these two parties to take the same view of the question or by amicable means to settle that strike. That was on Sunday, the 22nd. I convinced myself as clearly as I could that day that no effort at peace or amicable arrangement would succeed. There followed a week during which matters rapidly developed, and the methods that were employed by the strikers and the results are reflected in this Report which hon. members have before them, the Report of the Judicial Commission on the Witwatersrand disturbances, from which I shall quote to-day, and which I think cannot sufficiently deserve the close attention of hon. members of this House if they wish to understand clearly the inwardness of the events to which I am referring. (Hear, hear.) Hon. members will see extended findings made by this Commission in reference to the methods that were adopted. In the first place, from the very start the strike assumed the appearance, not of an ordinary strike, in which, of course, a certain amount of illegality and disturbance is to be expected, but from the very start this strike assumed forms of violence to which we in this country are entirely unaccustomed. (Ministerial cheers.) The most violent methods were resorted to and the most violent speeches were made, speeches such as I think we probably have never listened to before in this country. Hon. members will see on page 18 of this report some of the statements quoted which were made in order to incite the workers to strike and make this strike spread further.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#some_extracts">

<heading>SOME EXTRACTS.</heading>

<p>The Commission on page 18 of its report states:</p>

<block name="quote">From the 13th June onward several meetings were held and the men were urged to bring out the strike breakers, or, as they were popularly called, &#x201C;scabs &#x201D; and &#x201C;blacklegs.&#x201D; The Kleinfontein Company determined to enclose its property, and as the fence around the mine reached completion the feeling amongst the strikers became very bitter and the tendency towards violence became greater.</block>

<p>Then follow some extracts which, I think, hon. members will pay special attention to. Here is an extract from Mr. Crawford&#x2019;s address on the Market-square, Benoni, on Monday, 26th May, 1913:</p>

<block name="quote">Now Mr. Waterston has just told you that the engine-drivers are coming out to-night. Perhaps they will leave their engines well oiled. I said &#x201C;perhaps.&#x201D; If I was an engine-driver I would oil the engines with sand. (Laughter.) And if I understood anything about electrical work I would create difficult short circuits. Yes, I would give them a little of their own back. Militant workers must recognise that these things cannot be done by peaceful methods; otherwise how are you going to win; certainly not by standing about street corners all day and frequenting public-houses and doping yourselves; you must act; deeds, not words, and according to the new strike philosophy every man must be a law unto himself. You never know who is your friend; he may be in the pay of the police or a trapper; you must feel it a personal duty to do something to strike an effective blow at the profits of the boss, and when you have made up your mind what to do, go and do it without consulting anybody. Now&#x2019; I would not suggest doing what one wicked miner did during last strike. On his very own he got hold of a box of dynamite, and perhaps a capitalist who wanted to make some more profit sold it to him. (Laughter.) Well, this wicked miner went down one of the Modderfontein shafts and blew the blessed thing up, but he only told me about it a long time afterwards. Of course, I am not advising you to do this sort of thing, at the same time it is your duty to do something to win the strike. I would not do it. I don&#x2019;t understand dynamite&#x2014;I might blow myself up. I am only telling you what to do, etc.</block>

<p>Mr. Crawford is one of those whose names appear on the schedule to this Bill. (Hear, hear.)I hope the hon. member for Jeppe (Mr. Creswell), who has been very eloquent in this House on the liberty of the subject and other constitutional matters, will listen to these words. (Cheers.) Well, sir, that is the sort of advice which was given by Mr. Crawford to these people on the very day of the strike at Kleinfontein. And in other parts of the Witwatersrand; and all over the Reef they were making similar speeches to stir up feeling and create a strike. (Laughter.) Having read extracts from one of Mr. Mason&#x2019;s speeches and one of Mr. Brown&#x2019;s speeches, the Minister of Defence said: Well, I could go on quoting, and I am afraid that in the course of this afternoon&#x2014;in traversing the history of the past six months&#x2014;I will <span class="col_67-68" refersTo="page_0040"/>have to quote a good deal, but I quote to show hon. members that this was no ordinary strike, but that from the very start methods of violence were adopted, and the true methods of syndicalism were introduced into this dispute at Kleinfontein. These speeches were made to white miners; but they did not stop there, and, as the judges point out, from the very start these people attempted to tamper with natives. (Cries of &#x201C;Shame.&#x201D;) They incited the natives, and threatened the natives that if they went underground the strikers would do them some injury or other, and they induced the natives to come out on strike ultimately, on the plea that they wanted higher wages. This afternoon I shall have to show the House the extreme importance of this aspect of the question, and I want to read an extract from the evidence given before the Commission on this point.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#mr_taberers_testimony">

<heading>MR. TABERER&#x2019;S TESTIMONY.</heading>

<p>Continuing, the Minister of Defence quoted from the evidence of Mr. Taberer, who (he said), as members of the Transvaal know, was one of the most experienced officers on the Native Labour Bureau of Johannesburg, and now controls the native compounds of a large Recruiting Corporation on the Rand. From his position and experience, Mr. Taberer had a great influence with natives, and when the strike of natives on these mines took place, he was sent to cope with it, and in his evidence before the commission he says:</p>

<block name="quote">The reason the natives gave me for refusing to go underground was that the Europeans who were on strike had threatened to do them harm, and blow them up underground if they should proceed to work. They were threatened by the Europeans. They stated that the Europeans had first invited them to join them in going on strike. Having failed to induce the natives to join them, they threatened if they worked under the white men who were what they called &#x201C;scabs &#x201D;&#x2014;strike-breakers &#x2014; they would blow them up.</block>

<block name="quote">The report stated: Not only were the natives incited to strike, but they were actually threatened that if they dared to work with the strike breakers they would be blown up with dynamite. The fact that the strikers did pretty much what they wished inspired the natives with fear of their power. They doubted the capacity of the Government to protect them. We are unable to judge whether this interference with the natives met with the approval of the Strike Committee or whether it was the irresponsible act of some of the too zealous strikers. The evidence of Mr. Taberer, who has had a very large experience with natives, discloses very clearly the dangerous effect of the threats and incitement upon the native mind.</block>

<block name="quote">The Minister next read the following extract:&#x201C;Exhibit B 13&#x201D;: A meeting of strikers was called for three o&#x2019;clock this afternoon, and shortly after that hour about 150 white men assembled at the entrance to the mine. A large number of natives were also attracted to the scene, and listened with curious interest to the impassioned oratory of the strike leaders, one of whom, Mr. R. B. Waterston, advised his dusky auditors to &#x201C;tchella lo baas wena funa meningi mali and picanniny sebenza,&#x201D; which is kitchen Kafir for more pay and less work. They applauded the pleasing doctrine lustily, and danced with delight, but their antics were cut short by a burly sergeant of police, who galloped among them and rounded them up into the compound, where they all crowded on to a small dump which enabled them to overlook the fence and witness the meeting. Here they remained throughout the proceedings, the dump resembling a mountain of human beings, and presented a most remarkable appearance. Interested spectators were Captain Kirkpatrick and Inspector G. Miller.</block>

<block name="quote">At the meeting, which was then proceeded with, most of the leaders delivered addresses. While Mr. Waterston was speaking the police drove off a crowd of Kafirs who were helping to swell the gathering when the speaker shouted encouragingly to the fleeing savages not to go underground until they got less work to do and more money. Proceeding, the speaker said he would like to see a trade union among the natives, having for its object an eight-hour day and a minimum wage. The suggestion, however, was received rather coldly.</block>

<p>They (the natives) applauded this lustily, but some glimmering of sense was still left in the white auditors of Mr. Waterston, and it was they who did not quite approve of the doctrines of the minimum wage and the eight hours day for the natives. When they came back to work they made the natives believe that they had got higher wages, and the natives struck because they thought they were entitled to their share also. (Laughter.)</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#to_produce_a_general_debacle">

<heading>TO PRODUCE A GENERAL DEBACLE.</heading>

<p>The gravity of this as bearing on what happened later I shall refer to at a later stage. I quote this as being one of the methods that were used by the militant leaders, at the start, in order to produce a general debacle if possible on the Rand. Their next method was &#x201C;pulling out,&#x201D; which proved such a striking success in the early period of the strike. There is a paragraph on page 19 referring to this.</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;A meeting had been called at the Van Ryn Mine to determine by ballot whether the men should or should not go out on strike. By a majority of some <span class="col_69-70" refersTo="page_0041"/>47 votes the men determined not to strike. Thereupon the strike leaders went over to the Van Ryn Mine and urged the men to disregard the ballot and to strike. Mr. Crawford addressed the men and told the strikers to go on one side and the &#x2018;scabs&#x2019; on the other. In the state of terrorism which then prevailed, those who had balloted against the strike and not the courage openly to say so, and all the men went out. On 20th June the strike leaders and Mrs. Fitzgerald went to the New Modderfontein and there incited the men to strike.&#x201D;</block>

<p>This method of pulling out was adopted universally in those days. Although the miners might be perfectly willing to work they were at once pounced upon by these truculent leaders, who called those that went on with their work &#x201C;scabs &#x201D; and who marshalled the sheep on one side and the goats on the other. Wherever this happened the men came Out, notwithstanding that they had decided by ballot to remain at work. This method of nulling out proved to be one of the most successful methods resorted to by the strike leaders. They surrounded themselves with so much fear and exercised so much intimidation that these poor, ignorant people who were working on the mines, although they voted against the strike, followed the strike leaders when the latter visited the mine. The result of this is shown on page 19 of the Report of the Commission.</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;The violence was increasing from day to day. On the 24th a motor-car belonging to the chief electrician of the Kleinfontein Mine was overturned and an attempt was made to ignite the car. Burning rags were thrown into the car, but luckily a rescue was effected by the police before the strikers were able to get at the petrol tank. (Betts, 507.) Soon after an attempt was made to burn a wagon containing mattresses going to the Kleinfontein Mine. The police provided an escort, but a crowd of some 600 men gained possession of the wagon and overturned it. The police were stoned by the mob, but on the arrival of reinforcements, the disturbance was quelled and several arrests made. (Betts, 507 to 512; G M. Taylor&#x2019;s statement, Q. 8694.)</block>

<block name="quote">In consequence of these and other acts of violence, nearly all vehicles had to he provided with police escorts, but notwithstanding this wagons were constantly being held up. (Betts, 526.)</block>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;As drunkenness increased amongst the strikers, the Magistrate determined, on the 24th June, to close all public houses. During the week ending 29th June the acts of violence and ruffianism became frequent and serious. On the 28th June two mine captains and shift bosses of the Kleinfontein Company were badly assaulted by the mob. One of them drew a revolver on his assailants and shot one in the thigh. This man laid a charge, but when the case came on both sides refused to make any statement, and the matter had to be withdrawn. The strikers had by this time so completely managed to terrorise the commercial population of Benoni that even men of substance, who witnessed acts of violence, destruction of property, and even fires, refused to help the police if there was any danger of their names appearing. They would admit that they saw acts of violence and that they saw who perpetrated them, but nothing would induce them to come forward and say so publicly. (Betts, 541.)</block>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;Your Commissioners can well understand that this must have been so in June, because even recently, after all trouble had apparently ceased, we have received numerous letters from persons who stated that they were anxious to give evidence, provided their evidence could be taken in camera and their names suppressed. The reluctance to give evidence was therefore not due to sympathy with the strikers who destroyed their property, but to sheer terror. &#x201D;</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#a_state_of_terrorism">

<heading>A STATE OF TERRORISM.</heading>

<p>A complete state of terrorism prevailed. (Cheers.) This is the constitutional method. (Cheers.) The &#x201C;Strike Herald&#x201D; of June 28 stated:</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;Strike News.&#x2014;During the week Benoni has been in a state of great excitement. Scab-hunting has been a popular sport; all other sport has been given way for this. &#x2026; One thing is certain: the Benoni men will brook no interference on Sunday next. The meeting will be held, and it is hoped that the police will not interfere, or bloodshed will inevitably be the result.&#x201D;</block>

<p>Here you see quite early in this movement Syndicalism in its true colours, worked up by violent methods; everybody intimidated, and honest, quiet citizens being afraid to give evidence. This is what Syndicalism led to in the very earliest stage of this business. That was the state of affairs prior to June 29.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_meeting_of_june_29">

<heading>THE MEETING OF JUNE 29.</heading>

<p>After the meeting of June 29, the strike spread like wild-fire all over the Rand. A great deal of blame has been attached to the Government in connection with that meeting. (Labour cheers.) The hon. member for Jeppe (Mr. Creswell) on Monday made his charges against the Government. One charge was that the workers were quiet and law abiding, but that it was the Government which had incited them to violence, and was the cause of all this trouble. His other charge was that this state of affairs which we saw later on on the Rand, was due very largely to the suppression of free speech by the Government on the following Friday, July 4. Here, on the 29th June, we had to deal with a case in which the freedom of speech was not interfered with by the Government. (Cheers.) The Strike Committee, of which <span class="col_71-72" refersTo="page_0042"/>Mr. Bain was secretary, advertised this great meeting which was to be held in defiance of the law on the Market-square at Benoni. In consequence of the state of affairs I have just referred to, the Magistrate in that area (Mr. Thompson) after he had consulted the late Mr. Sauer, decided to put in force the law of 1894, which gives the Government the power in times of disturbance to lay down that no meeting of more than six persons shall be held, unless special permission is obtained from the authorities. The police were very strongly of opinion that the Magistrate had acted correctly, and that in this case it would be most inadvisable from information which they had to allow this meeting to be held. The police feared the consequences that would result.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#starting_a_revolution">

<heading>STARTING A REVOLUTION.</heading>

<p>The Commissioner of Police was convinced that the meeting was to be held for one purpose only&#x2014;to get together a vast concourse of people&#x2014;not to assert the rights of the workers, but for the object of attacking the Kleinfontein Mine, rushing the mine, killing hundreds of people in it, and of starting the revolution they were aiming at. The Government considered the facts carefully. True, there was this abnormal state of affairs prevailing at Benoni but the Government was not convinced that the strikers would proceed to the lengths that were apprehended, and they thought that the fears of the police were exaggerated, and that it proper guarantees were given it might not be necessary to interfere with free speech. The meeting was to be held on the Sunday, and I believe it was on the Friday morning preceding when the hon. member for Springs (Mr. Madeley) came to my office and endeavoured to persuade me that the meeting should not be prohibited. He gave me an undertaking that if we did not interfere the meeting would pass off quietly. I communicated at once with the Magistrate at Boksburg, and asked him to get in touch with the Strike Committee and to ascertain from them whether this undertaking of the hon. member for Springs was justified. The Committee also gave that undertaking.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#a_distinct_agreement">

<heading>A DISTINCT AGREEMENT</heading>

<p>Mr. Bain was actually taken by the two Magistrates over the area, and the route for the procession was agreed upon, as shown by the evidence given by Mr. Thompson, the Magistrate. On page 54 the following evidence was given: &#x201C;I went with him as I had hardly had time to put him in full possession of all the facts. Mr. Bain met us at the charge office, and the route was laid down for him. He was told he was not to go east of the Market-square, and he was told why, viz., that east of the Market-square the mob would be too near the fence of the Kleinfontein and there was always a danger, even if they had given a guarantee, that some of the irresponsible in the crowd would break away. He asked us several times what would happen if the irresponsibles did break away from the rule. He also told us more than once that the Strike Committee had not asked for permission to hold this meeting, and that he himself had told General Smuts that the meeting would be held whether or no, either with or without permission.&#x201D; There was a distinct agreement, however. The men were to hold the meeting under certain conditions which had been agreed to by the Strike Committee and by Mr. Bain. On those conditions free speech might be exercised that Sunday afternoon. What happened&#x003F; Let me first refer to one particular point. On this Saturday afternoon a notice appeared which will be found on page 38 of the evidence, calling upon the workers to roll up to the Benoni meeting. It was brought to the notice of the police after they had made all the arrangements for the meeting that this notice had been written be, fore that day and kept by Mr. Bain, and it had to be decided whether the meeting should notwithstanding the notice be held or not. The police therefore looked upon the notice as if it had been cancelled, and they did not interfere with the meeting. The notice in question reads as follows:</p>

<block name="quote">From the Strike Committee to every worker on the Rand The message of the Strike Committee is &#x201C;Come.&#x201D; Come and help us to fight for the vindication of our just ideals and lawful rights, not only for the Kleinfontein men, but for yourself and every worker in the country as well. Come on Sunday next, June the 29th, to Benoni, and help by your presence to show, not only to the Chamber of Mines, but to the Government of this country, that the workers of the Union of South Africa are determined to win in this fight. Therefore the Strike Committee again asks you to come, and to come armed if you can, in order to resist any unlawful force which may be used against you. If unlawful force is used, we are ready to meet such unlawful force with lawful force, and 20,000 men cannot be beaten by all the forces of the mining industry and the Government as well. Your presence here in thousands will make force unnecessary. Your moral force will help us and secure victory. Again the Strike Committee asks you, invites you, to give us your presence on Saturday night at the monster demonstration arranged by the Transvaal Federation of Trade Unions.&#x201D;</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_police_theory">

<heading>THE POLICE THEORY.</heading>

<p>That, continued the Minister of Defence, entirely supports the police theory of the meeting&#x2014;that it was not called to exercise the ordinary Tight of free speech, but to bring together an enormous assembly of people, who, after their feelings had been <span class="col_73-74" refersTo="page_0043"/>played upon, might be led to any work of destruction.</p>

<speech by="#labour_member">

<from>A <person refersTo="hansard_za">LABOUR MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Why were special trains allowed to run&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>It was drawn to my attention that special trains were running. I protested against this, and the attention of the railway department having been drawn to the position, these special trains were stopped, and that was another crime which was urged by these ringleaders against a tyrannical Government. (Laughter.) Sir, that meeting was held, and hon. members will see from the remarks of the Commission what happened. &#x201C;Speeches were made and resolutions were passed, but before the last resolutions were put the strikers&#x2019; band struck up &#x2018;Dixie,&#x2019; and the bulk of the crowd rushed as one body towards Kleinfontein Mines.&#x201D; According to Captain Kirkpatrick, Mr. Bain incited the mob to go to the Kleinfontein Mine, and led them on. &#x201C;The crowd was led on by Mr. Bain, who told them to go on not once, but several times. I spoke to Mr. Bain, and told him he was breaking his contract; he said to me, &#x2018;Be damned, I am going,&#x2019; and he shouted to the men to go on and have a look at the Kleinfontein.&#x201D; Continuing, the Minister of Defence said: That is the gospel of Syndicalism, not only as preached but as acted upon. I knew Mr. Bain when he was a secret service agent before the late war, and a more desperate character I never knew&#x2014;a more desperate character I never came across. When I met him as secretary of the Strike Committee I knew whom we had to deal with and knew we were in for trouble. The chance for which he had been waiting for many long years had come at last. That was the gospel of free speech, of which the hon. gentlemen opposite are the exponents, but which Mr. Bain and others were to carry out. Hon. members should read for their information what the resulting state of affairs at Benoni was after this meeting on the Sunday. It was absolute chaos. That is what the hon. member for Springs boasts about.</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;The &#x2018;Cape Times&#x2019; of July 21 reports Mr. Madeley as follows: &#x2018;There was not a single policeman available to defend the business premises in Benoni. He was going to mention names, and he wondered if he was going to be had up for libel. There was a man&#x2014;no, a biped&#x2014; (laughter)&#x2014;named Donne working on the New Kleinfontein Mine who had a house in the township of Benoni belonging to himself, and who had reason to believe that his house was going to be burned down. He (Mr. Madeley) understood that there was some justification for this belief, but when certain people got to the house they found it surrounded by police. Well, it might be said that this was one of the citizens of Benoni, and it might be argued that this was an instance where the police protected private property in the town as well as on the mines. But this Mr. Donne was a nephew of Mr. E. J. Way, consulting engineer to the Kleinfontein Mine. Well, the men said, &#x201C;If we cannot burn this scab&#x2019;s house, then we are going to a place that supplies scabs with goods.&#x201D; And the men went to this property and set it on fire. And there was not a single policeman there to prevent it, although thirty-six hours afterwards he was told that a solitary policeman did arrive upon the scene. (Laughter.)&#x201D; The evidence of Mr. George Maitland Taylor (Q. 8694) shows clearly the power of the Strike Committee, and how completely personal liberty was controlled by them. The firm of Gow and Taylor supplied bread to the New Kleinfontein after the introduction of the strike breakers. They were compelled to seek protection from the Strike Committee. They had an interview with the Strike Committee, and were obliged to promise that they would cease to supply bread to the personnel of the New Kleinfontein Mine from a mine manager to a trammer. Upon their giving this undertaking the committee passed the following resolution: &#x2018;That the embargo which has been placed on the firm of Gow and Taylor be now removed.&#x2019; Mr. Madeley and others congratulated the firm on having yielded to the pressure put upon them by the strikers, and informed them that though they were making a temporary sacrifice they would reap the benefit later on. Notwithstanding this, their store was burnt down on the morning of the 6th.&#x201D;</block>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_hon_member_for_springs">

<heading>THE HON. MEMBER FOR SPRINGS.</heading>

<p>The Commission goes on to deal with the results of all this business.</p>

<block name="quote">The Strike Committee assumed to itself, unchallenged, some of the functions of government; It gave its &#x201C;placet&#x201D; to persons whose property it thought should be respected, and inferentially therefore the absence of a permit left men at the mercy of the mob. The owners of property went to the Strike Committee for protection, and even men in the position of clerks of the National Bank preferred a permit of the Strike Committee to police protection (Betts, 770 sq.; exhibit &#x201C;B 10&#x201D;). We have it in evidence that several such permits were exhibited to Mr. Colson and Inspector Betts. Indeed, Mr. Bain admits in a letter to the Press that hundreds of such permits were granted by the Strike Committee for the purpose of protecting property belonging to strikers or those in sympathy with them. (&#x201C;Leader&#x201D; of the 31st July, 1913). The fact that the Strike Committee could, if it chose, control life and property or leave both to the tender mercies of the mob has been made a boast of on many occasions by some of the strike leaders. <span class="col_75-76" refersTo="page_0044"/>Thus Mr. Madeley is reported by the &#x201C;Cape Times&#x201D; (24th July, 1913) to have said: &#x201C;As workmen, they could do anything if they stood shoulder to shoulder. The Benoni Strike Committee ran the town. &#x2018;No man could supply goods without their permission, and no one could go about the place without a permit,&#x2019; he told them, and cited the case of a baker&#x2019;s cart which called at the house of one of the mine captains. When the captain asked for his usual supply of bread, the driver asked for his permit. &#x2018;I have not got one,&#x2019; said the mine captain. &#x2018;Then you won&#x2019;t get any bread,&#x2019; returned the driver, &#x2018;and none did he get,&#x2019; added Mr. Madeley.&#x201D; (Meeting at Salt River Works, 23rd July, 1913.)</block>

<p>These were all unblushing boasts of the hon. member for Springs. (Laughter.) I think that the Government acted with extreme moderation in the steps that it took. Benoni has been under Martial Law and Benoni has been under Syndicalist law, and I think that if we were to ask the people of Benoni which they preferred, they would know the answer to give.&#x201D; (Cheers. )</p>

<p>After that the strike spread, rapidly, and Bain and the Strike Committee controlled area after area. They issued permits for the ordinary work of the town of Johannesburg, and in the report of the Commission we have examples of the permits that were supplied by these high authorities. (Laughter.) Permits were issued for the supply of power and water and to the &#x201C;night service sanitary inspectors&#x201D;&#x2014;(laughter)&#x2014;to perform their duties in all parts of the town with the exception of Parktown and the mines. (Laughter.) in a few short days, by the methods which I have described, this state of affairs was produced in the township of Benoni, and Mr. Bain and his friends legitimately asked if they could do this at Benoni, why not all over the Rand, and all over South Africa&#x003F; The experiment was begun on a small scale, but it was most effective and successful, and if extended, would probably hold up South Africa.</p>

<p>Then the strike spread like wildfire. The mob went from mine to mine, and no number of police could have protected every property though we had collected numbers from all parts of the country. Mobs of men marched here and there, until there was a reign of terror, not only at Benoni, but right along the Reef Johannesburg.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#in_the_worker">

<heading>IN THE &#x201C;WORKER.&#x201D;</heading>

<p>Let me quote the following:</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C; On the day previous to the meeting (3rd July], an article appeared in a paper called &#x2018;The Worker,&#x2019; which describes itself as the official organ of the South African Labour Party. The following extracts from that article speak for themselves: &#x2018;Carry it through.&#x2019; &#x2018;War having been declared in the shape of a general strike on the Rand, it is no longer necessary to discuss the previous pourparlers or tactics, which, after all, never connect up very closely with the actual policy of any war. The war has now got to be fought, not &#x201C;to a finish,&#x201D; as the phrase goes, but to victory, neither death nor any other alternative being accepted. And it can be done; though it will need more than a Rand strike to do it. For victory means bringing the South African public, and in particular the Union Parliament, to its senses and its knees, and extorting substantial legislation in the workers&#x2019; interest. &#x2026; We can still be &#x201C;constitutional,&#x201D; that is, avoid common crime like murder or arson; but now it is war, the shoe has got to be made to pinch everywhere as tight as it will go, until they cry for mercy, and really, once it is war, the things usually called murder, arson, destruction of property, and so on, become the principal occupation of armies, and there is no reason in principle, but only in tactics, why they should not be included in the various forms of acute pressure which have to be exercised in industrial war.&#x2019; &#x201D;</block>

<p>The &#x201C;Worker &#x201D; describes itself as the official organ of the South African Labour Party. These extracts which I have read are a commentary on the speeches which we have listened to in this House. (Cheers.) Hon. members on the cross benches have talked about Magna Charta and freedom here, but when it comes to business, you find the real thing in the columns of the &#x201C;Worker.&#x201D; The workers have been incited to this pitch. He was speaking of the methods that were adopted. The methods of Mr. Bain and his friends undoubtedly were to collect huge crowds&#x2014;and in a place like Johannesburg, of course, hooligans and ruffians are a large percentage of the community&#x2014;to collect huge crowds, inflame them with this sort of oratory, and when their feelings had been worked to the due pitch then lead them on, working on them as the artist works on his material.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#mecca_of_the_hooligan">

<heading>MECCA OF THE HOOLIGAN.</heading>

<p>This succeeded on several occasions, particularly at this Sunday meeting at Benoni, and the next stage was to start on a much larger scale in Johannesburg&#x2014;Johannesburg, the Mecca of the hooligan. (Laughter.) Notice of meetings was no longer given, it was unnecessary to call on the people to come armed because they were masters of the situation. We had police and military galore, but the mob had tasted blood, their methods had been successful, and they were determined to conduct operations on a grander scale. A big meeting was called quite suddenly without notification for Friday, July 4, on the Johannesburg Market-square. Nobody knew about this meeting till Friday morning. On Friday morning the Government got information that there was to be this concourse on the <span class="col_77-78" refersTo="page_0045"/>Market-square, Johannesburg. Now, I ask hon. members in this House, with the facts before the Government of what had happened at Benoni the previous Sunday, what course was open to the Government&#x003F; Although it was very late in the day&#x2014;the meeting had been called for 2 o&#x2019;clock&#x2014;it was quite clear that this meeting could not be allowed, and there had to be an interference with what the hon. member there (on the Labour benches) calls free speech and free movement. The Commissioner of Police was sent to Johannesburg, and he arrived there between 12 and 1. From 12 o&#x2019;clock that Friday morning the people had started to collect. The whole operation I saw in full force the next day when the Prime Minister and myself were in Johannesburg. The whole method was perfectly simple. It was to get the people from all parts of the Rand to congregate in huge numbers, and then set a mob like that going with inflammatory oratory. What can you do with a mob like that, a mob of thousands and tens of thousands&#x003F; You can kill them, you can shoot them down by the hundred, but who takes a delight in shedding blood&#x003F; The object of Mr. Bain and his colleagues was to collect this mob, and by inciting and goading them on to lead them on thereafter to any crime they might wish. When Col. Truter arrived on the Market-square he stopped the speaking, but found it impossible to stop the crowd. They were not all of them strikers, not all of them hooligans, but there are always in a place like Johannesburg thousands and thousands of sightseers who attend in order to see the fun, and, of course, when it came to serious business, as happened that day and the following day, they; were amongst the chief sufferers&#x2014;these idle sightseers, men, women, and children who wanted to see what was going on, and who wanted to be witness of any violence that might ensue. The meeting could not be prohibited, but an attempt was made to prevent the oratory. As hon. members will remember, this attempt was a failure, and as a result Mr. Bain and other gentlement that afternoon made some violent speeches and worked up the mob.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#after_the_market-square_meeting">

<heading>AFTER THE MARKET-SQUARE MEETING.</heading>

<p>The crowd left the Square that afternoon, but the real work started at night. I will not take hon. members through that dismal story of unrestrained destruction that reigned in Johannesburg on that Friday night. They went to the Power Station first and wanted to pull out the workers there. They succeeded in doing that, but happily the lighting of the town was maintained by the officials, so that this foul design to put the whole town in darkness that night and destroy it thereafter was nipped in the bud. They then marched to Park Station, Mr. Crawford and Mrs. Fitzgerald leading a huge crowd. We know what happened there. The police were not armed, and it was impossible for them to withstand this enormous crowd, and the place was set on fire and destroyed. After that they went to the &#x201C;Star &#x201D; office and wrecked the place. After that the Corner House came in for its share, but after what had been done at the Power Station and Park Station, it became necessary for the police to be armed, and when the mob appeared at the Corner House it met an armed force of military and police&#x2014;(hear, hear)&#x2014;with the result, as hon. members know, that there was on that occasion very serious loss of life. So that dreadful night passed away. They wound up the orgies of that night by looting the gun shops, arming themselves, and preparing for the battle, which was to follow on the next day.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#ministers_in_johannesburg">

<heading>MINISTERS IN JOHANNESBURG.</heading>

<p>The Government was kept informed of what was going on, and the Prime Minister decided on that Saturday morning to proceed to Johannesburg and go into matters there, and he asked me on the way to go with him, and so it happened that we appeared on that morning in Johannesburg. I do not want to refer at great length to what happened there. The Prime Minister and myself consulted the Commissioner of Police and General O&#x2019;Brien, who was in command of the Imperial troops, and we went over the whole matter very carefully, and thereafter we met a deputation from the leaders of the Strike Committee, Mr. Bain among them. At this, stage I may say Mr. Bain and some of his colleagues, who were actively leading the whole of this disastrous movement, were out on bail. They had been arrested at an early stage of this business at Benoni, but a kind hearted Magistrate had let him out on &#x00A3;20 bail, and not only was this movement engineered by a man who was out on bail, but ultimately, for the good of the country, the Prime Minister and myself had to conduct negotiations and sign papers with these gentlemen on bail. There was no doubt that, although the country did not understand the enormous gravity of the situation at Johannesburg on that Saturday, the members of the Government were fully informed and their officers and the Imperial officers who were there, fully realised that Johannesburg was faced with a crisis as great as any community had ever been faced with. To me, that afternoon in Johannesburg, it was a wonderful thing to see how people can live in a doomed place without knowing it, walking about the streets, going about their ordinary avocations, sight-seeing, and going into streets where any moment they might be shot because firing was taking place in all directions.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#arranging_a_settlement">

<heading>ARRANGING A SETTLEMENT.</heading>

<p>After we had consulted with these gentlemen it came down to this that they were prepared to use what influence they had with their fellows and with the mob and <span class="col_79-80" refersTo="page_0046"/>the hooligans to stop this business that was going on, to stop further shooting, and to stop the strike if the Kleinfontein strikers were reinstated, about 170 of them, and the Government undertook to appoint a Commission of Inquiry into the grievances of the workers. These were the two conditions: the Kleinfontein workers had to be reinstated at Kleinfontein, and the grievances of the industrial community had to be inquired into by a Commission. The Prime Minister and myself, in the course of the afternoon, saw a number of the more important men among the mine-owners, the employers, and discussed with them very fully the situation, and pointed out to them what the situation really was, and after a long discussion, they came to the conclusion that, for the reasons which were pointed out, and which they considered paramount, they would leave it entirely in the hands of the Government to make any arrangement they might think fit to stop the bloodshed and disorders that were going on. The chief trouble occurred over the reinstatement of the strikers at Kleinfontein. As I say, 170 fresh men had been taken on. The employers there had given a guarantee to all these men of permanent employment&#x2014;(hear, hear)&#x2014;and of course it was impossible for them to break their word, or for the Government to press them to break their word. The object of the Government all through this has been the protection of the free labourer. (Cheers.) Whatever happened, we had to stand by the free labourer, and here were a number of men&#x2014;170 of them&#x2014; call them &#x201C;scabs,&#x201D; call them &#x201C;blacklegs,&#x201D; call them by whatever name you like, who had volunteered at that time to continue operations on this mine, and the employers, who had given them a guarantee of permanent employment, had to stand by them. Ultimately the thing was solved in this way, as hon. members know, that the Government said: &#x201C;Very well, if it is impossible for you to deal with these men, leave that to the Government, and we will deal with them &#x201D;; and hon. members know that the conclusion we came to was that we would take these men over and compensate them ourselves, so that the reinstatement of the strikers could take place at the Kleinfontein Mine, and the men who had been taken on in the meantime would have adequate protection, and would be compensated for the positions they had lost. The strikers&#x2019; representatives would not hear of compensation being paid to &#x201C;scabs&#x201D; and &#x201C;blacklegs&#x201D;; they could not understand how the Government could do a thing like this, because the whole battle they were fighting was against the &#x201C;scabs,&#x201D; and now the Government came forward and were going to compensate these people on a fair basis. However we stood firm, and the result was that in the end this was done.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#a_question_of_principle">

<heading>A QUESTION OF PRINCIPLE.</heading>

<p>Next Monday they returned to the charge, and said that the crowd would not accept it, and that they were very much dissatisfied with the terms come to&#x2014;to compensate the strike-breakers of Kleinfontein. I submit to hon. members that it was the proper thing to do, and that it was not a question of amount&#x2014;whether it was &#x00A3;20,000, or as it turned out to be nearer &#x00A3;50,000. The question was one of principle, whether the Government would stand by the free worker and protect him. (Cheers.) We have also been criticised for buying off the evils that were threatening us in a time of great violence and impending disaster, but hon. members will see that that was not at all the matter, and it was not a case of paying &#x00A3;50,000 to the strikers to keep them quiet. We were paying &#x00A3;50,000 to the strike breakers to satisfy the honour of this country, and to discharge the duty of this country to protect the free worker. (Hear, hear.) The position was settled that afternoon, and on that basis, and I have here the original document which was signed at the Carlton Hotel that afternoon. I admit freely that it was one of the hardest things I have done in my life to put my name on a document together with that of Mr. Bain and the others, but very often in life&#x2014;and I have learned it in my own previous experience&#x2014; you have to incur humiliation and disgrace to do a great public service&#x2014;(hear, hear)&#x2014; and I feel as certain as I stand here this afternoon, that but for the action of the Prime Minister in going to Johannesburg and settling that dispute that Saturday afternoon, there would have been not fifty thousand pounds to pay, but we would have to pay a price which would have been appalling to the world. (Hear, hear.) The disgrace has been incurred: the expense has been incurred: and we come to this House to ask it to ratify what has been done, under the most abnormal conditions. Continuing, the Minister said: Some further looting and dynamiting took place that evening, but, on the whole, the difficulty for the time being was over. But I felt&#x2014;and let me say that every thoughtful man must have felt on that occasion&#x2014;that that was not the end of the business, and when the strikers appeared on the following day and spoke about a truce, I felt that there was a deep truth in what they said. They had tasted blood, and looked upon what had happened there on that Saturday afternoon as a complete victory for the strike movement, and a complete victory for the methods that had been adopted; and most people felt that we were not at the end of the matter. (Hear, hear.) Here was a solemn document signed, which should have ended this matter, and which promised inquiries into their grievances, but in effect they did not look upon it as concluding the matter; and thereafter things actually became worse, as I will show hon. members. On the following Monday Mr. Bain with his colleagues <span class="col_81-82" refersTo="page_0047"/>

appeared in the office of the Prime Minister and explained that their people were very much dissatisfied with the terms which they had arranged and that some of them said that they had been called traitors, that they had been accused of bribery and corruption, and that their lives were threatened. That may have been meant for our consumption, but I doubt, continuing the hon. Minister said: &#x201C;By the appearance of the Prime Minister that Saturday afternoon the whole movement that they were aiming at&#x2014;the spread of the strike throughout the whole of South Africa&#x2014;was brought to a stop by one bold coup. On Monday they thought a great mistake had been made by coming to terms with the Government. I see the hon. member for Springs (Mr. Madeley) smiling, but I will road later what he said in reference to it. They saw, of course, that by this coup they had been deflected from their course, and that at all costs this movement should be resumed, and that an attempt should be made, by hook or by crook, to urge on and bring into existence this general strike over South Africa.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#mr_poutsma">

<heading>MR. POUTSMA.</heading>

<p>We, therefore, from that point&#x2014;after we had had that discussion with the committee and Mr. Bain&#x2014;-saw at once greater trouble coming. And now at this stage a new figure, much more sinister than Mr. Bain, appears on the scene, and this is Mr. Poutsma. Some time ago before the present strike I read an interesting book in Dutch written by one Domela Nieuwenhuis, who was for a number of years the Syndicalist leader of the Socialists in Holland. The title of the book is &#x201C;Van Christen Tot Anarchist.&#x201D; The author describes the evolution of this revolutionary Syndicalist movement in Holland, and gives with great detail what happened in connection with the railway strikes in Holland Mr. Poutsma was a lieutenant of this gentleman and graduated in the school of anarchy&#x2014;(laughter)&#x2014;and had actually gone through all this process in Holland. When Mr. Poutsma saw that this general strike, this movement, had been brought to a dead stop by the Prime Minister on that Saturday afternoon, he was a very disappointed man. (Laughter.) Mr. Poutsma addressed the railway workers at Braamfontein, and at the same time notices began to appear in the &#x201C;Rand Daily Mail&#x201D; which in those days was apparently the accredited organ of the party&#x2014; (laughter)&#x2014;and in other papers. Threats appeared in this paper, and in other papers also, that the business was not over and that it was only beginning, and that the Government would be faced with the situation that the railway workers had grievances under which they had been groaning for a number of years, and that a forty-eight hours&#x2019; ultimatum was coming. After that there would be a general strike of railwaymen and everybody else, if these grievances were not attended to. Well, that was the new campaign. Mr. Bain had not the education and the wide experience of this gentleman who had graduated in syndicalism in Holland and on the Continent. (Laughter.) There was tremendous organisation, not only on the railway, but all over the country, with all classes of workers, and there were vast preparations for a general strike. &#x201C;What had been done&#x201D; (it was said) &#x201C;at Kleinfontein could be done all over the country) and the Prime Minister, as the hon. member for Springs said, had hood winked them.&#x201D; On July the 11th Mr. Poutsma made a speech at Johannesburg, and said that the railwaymen had given their pledge and word of honour that they were not going to act on their own, and that in the future they would act in concert with the other workers, that was, the Federation of Trades. Their work had only just begun, and they were going to submit to the Government a list of grievances which they had been unable to get redressed in the past, and they must have an answer yea or nay. &#x2026; Proceeding, the Minister said that the document signed on that Saturday July 5 contained the following: &#x201C;The representatives of the workers are at liberty to lay any other grievances before the Government, who will inquire into them;&#x201D; but Mr. Poutsma said that it was not a question of inquiry into them, but a question of yea or nay, and that now was the time to act. On July the 13th Mr. Poutsma, who now becomes an active figure, and simply aeroplanes over the whole of South Africa, addressing the workers of South Africa, at all sorts of places, addressed the workers at Germiston, and said that every body would soon have to starve for want of supplies. There was a time (said the Minister) when I would look upon this as clap-trap, and rhodomontade, but we had been taught by experience, and after the settlement of that strike on Saturday afternoon, and after Mr. Poutsma had appeared on the scene, I felt that a very serious business was pending. Mr. Poutsma was far more educated than the rest of them, and far more plausible, and having been taught to wield influence over the workers, wanted to bring, the railway into this business, and by starvation compel the country to surrender.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_at_a_standstill">

<heading>BUSINESS AT A STANDSTILL.</heading>

<p>The Government, of course, could not sit perfectly still all this time. It was not merely a case of Mr. Poutsma speaking, but all business came to a standstill. Government took a very grave view of what was going on and so did the whole of the community. The recruiting of natives had to be stopped. Something had to be done, to forestall a disaster. An effort was made by the Government to get into touch with the railway workers. After all, the railwaymen were our own officials and servants, and an effort was made to see whether we could not meet them in a reasonable <span class="col_83-84" refersTo="page_0048"/>way. (Hear, hear.) Some friends in this House and outside offered their services to help the Government, and ultimately on July 14 the Minister of Mines and myself met Mr. Connerty and Mr. Poutsma and some delegates of the railway servants. They said that their grievances had been placed in the hands of the Federation of Trades and that they could not discuss them independently. I was astounded at this declaration. We expressed ourselves to that effect, with the result that the next day they appeared again and said there was some misunderstanding, and although they had no power to act they could discuss the matter with the Government. The result was embodied in a letter which Government sent to them. Of course in the meantime the disaffection had spread to other branches of the public service. The Union postal and telegraph employees also became very active at a most inopportune time, but they wished to join in this Armageddon which was going to be fought. Finally on July 16 the Federation nominated its delegates to discuss with the Government the terms they would present. These terms were presented on July 17 with an intimation that a reply was expected on July 23. Mr. Bain wrote to the prime Minister&#x2014;he never corresponded with anybody else than the Prime Minister &#x2014;(laughter)&#x2014;giving a list of the grievances which they required redressed, and requesting a reply within five days. This was not so drastic an ultimatum as we expected. Hon. members know this document&#x2014;with its enormous list of grievances. I would point hon. members to the speeches delivered by this revolutionary junta during the period when Government was supposed calmly to be considering the position. We had the flood-gates of oratory opened. On Sunday, July 20, Mr. Waterston, speaking at Bloemfontein, said they were talking of forming a provisional Government&#x003F; Of what&#x003F; Of the representatives of the men. (Laughter.) What they had in view in the formation of this revolutionary Government was not a Government representing the people of South Africa, but a Government of the men and the ousting of the present incompetent Government. (Laughter.)</p>

<p>Of course we had not been asleep all this time. The Government and the country had been taught a very bitter lesson during that July business, when but for the assistance we received from the British troops we should have been in a very terrible position, and we can never be sufficiently thankful to the Imperial authorities and the galiant officers who assisted us. (Cheers.) We were given notice by these events and we set our house in order. Mr. Waterston said: &#x201C;They were like Lord Milner. They were going to fight and damn the consequences.&#x201D; (Laughter.) But this is a rough world, and those who take the sword perish by the sword. I do not think the consequences are now being damned on the high seas. Referring to the calling out of special constables, Mr. Waterston said:</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;If the Government call on you in times of industrial disputes, tell them to go to the devil. Tell them you will not be a scab, and worse than a scab. Tell them that those who sign on as special police are the worst microbes on earth. &#x2026; Every member of the Defence Force, if called upon in time of industrial disputes, should tell the Government to go to the devil.&#x201D;</block>

<p>I don&#x2019;t think he learned that from Lord Milner. (Laughter.) In the next strike, Mr. Waterston advised his hearers to</p>

<block name="quote">&#x201C;be men when the call was made. Make no excuses, but come out. In the next struggle you should all have rifles and bandoliers and a few hundred rounds of ammunition.&#x201D;</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#mr._creswells_share_of_the_blame">

<heading>MR. CRESWELL&#x2019;S SHARE OF THE BLAME.</heading>

<p>Well, Sir, these were the speeches delivered in the interim while the Government was calmly deliberating over this list of grievances. That same Sunday there was a great meeting at Pretoria by the S.A. Labour Party, when the hon. member for Jeppe (Mr. Creswell) made the following statement.</p>

<speech by="#merriman">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. X. MERRIMAN</person> (Victoria West):</from>

<p>What date was that&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>July 20. All the orators were there in force. The hon. member for Jeppe said that Parliament had treated matters with callous indifference, but not a word in condemnation of all these disorders. (Cheers.) Not a word of advice to his deluded followers. No, the whole blame was put on Parliament, for the people had to be worked up into a state of complete dissatisfaction. He referred to the miserable and callous way in which Parliament had dealt with the matter, and added: &#x201C;If they could not obtain their end by constitutional means, then they would have to adopt other means.&#x201D; I would say this in extenuation of the hon. member &#x2014; this is oratory, this is not meant as syndicalism. (Laughter.) His partners, the real men, the doers were there too, but I think the hon. member must bear his share of the blame &#x2014;(cheers)&#x2014;for he had the opportunity of speaking words of calmness and moderation to calm the tempers of the people, but he went on to attack the Government for incompetence&#x2014;which was quite legitimate&#x2014;(laughter)&#x2014;and he also attacked the finding of the Judicial Commission. I do not mind Mr. Bain and all the rest of the revolutionary crowd taking this line, but the hon. gentleman is an educated man. He knows better. He knew that the judges were doing their best to probe the affair to the bottom, but so as not to be put completely in the shade by the revolutionaries, he also condemned the Commission and praised unconstitutional methods. This is the blame that rests on the hon. <span class="col_85-86" refersTo="page_0049"/>gentleman and those who sit here with him they have taken their men to the brink but they themselves have drawn back, while their followers have tumbled into the abyss.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#brought_to_its_knees">

<heading>&#x201C;BROUGHT TO ITS KNEES.&#x201D;</heading>

<p>Then too the hon. member went on to the general statement that the &#x201C;workers on the Rand had brought the Government to its knees.&#x201D;</p>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. H. P. CRESWELL</person> (Jeppe):</from>

<p>So they did.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>He went on to say that &#x201C;more has been done in two or three days than could be accomplished in ten years of political agitation.&#x201D; That was so. They had indeed opened the eyes of South Africa and the world. That was the sort of thing the Government had to read the next morning, when they were endeavouring to do what they could to remedy the grievances of the workers. Mr. Poutsma took part in this meeting. He was safe behind, pulling the strings. He said that &#x201C;all these matters would be threshed out on Tuesday morning. They were going to wrench from the Government what they had not been able to gain in the past.&#x201D; Whilst the others talked violence he talked business. &#x201C;The Government must realise,&#x201D; he said, &#x201C;that it would take six months to put straight every twenty-four hours the country had been at a standstill.&#x201D; He urged the railway workers to strike and bring the country to a standstill and starvation. Those were, I think, words of wisdom for which the country is indebted to him. (Laughter.) They passed a number of resolutions on that occasion that their demands were fair and reasonable, that the Government must give in to them, that the Government must resign, and that no member of the public must give evidence before the Commission, for the reason that the public&#x2014; which was now Messrs. Bain and Co.&#x2014;(laughter)&#x2014;was not represented thereon. This momentous interview took place with the Government on Tuesday morning. The Government took a firm but reasonable line. They had already seen what had happened. They had seen that in spite of the concessions that had been made, the Government was to be threatened, that the Government was to be intimidated, that there was to be an enormous commercial crisis. We, therefore, took care to deal with them temperately but firmly. Mr. Bain then issued an appeal to the Dutch to stand by them. Mr. Poutsma held a meeting with the railway men at Pretoria, and warned the men to have nothing to do with those who were cringing to Mr. Hoy. Such men, he said, should be branded on the forehead. He also said that he had received promises of support from all the railway centres of the country. All this went on while the Government was discussing the grievances of the men, and seeing what could be done in the matter. The discussions went on on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, and on the Friday the Government gave a written reply, which it also published. This publication was considered to be a breach of faith, but the real object of these gentry was to keep the public in the dark as to what was happening&#x2014;to threaten the public, to hold up the community by fear and intimidation and not to let them know what was going on. To the general workers, apart from the railwaymen, the Government said: &#x201C;You have a long list of grievances. We shall carry out our undertaking of the 5th of July. We shall appoint a Commission to inquire into these grievances. We will give you a Commission. The Government also said that it would make representations to the employers to see whether any concessions could not be gained without waiting for the Commission.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#employers_concessions">

<heading>EMPLOYERS&#x2019; CONCESSIONS.</heading>

<p>I don&#x2019;t think that we could have carried out the terms of the agreement in a better way. My hon. friend the Minister of Mines was at the time interviewing the employers, with the object of seeing what concessions they would make. As the House knows, a number of important concessions were made by the employers without waiting for the Commission. I will say again, that the employers made such important concessions that these should have eased the situation at once. With regard to the railway workers, we adopted a different line. We said: &#x201C;You have your society.&#x201D; We said that we were&#x2014;one of their principal grievances was that their society should be recognised&#x2014;prepared to recognise their society, under certain conditions which were laid down, and these were to the effect that the society should be of a non-political character, that it should be composed of railway and harbour servants only, and that it should not be associated with any outside organisation. With regard to the grievances, a great number, as the House was told by the Minister of Railways yesterday, have already been remedied. The balance we proposed to refer to a Statutory Commission, provided for under the Railway and Harbours Service Act. That was the answer we returned. But these things did not meet with the approval of these gentlemen. On July 27 the Federation held a meeting, at which Mr. Poutsma was present, and they passed certain resolutions, and I would direct attention to these resolutions. One of these resolutions was to the effect that the reply of the Government was not considered adequate, and that if the demands were not conceded a general strike would be declared. And after all the work we had done in order to meet the grievances that had been presented to us, we were met by the threat of a general strike. Then it was resolved that a Strike Committee should be formed, and that the strike should be waged on scientific lines. This was the diabolical move now. There <span class="col_87-88" refersTo="page_0050"/>was no declaration of a general strike at once, but a declaration that a general strike was coming. Nothing could be more disastrous to the economic life of this country, and hon. members not only in the Transvaal but in other parts of the country, knew of the state of affairs that ensued after the passing of these resolutions. This threat was held over the heads of the people of South Africa. Everything came to a standstill. Mine after mine closed down, businesses were closed up, people were retrenched, and the streets of Johannesburg were full of men who were retrenched because of this threat of a general strike. Then a secret Strike Committee was formed. Nobody ever heard the names of the members of that committee, and their names were not even known to the workers themselves. Mr. Tom Matthews explained the resolutions in plain, unvarnished language, for which he is noted He said that they were &#x201C;going to wait until it suited their book to strike, and that they were sorry for the inhabitants of Johannesburg, but they could not help it. They were not, he said, satisfied with the concessions, and would approach the Government for further concessions on the following Tuesday. They would, he added, call a general strike in their own time, and their own time would be the most opportune time. Everyone (he concluded) must be ready for the signal.&#x201D; On that same Sunday. July 27, he mentioned that to show what their policy was &#x2014; to terrorise the community by disorganising its industries &#x2014; that same Sunday they posted this notice. &#x201C;The Federation of Trades makes it public that any man signing on as a special constable will be posted and treated as a scab throughout South Africa.&#x201D; Thus they had the old strategy again. Then there was the speech of the chairman of the party, the hon. member for Georgetown, at a meeting at Germiston that Sunday afternoon, who said the position was as serious as it possibly could be. What concessions the Government had made were not satisfactory to the Federation nor to the vast army of workers. It might be, he added (and these were prophetic words, said the hon. Minister) that South Africa would be in the throes of a struggle the like of which the country had never before seen, and which would cause the events of the 4th and 5th of July to fade into significance. (Shame.) Thus spoke the two prophets. The hon. member clearly contemplated that that state of affairs was going to arise. Well, it had arisen, but not in the way that was anticipated. The moment came for every man to decide a momentous issue once for all. At the railway meeting at the Grand Theatre, the chairman of the amalgamated society referred to the unsatisfactory reply of the Government to the deputation, and said that never had a deputation of men been treated in such a manner, and went on to as that possibly the executive might find it expedient to say that they would now not require Government recognition for their society. Those were the last words they heard of the question of recognition by the Government of the amalgamated society. They had some similar speeches from Mr. Poutsma, who stated that although they were not affiliated to the Federation of Trades they were working in concert with that body and would continue to do so. Mr. Poutsma had said that never had a deputation spoken to the Government as they had done. That, he (the Minister) could corroborate. He had had a large experience of deputations, and he could say &#x2014; and the Prime Minister would bear him out&#x2014; that never had they been spoken to with the insolence and truculence shown during these attempts to negotiate with Mr. Poutsma. The object of that truculence seemed to be to make it impossible for the Government to meet them in any way. Their object was to further a general strike, to throw the Government into opposition to their wishes, and at the same time to educate the people of South Africa into a realisation of how reasonable they were in their demands, and how impossible was the Government. Mr. Poutsma added they were not going to tell the Government when the blow was to be struck, but when they did strike the onus would be placed on the Government. War might be declared at any moment. It was difficult to think that a body of men in their sound senses should take those steps. On the Saturday following, Mr. Waterston repeated his Bloemfontein speech, and he added the words: &#x201C;The man who fired to kill was nothing more or less than a murderer. &#x201D; At the same time there was a meeting held at Krugersdorp, and Mr. Waterston said that at the Federation meeting at Johannesburg that day a general strike had been determined upon, and that strike would be called in the workers&#x2019; own good time. He added: &#x201C;We are ready and will beat the Government at their own game. The order will be given to down tools. It seems cowardly, but we want to catch them when they are asleep.&#x201D; He was averse to taking a ballot for or against a general strike; that was too slow to bring things to a head.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#general_hertzog_criticised">

<heading>GENERAL HERTZOG CRITICISED.</heading>

<p>When these speeches were published in the Transvaal Press another speech appeared, made by the hon. member for Smithfield to his constituents. This was at a time when every wise man in this country was staying his hand and trying to get the country out of the frightful mire into which it had been dragged by these revolutionaries. That was the time chosen by him to make a speech on the situation which had arisen on the Rand. He said he would not go fully into the matter because the position was too critical, but added that had the Government taken the warning given in Parliament that situation, with its <span class="col_89-90" refersTo="page_0051"/>bloodshed, would not have arisen. The whole blame of the revolutionary movement in South Africa was not put at the door of these gentlemen, but at the door of the Government. The Government, he stated, had to do something more than to protect life and property, they had to protect the poor against the rich, the workers should be protected against injustice, and the Government should see to it that their lives should be made as happy as possible. They should be given the hope, if nothing more, that their position, and that of their wives and children, might be improved. Blessed word &#x201C;Mesopotamia,&#x201D; said the hon. Minister, adding that was the contribution of the ex-Minister to the enormous cloud of trouble; the hon. member denied that he had any desire to join the Labour Party, but it was quite clear that Mr. Bain had captured the hon. member for Smithfield. (Laughter.)</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#mr_bain">

<heading>MR. BAIN.</heading>

<p>On Monday, the 28th July, the day of the meeting of the Federation, Mr. Bain also attended a meeting of the Amalgamated Society of Railwaymen, and declared after that meeting there was perfect unanimity between the two bodies. It was not true. There was a rift in the lute by that time, because the railway workers were not all mad. (Cheers.) But the enormous pressure was now being felt by the workers as well as employers, and there was not perfect accord. Mr. Bain published a notice to the members of the Defence Force, pointing out that in the event of a general strike they might be called upon to shoot down defenceless men, women, and children, and he asked them to send in their resignations at once. This was the last step; there were no other negotiations. The Government refused to have anything further to do with them, but they were called upon to nominate two of their members to this Commission of Inquiry. That was treated with contempt, as they never wanted an inquiry at all. Afterwards the Federation of Trades met again. The natives were returning in enormous numbers to their territories. The Government knew the vast struggle that was going to come, and they did not want to have savages to, contend with on the Rand in addition to white workers. They were being sent away in large numbers, and in proportion white men were being thrown out of employment. This suspended strike was thereupon followed by a new resolution of the 30th July, to the effect that that meeting of delegates viewed with disgust the attitude adopted by the Government towards the workers of South Africa, and declared a general strike off. But they had not the decency to do so in honest terms. Pressure on those people had become so great that they drew back, and said that no general strike would be declared at the present juncture. The explanation was that the railway men had broken off. Mr. Poutsma had failed to carry the Cape railway men with him. They should not forget the meed which was their due for that action. (Cheers).</p>

<speech by="#smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. W. SMARTT</person> (Fort Beaufort):</from>

<p>I hope you will give them some recognition. (Hear, hear.)</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person></from>

<p>proceeding, said that there were two explanations given for the sudden breakdown. The hon. member for Jeppe attributed the breakdown to the measures taken by the Government for the removal of the natives from the Rand in case of a strike. The hon. member for Jeppe had been contending for years that the Rand should be worked by white labour, but when the Government were taking steps to bring that about, for they had made most elaborate machinery for taking away a quarter million natives from the Rand in case of the general strike, he said: &#x201C;This is awful, the idea is to crush democracy.&#x201D; So much for the consistency of the hon. gentleman. But Mr. Poutsma, went on the hon. Minister ironically, always speaks the truth. At Pretoria he made the statement that the executive of the railway men resented the general strike because they Were not revolutionaries or anarchists; and they would not leave matters in the hands of the Federation. Continuing, the Minister of Defence said it was owing to the want of united action and abstinence of certain sections of the railway men from participating generally in the strike that the movement collapsed. It is quite clear, and I need not labour the point much, but it is a fact that it was an attempt to paralyse all trades and businesses of the country and to starve the public into surrender. That is the inwardness of the business. I cannot conceive a more diabolical act, even at the hands of an hostile force invading this country than that which these citizens of the Union have attempted. (Hear, hear.) We had at that time a situation of affairs far more dangerous than anything that could be brought about by a hostile force invading our shores.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#french_syndicalism">

<heading>FRENCH SYNDICALISM.</heading>

<p>A writer in &#x201C;The Hibbert Journal&#x201D; of last month contributes an article on &#x201C;Syndicalism in France.&#x201D; from which it may be useful to quote in regard to the nature of the movement which has been taking place in this country. Speaking of Syndicalism, he says: &#x201C;Its great organisation is the &#x2018;General Confederation of Labour,&#x2019; which was formed in 1895, and aimed at getting rid of politicians and securing what is called direct action&#x2019; and &#x2018;direct control.&#x2019;&#x201D; I think some of them (interpolated General Smuts) are amongst the Young Unionists opposite. (Loud laughter.) &#x201C;It is independent of all parties, and free from all tutelage of State or Municipality. It is based on an intense class-consciousness, and is organised definitely for a class-war. The <span class="col_91-92" refersTo="page_0052"/>very breath of life to it is that capital and labour are deadly enemies, and are incapable of reconciliation. The organisation proceeds from simple to complex. First you have the Syndicate, which is an aggregate of workers; then comes a union of syndicates; and then a general federation of unions. Each part is autonomous. In the syndicate are those of the same or similar trades or industries. The grouping is spontaneous, not following a pre-arranged plan. Any workers whose interests are identical with those of a group can join the group, without considering any conception or theory, philosophical, political, or religious. We are told that one characteristic of the syndicate is that it does not limit its action to claim only for its members; it claims for all workers. Pouget calls this &#x2018;profoundly social.&#x2019; We must remember, however, that it does not take in society, but only the working class. The General Assembly is supreme. Its Council of about ten, with secretary and treasurer, have only power to execute its decisions. A union of syndicates or of labour exchanges (labour exchanges in France are entirely controlled by the working people) is a union of groups in the same town or region. The great business of the organisation is the class-war. It must so act as to intensify working-class feeling against the employing class and the wage system, against all the forces of exploitation manifested in capitalism, and against all forces of oppression held by the State, such as the army; it must eliminate the modern State, because the modern State is the upholder of the present system. Syndicalism at its height proclaims war on the Parliamentary system, and &#x2018;Down with democracy!&#x2019; is one of its rallying words. No hope of deliverance lies in electing Labour representatives to Parliament. They soon lose their fighting nerve and become conciliators; they soon surrender to the influences that play upon them from the upper and middle classes, and forge) their old enthusiasm. A Labour Party Parliament, therefore, becomes a hindrance to what the Syndicalist regards as the only possible emancipation for the workers.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#elimination_of_employers">

<heading>ELIMINATION OF EMPLOYERS.</heading>

<p>&#x201C;The one thing to do for this emancipation is to enter upon a deadly war for the elimination of the employing class, and of all the forces that tend to support it. The syndicate must keep the employer in dread, restrain his insatiable desires of exploitation, secure from him every possible improvement of conditions while he remains, and despatch him at the earliest possible moment.</p>

<p>&#x201C;The main weapons with which this class war is to be fought, are the strike and sabotage. Sabotage is, however, condemned by Sorel, who may be called the philosopher, of Syndicalism. It is undisguisedly and boldly advocated by Pouget and others to the C.G.T.&#x2018; Pouget says that the maxim of Syndicalism is: &#x2018;For bad pay, bad work.&#x2019; It makes itself effective now by a slackening of production, now by bad work, and again by attacking the instrument of production, such as damaging a machine. In commerce it will often spoil the things sold in order that the seller may lose his custom. The object of sabotage is to hit the master, not the consumer. Pouget defends it and says: &#x2018;Sabotage is in the social, war what guerilla fighting is in national wars.&#x2019; There is no sanctity in laws. It is held that the laws have been made in order to defend what is, and it is therefore necessary to go outside them in order to obtain anything. They give us what they take to be examples of the efficacy of sabotage, e.g., the hairdressers&#x2019; assistants in Paris put a caustic ingredient in paint that was to be used for shop fronts which caused it to deteriorate quickly. In three years nearly 2,000 shops were treated in this way, with the result that the masters granted shorter hours of labour and a weekly day of rest. The method is recommended all round. If it were adopted all round, society would collapse. That is what the Syndicalists want. The main weapon of this class war, however, is the strike, sectional strikes being preliminary to the great general strike which is to overturn society and make possible a new economic world. Great emphasis is laid upon the moral value of strikes, quite apart from any material benefit gained by them. They are splendid drills for the feeling of solidarity and common interest, and they thus prepare the proletariat through the discipline of common action, and through the intensification of their hatred of the employing class, for the one great strike which is to end the present order.&#x201D;</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#industrial_legislation">

<heading>INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION.</heading>

<p>This was the theory, continued the Minister, which emerged from all the speeches already quoted in that House, and there was no doubt that the views expressed in the article were completely shared by and even improved upon by Syndicalists in this country. &#x201C;I have no doubt that Syndicalists are prepared to go to the same extreme lengths in other countries as they have done in this,&#x201D; the Minister added, although they have not done so. He would like to say that as a result of the negotiations which took place in July last in order to remedy the grievances of the mine workers, the Minister of Mines had for some months been preparing a mass of legislation for the consideration of Parliament and the country. Messrs. Berman and Walmsley were appointed by the Federation of Trades to discuss this proposed legislation with the Secretary for Mines. It was the same Mr. Walmsley about whom such a storm was being raised in the Johannesburg Town Council the other day; The greatest discussion took place and the utmost interest was taken in the question of the recognition of Trade <span class="col_93-94" refersTo="page_0053"/>Unions. The Government were given to understand that the Federation had established its position in the country as the governing-body of labour, and that as the Government imposed its will upon the population by utilising the forces at its disposal, so the Federation as governing a part of the people would impose its will upon the country by using its powers in a similar manner. Thus they were faced with having two Governments in the country&#x2014;the constitutional Government and the Syndicalists as the government of labour, who were always prepared to fight the laws of the land, because they were not made by them. It is quite clear from this statement that this was the theory held by the Federation of Trades. It is not recognised so clearly in the speeches I have read, but generally it is recognised that in the country there are two Governments, and these two Governments come to loggerheads and they fight it out in the class war or civil war two great attempts up to now had been made to bring about the general strike.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_third_attempt">

<heading>THE THIRD ATTEMPT.</heading>

<p>The one failed because of the intervention of the Prime Minister; the other failed because in the end the railway workers drew back, and now another attempt was to be made. The two failures proved they had to reckon with two facts. If the general strike was to succeed the railway workers must on any account be included in it. The other was that the easiest way of hitting at the country and the population generally was to get a strike among the coal miners. In a country like ours coal is of the very essence of industrial life. From this time onwards the attempt is made along these lines. The railways were organised into the highest state of efficiency and combination for the purpose. In August you will find that two organisers of the Transvaal Miners&#x2019; Association were sent to Natal to start operations there, and it seemed clear that an attempt was going to be made at this time to start, if possible, with the coal miners. The first thing that happened was a strike among the engine drivers in Natal. The employers considered the demands, and, on the whole, decided to meet them fairly, so that that danger passed off; but the organisers went on in the meantime, and finally, owing to the efforts of these men, when we got to the end of the year, the coal miners were ready for a strike. The railway business, which was the proximate cause of the strike in January last, was parallel with this movement in Natal. If the strike was not coming one way it would have come in another, and as a matter of fact the strike on the coal mines preceded the strike on the railways. At the end of the year the position was very threatening. Things seemed to have ripened for a strike of coal miners in Natal, and Mr. McKerrell, who returned to the Transvaal, was sent back again to lead the movement in Natal. At the same time Mr. Haynes, chairman of the Strike Committee at Benoni, was sent to Witbank, which was just as vital, or perhaps even more vital a coal centre of the country than the Natal collieries. Mr. Morgan, another gentleman in the schedule, was sent to Vereeniging. They had, if possible, to bring about a strike simultaneously. These three very active gentlemen were now busy and pushing things ahead. The Secretary for Mines, Mr. Warington Smyth, was sent to Natal when these demands were made by the white workers on the coal mines, to see whether something could not be done. He met certain representatives of the colliery proprietors at Hattingh Spruit to discuss these demands.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#mr._mckerrells_ultimatum">

<heading>MR. McKERRELL&#x2019;S ULTIMATUM.</heading>

<p>During this interview Mr. McKerrell, who had been sent down from the Rand, entered the room. His manner, according to the report, was defiant, and he threw on the table a piece of paper, which he said was the ultimatum of the executive. He warned Mr. Williams, the representative of the coal owners, that unless the ultimatum was accepted by January 1 he would telegraph to Mr. Poutsma. Now the body that sent him was the Federation of Trades. He was the official of the Transvaal Miners&#x2019; Association, but he was going to telegraph to Mr. Poutsma, with whom he stated he had been in conference, and the Transvaal Miners&#x2019; Association, and the result would be a strike of the railways and of the Witbank coal area in sympathy. He pointed out that the shutting down of the Witbank coal area would stop the Transvaal mines. Now this was actually what was brought about. A long interview resulted from this ultimatum, and in the course of that interview Mr. McKerrell took up a very strong attitude, and, inter alia, stated that it was now a war of classes, and that he hoped the matter would not be settled. Quite true; they had never wanted a settlement. Turning to Mr. Smyth, he said, &#x201C;Your Bills will never come before Parliament.&#x201D; (Hear, hear.) When asked why, he stated, &#x201C;We shall not allow them to&#x2014;(Ministerial cheers)&#x2014;we shall hold up the country to prevent it.&#x201D; I must say when this report was brought to our notice, and that before things had reached the Last stage on the railways, it was becoming quite clear that they had decided to avoid their old mistakes, and this time the start was not going to be made by the Transvaal miners, but by the coal miners and the railways also, if possible. Of course, events were moving fast. We were now at the end of the year, and on the same day, that this remarkable interview took place in Natal the annual Congress of the Labour Party was held in Pretoria. On the 1st January a motion was brought forward by Mr. Weinstock, &#x201C;That this Conference demands the immediate <span class="col_95-96" refersTo="page_0054"/>liberation of the prisoners unjustly incarcerated for the alleged crime of inciting to violence.&#x201D; Afterwards an amendment was moved to delete &#x201C;unjustly.&#x201D; Speeches were made by a number of notable gentlemen, and I think it is due to the House to draw attention to one made by the secretary, Mr. Waterston, in the course of which he said, &#x201C;As to the assaults on life and property&#x2014; let property go to the devil.&#x201D; (Laughter.) He went on to say that he was not going to dissociate himself from anything done during the strike, and added, &#x201C;I say my class, right or wrong.&#x201D; The chairman of the party, the member for George Town, lay very low at that time, but the member for Jeppe said that the doctrine preached by Mr. Waterston, &#x201C;My class, right or wrong &#x201D;&#x2014;this is not the doctrine that Mr. Waterston preached; he has preached quite a different doctrine&#x2014;but the member for Jeppe said that the doctrine preached by Mr. Waterston extended to the justification of acts committed at such times was one of the most dangerous doctrines that could be laid down. He pointed to the use of agents provocateurs in America by the capitalists against the workers, and protested against the doctrine that anything done by an unauthorised person should be taken as being approved by authorised bodies. Well, I was astounded when I read that. Here was a gentleman preaching the most violent revolutionary doctrines possible, and their Parliamentary leader of the party was not rebuking him for this, but rebuking him for saying &#x201C;My class, right or wrong.&#x201D; There was not a word of condemnation for what was done at Benoni. The real lead had passed out of his hands and was taken by the Bains, the Poutsmas, and the Waterstons, who ordinarily were what I consider windbags&#x2014;'(laughter)&#x2014;but in this movement were the real actors.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_railway_crisis">

<heading>THE RAILWAY CRISIS.</heading>

<p>Now I come to the railway position. As hon. members know, some little trouble had arisen on the railways early in October, after the return of my hon. friend (Mr., Burton) from Europe. There were rumours in the Press of large schemes of retrenchment, and the result was that there was a great unrest amongst the railway workers generally. My hon. friend then took the course, not only in public speeches, but in circulars issued to the railway workers, of explaining exactly what the position was, and that there was no large scheme of retrenchment contemplated, but that the financial position of the railways was such that, in view of the Railway Board having to conduct its affairs on business principles, it was necessary to reduce the expenditure on the railways, and as part of this scheme it had been necessary to have a certain amount of retrenchment. Hon. members will remember that my hon. friend had before Mm the report of the Railway Commission, which had gone into the workshops. I am not arguing the propriety of the course which was adopted, but leading up to the methods adopted by the Amalgamated Society Tater on. Nothing further was heard until some time in December, when in pursuance of the policy which my hon. friend had announced, that certain men would be got rid of, the Railway Board gave notice of retrenchment to a certain number of employees in the workshops. What this number was does not really matter. It may be TO or 80, or more. The question is not one of number, but one of principle. (Hear, hear.) The Railway Board, as the Railway Government, had determined that it was necessary for the proper conduct of their business, that there should be a reduction of expenditure, and this is one of their functions. If they go wrong, their policy may be discussed in Parliament. Well, there was a fresh flutter in the dovecotes&#x2014;(a laugh)&#x2014;and another meeting of the Amalgamated Society was held to consider the position. A letter was sent on January 3 to the Prime Minister, stating that the Executive Council of the A.S.E. had resolved that the retrenchment now being carried out should be stopped, and that those already retrenched be re-instated; further, that it considered retrenchment at that time uncalled for, and in view of the serious situation, would be obliged to receive a reply from the Prime Minister without delay.</p>

<p>As I said (continued the Minister), I am not going to argue the question of legitimacy or illegitimacy, and the Amalgamated Society might have been perfectly right in their opinions that these retrenchments were uncalled for, but that is not what matters and is beside the point. The issue rests on this notice and resolution, and on the dispute which followed upon it; and it is whether it was possible for the Government of this country to entertain an ultimatum like this from its own servants. (Hear, hear.) I should like to know how any Government could be held responsible for the administration of its affairs, when a body of its servants, whoever they may be, can come and fling an ultimatum like this at it. Their procedure is laid down in law, and they can have recourse to the procedure laid down by law, but they have not the right to fling an ultimatum like this at the head of the Government. (Hear, hear.) If the Government, did not take up an ultimatum of this kind, the Government was not worth its salt.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#mr._addisons_mission">

<heading>MR. ADDISON&#x2019;S MISSION.</heading>

<p>I think Mr. Poutsma was very lucky, because now the issue was not a mining issue, and not a coal issue, but a railway issue, and he had always had the greatest difficulty in getting his team together. This retrenchment might fall on the people in Cape Town, East London, Uitenhage, Durban, or wherever there were railway workshops, and this action taken by the Railway Administration consolidated the movement, and gave him (Mr. Poutsma) the <span class="col_97-98" refersTo="page_0055"/>chance he had been working for so hard. (A laugh.) On January 2 the coal strike had broken out in Natal, and a large number of men had come out on the mines, and were followed by more than a thousand natives, who had at once proceeded to ask for higher wages. Those who had been receiving &#x00A3;3 per month on the coal mines immediately demanded &#x00A3;5 per month. The Native Affairs Department sent their representative (Mr. Addison) to the coal mines to argue with the natives, and luckily for us he is one of the most influential men with the natives in South Africa. He is an experienced gentleman who has spent all his life amongst these people, and whom they trusted apparently more than these people who incited them to ask for higher wages. He talked them round, and the result was that at an early stage of this coal business they returned to work. But the white men remained on strike in Natal, and in the meantime on January 3 we had received an ultimatum from the other party. As I explained to the House, it was their policy to start with the nerve centres, and if they could stop power and transport the country would soon starve, as Mr. Poutsma had said at Germiston. They did not know how limited the supplies were in the country and how easy it was to bring about such starvation. This letter of Mr. Poutsma was brought to the Prime Minister, I believe, on Saturday, and a reply was immediately sent that Mr. Burton was away, but was expected back, and that as soon as he came back the matter would be dealt with. We had been taken completely unawares in this matter, and the Minister of Railways and Harbours and the General Manager were away, and it was impossible for the Government, in the absence of these officers, to consider the position seriously. The Prime Minister left on Saturday night to keep an important engagement in the country, and on Monday Mr. Poutsma proceeded to complain to the Governor-General that he was contemptuously treated by the Government: that Mr. Burton was in Mafeking, and that the Prime Minister had gone somewhere else. He (Mr. Poutsma) impressed on Lord Gladstone the, extreme gravity of the situation. We knew that ourselves. He, was sent to me, and I informed him that he must wait till Mr. Burton returned., My hon. friend (Mr. Burton) arrived in Pretoria, I believe, on that Monday night. The next morning we discussed the whole matter&#x2014;those of us who were in Pretoria &#x2014;and we made un our minds that it was impossible to accept any ultimatum, especially from our own workers in this country. (Hear, hear.) We decided that Mr. Burton should meet this deputation and discuss the position with them, and explain to them what the position was, because they might be labouring under an entirely false apprehension as to what the position really was. After that a circular was to be sent to the railway servants informing them of the situation. He met the railway representatives on Tuesday afternoon, and explained at great length what the position was. Some of the men were prepared to consider alternative courses, but not Mr. Poutsma. He knew perfectly well it was impossible for Government to concede what was asked. On the evening of July 7, Mr. Poutsma held a big meeting of railway workers at Pretoria, when he said that &#x201C;the population was divided into two camps. That unfortunate war between the classes was declared in July, and they knew what impetus the happenings of July had given to the labour movement in South Africa.&#x201D; Mr. Poutsma referred to the statement of my hon. friend in the interview that afternoon, and he proceeded: &#x201C;The Amalgamated Society made it plain to the Minister and to the Administration that if they could put their hand on twenty-five retrenchment notices they would advise the men to take drastic action,&#x201D; he proceeded to announce that no other weapon was left, and if the Government did not stop retrenchment and reinstate the retrenched men, the railway and harbour men would be advised to stop work on the following morning. He added if they just ceased their work and went home there would be no one to shoot at.</p>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. W. JAGGER</person> (Cape Town, Central):</from>

<p>Move the adjournment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person>:</from>

<p>I shall probably be a considerable time, so I will move the adjournment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#merriman">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. X. MERRIMAN</person> (Victoria West):</from>

<p>With precedence.</p>

<p>The motion was agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. B. MADELEY</person> (Springs):</from>

<p>Do I understand that this order is to take precedence to-morrow&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The order for to-morrow is governed by the order of yesterday.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>All right, sir.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The debate is adjourned till to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1914-02-04T17:45:00">5.45 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

