---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol14 - TUESDAY 24 February 1914'
layout: debate
year: 1914
month: FEBRUARY
month_slug: Feb
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>TUESDAY, 24th February, 1914.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the chair at <recordedTime time="1914-02-24T14:00:00">2 p.m</recordedTime>. and read prayers.</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#public_meetings_bill">

<heading>PUBLIC MEETINGS BILL.</heading>

<p>The Order for to-morrow, Second Reading of the Public Meetings Bill, was discharged, and set down for Wednesday, March 11.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#laid_on_table">

<heading>LAID ON TABLE.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>Papers relating to grants and leases of land, etc.</p>

<p>These were referred to the Select Committee on Waste Lands.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#conservation_of_water">

<heading>CONSERVATION OF WATER</heading>

<speech by="#cullinan">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. M. CULLINAN</person> (Pretoria District, North)</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister if it is the intention of the Government, in pursuance of the resolution adopted by this House on April 2, 1913, in regard to the systematic conservation of water, to bring before Parliament any scheme or schemes this session&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person> replied:</from>

<p>The Government has under consideration several large projects for the conservation of water for irrigation. The details of these projects are now being worked out, and the Government hopes to be able to submit them to Parliament during the present session.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_s.a.m.r_band">

<heading>THE S.A.M.R. BAND.</heading>

<speech by="#schreiner">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. L. SCHREINER</person> (Tembuland)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence whether, seeing that the Government have placed a sum of &#x00A3;6,000 on the Estimates for the purchase of instruments and to provide allowances for bands in connection with the Active Citizen Force, and that there is a fund of some &#x00A3;3,000 standing to the credit of the band of the late C.M.R., it is the intention of the Government to re-establish that band in connection with the S.A.M.R., in accordance with the promise made by the Minister in 1912; if not, what do the Government propose to do with the fund mentioned &#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>The provision of &#x00A3;6,000 for bands on the draft Estimates 1914-1915 is made under the heading &#x201C;Citizen Forces.&#x201D; No provision <span class="col_703-704" refersTo="page_0358"/>for bands is made under the heading &#x201C;South African Mounted Riflemen.&#x201D; The band fund of the regiment of Cape Mounted Riflemen, now the 1st Regiment of South African Mounted Riflemen, was the private property of the officers and members of that regiment, and the question of its disposal therefore is a matter for their decision.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#stamp_duties">

<heading>STAMP DUTIES.</heading>

<speech by="#keyter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. G. KEYTER</person> (Ficksburg)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether he is aware that the Stamp Duties and Fees Act, 1911, is a heavy burden on the people so far as the stamping of documents by sureties in connection with promissory notes is concerned; and, if so, whether he is prepared to take into consideration the advisability of giving relief in this matter as soon as possible&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>The hon. member evidently refers to the duty payable under item 22 of the Tariff of Stamp Duties, but no representations have been made to the Treasury that this tax constitutes an undue burden upon the public. I may point out that no duty is exigible when the obligation is undertaken in respect of a payment due to Government.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#toverwater_poort">

<heading>TOVERWATER POORT.</heading>

<speech by="#rademeyer">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. M. RADEMEYER</person> (Humansdorp)asked the Minister of Lands:</from>

<p>(1) Whether the Irrigation Department has been making experiments with the Toverwater Poort flow of water, and, if so, with what result; and (2) in the event of the result being satisfactory, whether he will cause the proposed scheme, after due notice to all riparian owners, to be laid before the interested parties at an early date&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) The Irrigation Department has constructed a gauging weir with automatic recording apparatus at the site of the proposed dam in Toverwater Poort, and the results of the gaugings for the hydrographic year ending September 30, 1913, show that the total amount of water flowing through the Poort was only 72 per cent. of the proposed capacity of the dam (2) Further experience is necessary before it is possible to make any definite recommendations regarding this scheme.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#fire_at_ndabakazi_station">

<heading>FIRE AT NDABAKAZI STATION.</heading>

<speech by="#schreiner">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. L. SCHREINER</person> (Tembuland)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether he will lay on the Table of this House a return with regard to the claims made against the Government for compensation with regard to goods destroyed in the fire at Ndabakazi Station in July, 1911, showing the following particulars, viz., the names of claimants and the amount of claims (a) which were fully compensated; (b) which were partly compensated; (c) which were repudiated; and (d) the reasons in each case for the payment of such compensation or repudiation&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person> replied:</from>

<p>The reply to this question is in the affirmative. The return will be laid on the Table in the course of a few days.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#government_farms_in_marico_district">

<heading>GOVERNMENT FARMS IN MARICO DISTRICT.</heading>

<speech by="#lemmer">

<from>General <person refersTo="hansard_za">L. A. S. LEMMER</person> (Marico)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands: (1) Whether he is aware that the Government farms, Nietverdiend and Spitzpunt, ward Boschveld, in the district of Marico, were held under a hire-purchase contract by Mr. P. D. Swart and others; that they have dug three wells and made a dam on those farms, and in addition cultivated a large piece of ground; that they have regularly paid their instalments; and that finally after three years the contract was cancelled by the Land Board because the said farms were not being occupied in a satisfactory manner; and (2) whether he is prepared to make representations to the Land Board to reconsider its decision and to enter into a new contract, on the same terms as the previous one, with the said persons, all of whom are worthy and faithful citizens&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) and (2) The lessees of Nietverdiend and Spitzpunt have, on the recommendation of the Land Board been reinstated, to enable them to transfer their lease to Messrs. P. D., N. J. and C. J. Swart, and J. P. J. Niemand, in partnership.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#elephants_in_the_addo_district">

<heading>ELEPHANTS IN THE ADDO DISTRICT.</heading>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. M. BROWN</person> (Three Rivers)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands: (1) Whether his attention has been called to the fact that a man named Vermaak has been killed by elephants within half-a-mile of his own house, in the Addo district; (2) whether a report has been received from an experienced hunter that the number of elephants in the Addo Bush is too great for the available feeding ground and water; and (3) whether, in the interests of the district, which is rapidly developing, the Government do not think the elephants should be exterminated &#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) I have read the newspaper report of the occurrence, but the matter has not been brought to my notice officially. (2) and (3) I have not received such a report, and must refer the hon. member for any further information he may desire to the Provincial Administration, which, in terms of the South Africa Act, 1909, is charged with the administration of the Game Laws.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railway_bridge_at_butterworth">

<heading>RAILWAY BRIDGE AT BUTTERWORTH.</heading>

<speech by="#schreiner">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. L. SCHREINER</person> (Tembuland)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours: (1) Whether he is aware that the delay in the erection of the bridge over the railway cutting at Butterworth, which <span class="col_705-706" refersTo="page_0359"/>it was promised 18 months ago should be erected with no unnecessary delay, is inflicting great inconvenience on the inhabitants; (2) what is the reason of the said delay; and (3) whether the Minister will expedite the erection of the said bridge&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) I have no doubt the absence of a bridge at the-cutting in question has caused certain inconvenience, but the delay was entirely unavoidable. (2) Material from a main line bridge was ear-marked for this work, but the bridge could not be dismantled until material for the new bridge arrived from Europe, and considerable delay occurred in executing the order for this material. Material for Butterworth bridge has, however, now been released, and will be dispatched at once to destination, and erection work commenced and completed at earliest possible date. (3) Now that material is available every effort will be made to expedite the erection of the bridge, which should be completed in about two or three months&#x2019; time.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#jewish_immigrants_in_detention_depot">

<heading>JEWISH IMMIGRANTS IN DETENTION DEPOT.</heading>

<speech by="#baxter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. D. BAXTER</person> (Cape Town, Gardens)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior whether he is aware of the complaint of Jewish immigrants that during the period of detention at the Immigration Depot at Cape Town the food provided for them is not such as, according to their religious principles, they can eat, and whether he will take steps to remedy this&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>No Jewish immigrants have been known to complain to any officer of the department in regard to their food. Jewish immigrants are invariably allowed to take their meals in a restaurant in the neighbourhood of the Dock area, and are free to select their own food, or their friends can supply them with anything they desire. The department is always ready to deal sympathetically with any difficulties which may arise in the case of prohibited immigrants who are subject to dietary laws.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#ibeka_siding">

<heading>IBEKA SIDING.</heading>

<speech by="#schreiner">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. L. SCHREINER</person> (Tembuland)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether he will take into consideration the advisability of placing a railway official at Ibeka Siding, on the Butterworth-Idutywa line&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>replied:</from>

<p>The question of placing an official at Ibeka Siding has already been under consideration. There is great diversity of opinion amongst traders as to the most suitable point for a station at Ibeka, and the hon. member for Tembuland was informed by the Administration in July last that, for that reason, it was proposed to leave the matter in abeyance for twelve months. In any case, the traffic now being dealt with does not warrant the appointment of an official at this place. I am advised that a forwarding agency was established at Ibeka, but that the agent left owing to the paucity of traffic.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#language_medium_at_the_military_college">

<heading>LANGUAGE MEDIUM AT THE MILITARY COLLEGE.</heading>

<speech by="#alberts">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. ALBERTS</person> (Standerton)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence: (1) Whether he is aware that two persons who were unilingual, and who recently went to the Military College at Bloemfontein in order to go through the course to obtain a commission as officers, had to go back because they could not follow such course in their own language (Dutch); and (2) whether, and if so what, steps he has taken to provide that in future candidates for an officer&#x2019;s commission at the said college can choose either of the official languages in which to follow the course&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) The hon. member is misinformed as to the facts. The two officers were not required to attend the course in order to qualify for an officer&#x2019;s commission, but simply to take a special course in machine guns (Maxim .303). The fact that they had not qualified in the course in no way affects their position as officers of the Active Citizen Force. It is quite true that when they attended the machine-gun course, we had not been able to train bilingual instructors in that particular subject, but fully-qualified bilingual instructors in that subject have since been trained, and the two officers in question will be allowed to take a further course in the same subject. (2) All candidates required to undergo examination in order to qualify for appointment to, or promotion in, commissioned rank can receive instruction and take their examination in whichever of the two official languages they choose.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#defence_force_uniforms">

<heading>DEFENCE FORCE UNIFORMS.</heading>

<speech by="#sampson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. W. SAMPSON</person> (Commissioner-street)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence how many uniforms were imported for the use of the Defence Force, and what were the reasons for importing those uniforms instead of placing the contracts in South Africa&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>56,950 outfits have been obtained, including 16,000 for cadets. The reasons for importing were: (a) Hats and helmets are not manufactured in South Africa, (b) Material for jackets, breeches, and trousers is not manufactured in South Africa. (c) Special material had to be manufactured for jackets of the Active Citizen Force. (d) The order could not be executed in South Africa within a reasonable time, and even overseas, owing to its magnitude, delays occurred in spite of the special facilities existing there, (e) The cost of making up garments in South Africa would have been very considerably more than overseas <span class="col_707-708" refersTo="page_0360"/>rates. Some 15,000 pairs of leggings have been obtained in South Africa. These were manufactured in South Africa by a local firm in Natal.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#level-grossing_at_muizenberg">

<heading>LEVEL-GROSSING AT MUIZENBERG.</heading>

<speech by="#runciman">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. RUNCIMAN</person> (South Peninsula)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether his attention has been directed to the danger to human life of the level crossing at Muizenberg, and what steps, if any, he intends to take to obviate such danger&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person> replied:</from>

<p>Traffic is congested at the level crossing at Station-road, Muizenberg, particularly during the holiday season. The Cape Publicity Association has represented to the Administration the desirability of erecting two overhead bridges to give better access to the beach. The question of improving generally the means of approach to the beach is, however, one for consideration by the Municipality, which will no doubt make representations to the Administration in regard to any proposals it may have in view The erection of an overhead footbridge between the road and beach at the Simon&#x2019;s Town end of the station has already been authorised, but its erection has been postponed in compliance with a request made to the Administration that this should be done.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#witwatersrand_rifles:_damaged_clothing">

<heading>WITWATERSRAND RIFLES: DAMAGED CLOTHING.</heading>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. H. P. CRESWELL</person> (Jeppe)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence: (1) Whether any applications have been received at the headquarters of the Witwatersrand Rifles for compensation by members of that corps for clothes damaged during the recent calling out of the Defence Force; and (2) whether any compensation has been paid in such cases&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>All cases of uniforms, accoutrements and equipment issued to members of the Active Citizen. Force having been damaged during the period such members were called out for service under section 79 of the Defence Act, are being investigated by regimental boards, and if, as a result of such inquiry, it appears that articles were not damaged owing to carelessness or neglect, the loss or damage will be made good at public expense.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#training_of_irrigation_engineering_students">

<heading>TRAINING OF IRRIGATION ENGINEERING STUDENTS.</heading>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">E. NATHAN</person> (Von Brandis)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands whether, in view of the fact that the Estimates for the year ending 31st March, 1915, make provision for the sum of &#x00A3;4,729 for Agricultural Scholarships and Bursaries, and whereas the welfare and progress of the Union is bound up with the increase and extension of large irrigation works throughout the Union, and in view of the desirability of South African youths acquiring the necessary knowledge as irrigation engineers at the best centres in the world, Government will make provision in the Supplementary Estimates for some sum for aids and grants to irrigation students&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person> replied:</from>

<p>The provision of money on the Estimates for agricultural scholarships and bursaries provides no justification for similar aids and grants being made to civil engineering students, as facilities already exist in the Union, both at the South African College and at the Transvaal School of Mines and Technology for obtaining diplomas in civil engineering, the former diploma being recognised by the Institute of Civil Engineers in lieu of the examination for associate membership, prescribed by that body. These South African schools are State-aided institutions, and bursaries and scholarships are granted by both to selected deserving students. The Government, moreover, annually takes the students who have obtained diplomas as articled pupils for a period of three years, during which the pupils are paid a small salary, a great concession, as elsewhere pupils have to pay big fees for this privilege and get no salary at all. The Government considers that the provision of moneys for the purposes suggested by the hon. member would not be justifiable under the circumstances.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#tropical_natives_in_rand_mines">

<heading>TROPICAL NATIVES IN RAND MINES.</heading>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. H. P. CRESWELL</person> (Jeppe)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Native Affairs whether he will lay on the Table statistics for the past year (month by month) of the mortality of tropical natives employed on the Witwatersrand mines, the number employed, and the number repatriated as unfit for mine work or for other reasons&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS</person></from>

<p>laid the return on the Table.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#casualties_since_june_30">

<heading>CASUALTIES SINCE JUNE 30.</heading>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">E. NATHAN</person> (Von Brandis)</from>

<p>for Mr. H. M. Meyler (Weenen) asked the Minister of Defence: (1) How many persons have been killed and injured by gunshot and other wounds inflicted by forces in the employ of the Government since 30th June last, and what were the nationalities of such persons so killed or injured; and (2) how many members of forces in the employ of the Government have been killed or injured by gunshot and other wounds whilst engaged in the alleged suppression of disorder during such period&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) Killed by gunshot or other wounds: Europeans 21, Indians 9, South African natives 6; injured by gunshot or other wounds: Europeans 64, Indians 71, natives 8. Total, 179. It is not possible to state that in all cases the gunshot or other wounds were inflicted by forces in the employ of the Government. (2) Killed by gunshot or other wounds: Europeans 3; injured by gunshot or other wounds, 216. Total, 219.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railway_strikers">

<heading><span class="col_709-710" refersTo="page_0361"/>RAILWAY STRIKERS.</heading>

<speech by="#sampson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. W. SAMPSON</person> (Commissioner-street)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours: (1) What proportion and number of railway strikers were subject to twenty-four hours&#x2019; notice; (2) what proportion and number of them gave that notice before quitting work; and (3) whether those who gave the legal notice are to be deemed strikers in the legal sense, so as to forfeit their superannuation rights &#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) 52.65 per cent., or 3,223 of the men who left work during the strike, were temporary men, subject to twenty-four hours&#x2019; notice. (2) Two of these temporary men, or .062 per cent., gave the requisite notice before leaving. (3) The men who gave the notice required of them are not regarded as strikers; but question of forfeiting their superannuation rights does not arise, as temporary men are not contributors to the superannuation fund.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_high_commissionership">

<heading>THE HIGH COMMISSIONERSHIP.</heading>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. M. BROWN</person> (Three Rivers)</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister what is the reason for the delay in appointing a successor to the late Sir Richard Solomon as High Commissioner for the Union in London, and when he expects to be able to make such appointment&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person> replied:</from>

<p>The delay in making the appointment of a successor to the late Sir Richard Solomon as High Commissioner for the Union in London is due solely to the anxiety of the Government to secure the services of the most suitable person for the post. The Government hope to be able to make the appointment at an early date.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#telephone_lines">

<heading>TELEPHONE LINES.</heading>

<speech by="#du_toit">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. J. W. DU TOIT</person> (Middelburg)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs whether he intends to give effect to the decision arrived at by the Government last year to build a telephone line from Middelburg (Transvaal) to Lagersdrift Labour Colony, and from there to Pokwani, and, if so, when the work will be started&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person> replied:</from>

<p>It is hoped to start the work during the ensuing financial year.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#police_and_prisons_departments">

<heading>POLICE AND PRISONS DEPARTMENTS.</heading>

<speech by="#macneillie">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. C. MACNEILLIE</person> (Boksburg)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice: (1) What is the reason for the differentiation between the Police and Prisons Departments as set out in section 37 of Act No. 29 of 1912 (the Public Service and Pensions Act), the Services including the whole of the Police Force, but only such of the Prisons Department as are subordinate officers, superintendents, and equivalent ranks being appointed under the heading of Administrative and Clerical Division; (2) whether the presence of this distinction does not militate against the promotion of subordinate officers of the Prisons Department as compared with the Police Department; and (3) as promotion above the rank of Chief Warder depends upon the Public Service Commission, and as this is not generally understood by subordinate officers, will the Minister (as an incentive to advancement) circularise subordinate officers as to how they may look for further promotion&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) Parliament in passing Act 29 of 1912 maintained the position existing in three out of the four Provinces of the Union with regard to the appointment of Superior Officers of the Prisons Department that they should not be commissioned officers like the Police Officers, but should be members of the Administrative and Clerical Division of the Public Service. (2) The present distinction limits the chances of promotion of subordinate officers of the Prisons Department as compared with the Police Department. (3) I have no objection to subordinate officers of the Prisons Department being circularised in the direction mentioned, and I will issue instructions to the Director of Prisons to that effect.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#coal_conveyance_charges">

<heading>COAL CONVEYANCE CHARGES.</heading>

<speech by="#leuchars">

<from>Col. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. LEUCHARS</person> (Umvoti)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether, in view of the fact that coal for local consumption is being carried to Cape Town by the railway at a rate of one shilling per ton above the rate for export coal, and to Durban at a rate of five shillings above the export rate to that port, he will cause the question to be reconsidered with the view to more equitable rates being fixed&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER of RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person> replied:</from>

<p>This question was carefully considered before reduced rates now in operation were introduced. The considerations which govern the rates on coal for export or bunkering are entirely absent in the case of coal for local consumption. In the export and bunker trade the rates must be regulated to enable the South African article to compete on favour able terms with prices ruling outside the Union, and that being so, there can be no recognised difference between the two rates at any one port. Two considerations govern the rates for local consumption at Cape Town, which are absent at Durban: (1) The competition which comes from overseas; (2) the total cost of transporting coal from the Natal collieries via the sea route, which should not exceed 11s. or 12s. per ton of 2,000 lbs. at the outside. It will be obvious, therefore, that to maintain a difference of 5s. per ton at Cape Town would be ineffective, seeing that Natal coal, with a much lower cost of transport, is unable to prevent the use of imported coal in Cape Town. At Durban there is no imported coal. The rates as they now stand are not regarded as inequitable, but <span class="col_711-712" refersTo="page_0362"/>this and other matters are under consideration at present.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_savings_bank_case">

<heading>THE SAVINGS BANK CASE.</heading>

<speech by="#sampson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. W. SAMPSON</person> (Commissioner-street)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs what is the total amount of the legal costs awarded against one Lipschitz in a recent lawsuit against the Government in respect of a forged Savings Bank certificate for &#x00A3;200 of the plaintiff&#x2019;s savings, and has the Government claimed these costs from Lipschitz&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person> replied:</from>

<p>I am informed that the legal costs amount to &#x00A3;60 15s. 3d., and that the reply to the second portion of the question is in the affirmative.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#wages_at_salt_river_works">

<heading>WAGES AT SALT RIVER WORKS.</heading>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. B. MADELEY</person> (Springs)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether, in view of his statement that a 10 per cent. reduction of wages is not to be enforced at the Salt River Works, he will cause the immediate withdrawal of certain grading papers handed to first-class drillers, upon which the wage stated is 9s. per diem, and replace them with grading papers showing the wages laid down for that class of labour in the workshop printed regulations of 10s. per diem&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person> replied:</from>

<p>The answer to this question is in the negative. Every driller at Salt River and elsewhere is in possession of a copy of the staff regulations, which give the rates of pay for each class in this grade; and in April last grading papers were issued, showing the grade and class in which each man was placed, and, in addition, his current rate of pay. Those shown in the grading papers as first-class drillers know that, under, and subject to, the regulations, they can proceed to the maximum of their class, namely, 10s. per diem, but it was never intended that the men should at once be raised to the maximum, irrespective of their current rates of pay. The maximum rate for second-class drillers is 8s. per day, and any first-class drillers who are at present receiving 9s. per day, although not at their maximum, are within the scale applicable to their class and grade.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railway_extension_in_natal">

<heading>RAILWAY EXTENSION IN NATAL.</heading>

<speech by="#myburgh">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">M. W. MYBURGH</person> (Vryheid)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours: (1) Whether the Railway Board, during the past year, made an inspection of that part of the country lying between Vryheid, Melmoth, Eshowe and the north coast of Natal, with a view to building a railway through the same; (2) has the Railway Board reported on that inspection; and, if so, (3) will he lay the report, with all accompanying papers, upon the Table of the House&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) A visit was made by two members of the Railway Board. (2) Full details are being collected, but no report has been framed as yet. (3) It is not customary to present to Parliament any reports by the Railway Board on any new lines of railway until Parliament is asked to approve of their construction.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#colonel_greenes_allegations">

<heading>COLONEL GREENE&#x2019;S ALLEGATIONS.</heading>

<speech by="#myburgh">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">M. W. MYBURGH</person> (Vryheid)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours: (1) Whether the allegations of Colonel Greene with regard to remission of sidings charges in the Cape Province are correct; and (2) whether there is any justification for his accusation in reference to the alleged Indwe coal contract&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) The position in connection with private sidings charges was fully explained to the House on the 17th inst., in reply to a question by the hon. member for Durban, Point. A copy of the statement then made was laid upon the Table, and if there are any points therein relating to private sidings charges upon which the hon. member is not clear or desires additional particulars, I shall be pleased to supply the information if he will give notice of a further question setting forth exactly what is required. (2) In my statement to the House on the 17th inst., I confined my remarks to the main points in Colonel Greene&#x2019;s speech, as foreshadowed in my answer to the question put to me on the 10th idem. I hope, however, to have an opportunity, at an early date, of dealing with Colonel Greene&#x2019;s speech in greater detail, and of replying to the other issues raised. I shall also take that opportunity of dealing with the further allegations reported to have been made by Colonel Greene in reply to my statement of the 17th inst.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#grading_of_prisons">

<heading>GRADING OF PRISONS.</heading>

<speech by="#macneillie">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. C. MACNEILLIE</person> (Boksburg)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice: (1) Whether it is laid down in Prisons Service Order No. 4 of March last, that no prison for non-Europeans will be graded higher than the second-class; and (2) whether he will remove this distinction in grading of European and non-European institutions&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) The matter referred to is now regulated by Prison Regulation No. 164, duly approved by His Excellency the Governor-General, which contains a similar provision to that quoted by the hon. member. (2) As the matter was very carefully considered when the distinction was originally introduced, it is not proposed to remove the qualification introduced into the regulation.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#complaints_against_a_constable">

<heading>COMPLAINTS AGAINST A CONSTABLE</heading>

<speech by="#haggar">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. H. HAGGAR</person> (Roodepoort)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice whether the complaints lodged against Police-constable A311. <span class="col_713-714" refersTo="page_0363"/>Johannesburg, in connection with events of 16th January, 1914, have been investigated, and, if so, with what result &#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person> replied:</from>

<p>The complaints referred to were carefully investigated by the Commissioner of Police and found to be absolutely devoid of ground.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_railway_strike">

<heading>THE RAILWAY STRIKE.</heading>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. B. MADELEY</person> (Springs)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours: (1) What is the number of strikers whom the Administration refuses to re-employ at each of the following places, viz.: Durban, Pietermaritzburg, Salt River, Bloemfontein, Kimberley, Pretoria, Braamfontein, Uitenhage and Germiston; (2) what is the total number of men discharged and not re-employed by the Administration during and since the strike; and (3) how many fresh men have been engaged during and since the strike to date&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) The figures are as follows: Durban, 83; Maritzburg, 7; Salt River, 18; Bloemfontein, 20; Kimberley, 0; Pretoria, 33; Braamfontein, 78; Uitenhage, 0; Germiston, 45; total, 284; but the cases of certain additional men are still under consideration; (2) 400; (3) 208, from 8th January to 20th instant.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railway_rates_on_imported_potatoes">

<heading>RAILWAY RATES ON IMPORTED POTATOES.</heading>

<speech by="#macneillie">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. C. MACNEILLIE</person> (Boksburg) asked:</from>

<p>(1) Whether the railway rates on imported potatoes are four to five times greater than on South African seed potatoes; (2) whether this does not act as a deterrent in improving the quality of potatoes produced in this country; and (3) whether he will do What he can to secure a reduction in the rates&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) I am aware that the railway tariff on South African potatoes is extremely low compared with the import rate, the object being to encourage the use of and increase the market for locally-grown potatoes. (2) and (3) Seed potatoes are not now specially classified, but several years ago a reduced rate was in force for potatoes imported for seed purposes. While this low rate applied practically all the imported potatoes were declared to be for seed. The privilege was abused and in the interests of the South African grower it had to be withdrawn. It is not, therefore, proposed to repeat the experiment. The tariff on imported potatoes is not such as is likely to deter South African agriculturists anxious to improve the quality of their produce from importing the comparatively small quantities required for seed purposes.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#censorship_during_the_strike">

<heading>CENSORSHIP DURING THE STRIKE.</heading>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. B. MADELEY</person> (Springs)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence: If he will lay upon the Table of the House the censorship regulations in force during the late strike&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>No such regulations were made, the censorship being confined to refusing transmission of matter likely to cause a contravention of sections 4 and 5 of the regulations published under Government Notice No. 44 of 1914.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#cape_town_naval_cadets">

<heading>CAPE TOWN NAVAL CADETS.</heading>

<speech by="#hewat">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. HEWAT</person> (Woodstock)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence what has been done to carry out the promises made last session to put the Naval Cadet Corps on a sound financial basis&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>The Cape Town Naval Cadet Corps is treated as regards clothing grant and in all other respects like any other cadet corps. In addition the sum of &#x00A3;60 a year is allowed specially for giving instruction in naval subjects and for the upkeep of the corps&#x2019; boats and boat gear. This should enable the corps to be maintained on a perfectly satisfactory basis of efficiency.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#medical_officer_for_pretoria_gaol">

<heading>MEDICAL OFFICER FOR PRETORIA GAOL.</heading>

<speech by="#sampson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. W. SAMPSON</person> (Commissioner-street)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Justice whether it is true that a resident medical officer is required by Government for the Pretoria Gaol, and that it has been decided to pay him a salary of &#x00A3;600 to &#x00A3;700 per annum, with quarters and allowances.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person> replied:</from>

<p>The answer is in the affirmative.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#postmens_uniforms">

<heading>POSTMEN&#x2019;S UNIFORMS.</heading>

<speech by="#haggar">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. H. HAGGAR</person> (Roodepoort)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs whether his attention has been called to the unsuitable clothing supplied to postmen in the Cape Province; if so, what steps are being taken to provide these men with suitable summer clothing&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person></from>

<p>replied; In some districts it has been reported that the serge uniform supplied to postmen is too warm for summer wear. Drill uniforms are supplied in certain places in the Union, and the practice will be extended where found necessary.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#remission_of_school_fees">

<heading>REMISSION OF SCHOOL FEES.</heading>

<speech by="#kuhn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. KUHN</person> (Prieska)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance: (1) Whether he is aware that poor parents who request that the school fees for their, children'&#x003F; may be reduced have to pay for a shilling stamp on the declaration before they can secure such reduction; and (2) whether he will take steps to put an end to this injustice&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) The stamp duty payable on affidavits and attested declarations is exacted without regard to the financial circumstances of the makers; nor would it be practicable <span class="col_715-716" refersTo="page_0364"/>to apply a test of ability to pay before exacting the duty. (2) The point raised by the hon. member seems to be of concern rather to the Cape Provincial Administration than the Government, since any relief that might be deemed necessary could probably be secured by the acceptance on the part of school boards of statements unsupported by formal declarations. I Understand that the practice of requiring such declarations is not resorted to in the case of many school boards.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#martial_law">

<heading>MARTIAL LAW.</heading>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. H. P. CRESWELL</person></from>

<p> asked the Minister of Defence: (1): Whether he is aware that the Supreme Court (Transvaal Provincial Division) has declined to entertain applications regarding incidents arising out of the actions of the authorities under Martial Law, on the ground that the Indemnity and Undesirables Special Deportation Bill is now being considered by Parliament; (2) whether there is today any sufficient danger to the public peace to warrant the continuance of Martial Law; and (3) if now whether, in view of the abovementioned action of the Supreme Court, the consequent practical immunity from litigation of the Government and its servants during the consideration of the Indemnity and Undesirables Special Deportation Bill, and the great inconvenience caused to the public by present conditions, the Government will at once withdraw Martial Law &#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) Yes; (2) and (3) Martial Law will not be withdrawn until the Bill is passed.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#civil_servants_as_parliamentary_candidates">

<heading>CIVIL SERVANTS AS PARLIAMENTARY CANDIDATES.</heading>

<speech by="#macaulay">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. MACAULAY</person> (Denver)</from>

<p>asked whether the Government proposes to alter the regulations governing the various branches of the Civil Service in such manner as to enable Civil Servants who are candidates for Parliament or the Provincial Councils, to pursue their candidature without any loss of privilege or status, except loss of pay during the period in which they are so engaged &#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>The position of Civil Servants in this matter is regulated by the provisions of section 16 of the Public Service and Pensions Act of 1912. It is not the intention of the Government to submit any proposal to Parliament for the alteration of the law in the direction indicated by the hon. member. (Hear, hear.)</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#motkop-glen_almond_line">

<heading>MOTKOP-GLEN ALMOND LINE.</heading>

<speech by="#bekker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">S. BEKKER</person> (Aliwal)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours when the Government intend to commence building the Motkop-Glen Almond line of railway which has been voted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person> replied:</from>

<p>The final survey has been completed and the greater portion of the route has already been staked out. A commencement with actual construction work will be made as soon as the necessary formalities in regard to land have been completed, in terms of section 1 of sub-section 1 of Act 23 of 1913.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#native_mine_hospitals">

<heading>NATIVE MINE HOSPITALS.</heading>

<speech by="#haggar">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. H. HAGGAR</person> (Roodepoort)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Native Affairs what steps, if any, have been taken to improve the defective and negligent medical attention in the native mine hospitals, referred to by Mr. Pritchard in his special report last session to the Minister&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS</person> replied:</from>

<p>The whole question of the conditions in native mine hospitals is being inquired into by Mr. Buckle, whose report is shortly expected.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#censorship_of_cables">

<heading>CENSORSHIP OF CABLES.</heading>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. H. P. CRESWELL</person> (Jeppe)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs: Whether he will instruct the postmasters at Johannesburg and Pretoria to furnish immediately a report, to be laid on the Table of the House, showing: (1) What instructions, if any, were received by them or their subordinates during January from Control Officers and Censorship officials with regard to (a) the receipt or despatch of oversea cablegrams, and (b) the opening or delaying of letters passing through the post offices respectively in their charge; and (2) a list of cables and letters which were refused, delayed, or otherwise interfered with in passage through their offices&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person> replied:</from>

<p>I shall be glad if the hon. member will allow this question to stand down.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#lady_frere_telephone">

<heading>LADY FRERE TELEPHONE.</heading>

<speech by="#schreiner">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. L. SCHREINER</person> (Tembuland)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs, when the promised telephonic communication between Lady Frere and Queen&#x2019;s Town will be established&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS</person> replied:</from>

<p>It is not possible to say definitely when this work can be carried out. It forms part of a larger scheme of telephone communication in the Upper Transkei which is at present under consideration.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#electric_blasting">

<heading>ELECTRIC BLASTING.</heading>

<speech by="#sampson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. W. SAMPSON</person> (Commissioner-street)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Mines and Industries: (1) What are the views of the Government as to the success or otherwise of single-shift and electric blasting on the Meyer and Charlton Mine in connection with the abolition of fine dust and the prevention of miners&#x2019; phthisis; and (2) whether, the Government intend to take steps, and; if so, what steps, to secure the extension of this system &#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from><span class="col_717-718" refersTo="page_0365"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person> replied:</from>

<p>I would ask the hon. member kindly to postpone this question till next Tuesday.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#transvaal_provincial_council_elections">

<heading>TRANSVAAL PROVINCIAL COUNCIL ELECTIONS.</heading>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. H. P. CRESWELL</person> (Jeppe)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of the Interior:(1) Whether he is aware that the provision of only one polling booth in many Witwatersrand constituencies for the Provincial Council elections places a great handicap upon the less wealthy candidates, who have not the command of large numbers of vehicles, and prevents many of the poorer voters who live at a distance from the booth registering their votes; and (2) whether he will give instructions that representations from Labour; candidates, in this matter, in such constituencies as George Town and Hospital Hill, will receive favourable attention&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>I am not aware of the circumstances to which the hon. member refers. The conduct of the elections for the Provincial Councils is a matter for the Provincial Administrations.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#pretoria_railway_workshops">

<heading>PRETORIA RAILWAY WORKSHOPS.</heading>

<speech by="#cullinan">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. M. CULLINAN</person> (Pretoria District, North)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours: Whether it is a fact that the Estimates for the coining financial year show an estimated expenditure for the Pretoria Workshops of &#x00A3;658,241, against &#x00A3;912,202 for the financial year ending 31st March, 1914. If so, is the reason for this decrease due to the fact that the number of workmen in the shops is to be substantially reduced&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person> replied:</from>

<p>The answer to the first part of this question is in the affirmative and the answer to the second part is in the negative. The reduction in the vote is entirely due to the lesser quantity of material proposed to be used during the ensuing financial year, consequent upon an increase in repair work, which involves less expenditure in material than construction work. The Estimates for the forthcoming financial year provide for an increase of &#x00A3;21,530 in artisans&#x2019; wages in the Pretoria Workshops.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#labour_rosettes">

<heading>LABOUR ROSETTES.</heading>

<speech by="#creswell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. H. P. CRESWELL</person> (Jeppe)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence: (1) Whether he is aware that the election campaign for the Provincial Division is in progress in the Transvaal; (2) whether he is aware that it is the custom for the different parties to exhibit their party colours at such a time; and (3) whether he will give instructions do the Control Officers to withdraw any regulations which impede the exhibition and wearing of red rosettes&#x2014;the Labour Party colour&#x2014;during this election campaign&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>(1) Yes. (2) Yes. (3) There are no such regulations.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#mr_bernicott">

<heading>MR. BERNICOTT.</heading>

<speech by="#boydell">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. BOYDELL</person> (Durban, Greyville)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether it is a fact that, although no railwaymen came out on strike at Port Elizabeth or Uitenhage, Mr. Bernicott, president of the Uitenhage branch-of the Railway Society, has either been retrenched or recommended for retrenchment; and, if so, what are the reasons for this action&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>The reply to this question is in the negative.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#burghers_and_the_strike">

<heading>BURGHERS AND THE STRIKE.</heading>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. B. MADELEY</person> (Springs)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence: What quantity of arms, ammunition, saddlery, horses, boots and clothing, respectively, for which they have not paid, was taken back by the burghers after the strike&#x003F;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_defence">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF DEFENCE</person> replied:</from>

<p>The offensive implication contained in this question is groundless. (Hear hear.) Members of Defence Force commandoes called to serve for the prevention of internal disorder are being allowed under certain conditions to retain on loan the rifles and bandoliers issued to them. They have been permitted to purchase saddlery, articles of clothing and boots. In many cases cash was paid for such purchases, but in the majority of cases it was arranged that the articles should be paid for by deduction from pay and allowances earned on service. The very great majority of mounted members of the commandoes brought their own horses, and receive no allowance therefor except forage for the number of days the horses were used on service. In the few cases in which horses or transport animals were specially purchased, these animals will be used or sold for the public benefit.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#removal_of_will_restrictions_committee">

<heading>REMOVAL OF WILL RESTRICTIONS COMMITTEE.</heading>

<speech by="#juta">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. H. JUTA</person> (Cape Town, Harbour)</from>

<p>moved: That the Select Committee on subject matter of the Removal of Restrictions under Wills Bill have power to take evidence and call for papers, and consist of eight members.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. H. W. WESSELS</person> (Bechuanaland)</from>

<p>said that he had a few words to say on that motion. The matter was of such importance that they must have the mover on the Select Committee, who was an eminent lawyer of large experience; and a report brought to that House with the hon. member&#x2019;s name attached to it would carry much weight. (Hear, hear) He moved, as an amendment, that the committee consist of nine members instead of eight.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#juta">

<from><span class="col_719-720" refersTo="page_0366"/>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. H. JUTA</person> (Cape Town, Harbour)</from>

<p>said that he hoped the House would not agree to the amendment. He would find it exceedingly difficult to sit on the committee from day to day. It would be better to call him as a witness. He would do all he could by getting together all the information it was possible to get. He thought that would serve the purpose quite as well.</p>

<p>The amendment was negatived.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. H. W. WESSELS</person> (Bechuana-land)</from>

<p>called for a division, but after some minutes withdrew.</p>

<p>The motion was then agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#juta">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. H. JUTA</person></from>

<p>then moved that the Committee consist of Messrs. Keyter, Watermeyer, Oosthuisen, Struben, Boydell, Fawcus, Steytler, and P. G. W. Grobler, the mover to be exempted from service on the Committee.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#south_africa_act_committee">

<heading>SOUTH AFRICA ACT COMMITTEE.</heading>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">E. N. GROBLER</person> (Edenburg)</from>

<p>moved: That Mr. Louw be a member of the Select Committee on Amendment of South Africa Act in the stead of Mr. Merriman.</p>

<p>This was agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#leave_of_absence">

<heading>LEAVE OF ABSENCE</heading>

<speech by="#smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. W. SMARTT</person> (Fort Beaufort)</from>

<p>moved: That leave of absence be granted to Sir James Percy Fitzpatrick, member for Pretoria East, for the present session.</p>

<p>This was agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_a_tennant">

<heading>PETITION, A. TENNANT.</heading>

<speech by="#hunter">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. HUNTER</person> (Durban, Central)</from>

<p>moved: That the petition from A. Tennant, now residing at Wynberg, formerly Collector of Customs of the late South African Republic in Durban, praying that the House may grant him certain arrear salary, or for other relief, presented to this House on February 6, 1913, be laid upon the Table, and, if agreed to, that it be referred to the Select Committee on Pensions, Grants, and Gratuities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#currey">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. L. CURREY</person> (George)</from>

<p>said that as a member of the Pensions Committee he would like to ask the hon. member whether the petitioner had any further evidence, or whether the hon. member had satisfied himself that the petitioner had further evidence. That petitioner had had the same petition before the House last year, when it had been referred to the Pensions Committee, and had been very carefully considered, but the committee had been unable to make any recommendation in the matter. Unless the hon. member could give them the assurance that there was more evidence, it would be setting a very awkward precedent if the same petitions were referred to the committee year after year, and it would give the committee much trouble.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hunter">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. HUNTER</person> (Durban Central)</from>

<p>was understood to say that he had been assured that the petitioner had further evidence. The petition had been presented to the House at the end of last session, and he had then informed the House that he intended to bring it up again this session.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#currey">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CURREY</person></from>

<p>said that he had no objection.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>stated that the petition was upon the Table.</p>

<p>The motion was then agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_g_k_w_burwash">

<heading>PETITION, G. K. W. BURWASH.</heading>

<speech by="#kuhn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. KUHN</person> (Prieska)</from>

<p>moved That the petition from Gertrude K. W. Burwash, a teacher in the Ngqeleni Public School, praying for the condonation of a break in her service, or for other relief, presented to this House on June 5, 1913, be laid upon the Table, and, if agreed to, that it be referred to the Select Committee on Pensions, Grants, and Gratuities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>stated that the petition was upon the Table.</p>

<p>This was agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_p_buck">

<heading>PETITION, P. BUCK.</heading>

<speech by="#meyer">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">I. J. MEYER</person> (Harrismith)</from>

<p>moved: That the petition from Phoebe Buck, president, and others, office-holders and members, of The Local Council of Women, Harrismith, praying that the age of consent may be fixed throughout the Union at 16 years, for certain amendments in the Cape Contagious Diseases Act, and for legislation dealing with the white slave traffic, presented to this House on the 4th inst., be referred to the Government for consideration.</p>

<p>This was agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_c_long">

<heading>PETITION, C. LONG.</heading>

<speech by="#hunter">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. HUNTER</person> (Durban, Central)</from>

<p>moved that the petition from C. Long, of Pietermaritzburg, a retired Civil Servant, who served in Natal and the Transvaal for twenty-nine years until 1909, when he was retired, praying the House to consider the circumstances of his case, and to grant him relief, presented to this House on the 29th February, 1912, be laid upon the Table, and, if agreed to, that it be referred to the Select Committee on Pensions, Grants and Gratuities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>stated that the petition was upon the Table.</p>

<p>This was agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_t_clifford">

<heading>PETITION, T. CLIFFORD.</heading>

<speech by="#hewat">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. HEWAT</person> (Woodstock)</from>

<p>moved, on behalf of Mr. M. Alexander: That the petition from T. Clifford, of Wynberg, a foreman in the South African Railways, who joined the Cape Civil Service on the 28th <span class="col_721-722" refersTo="page_0367"/>of March, 1903, but did not contribute to the Pension Fund until January, 1910, praying that his services for the period during which he did not contribute may he taken into consideration in the calculation of his pension, or for other relief, presented to this House on the 27th May, 1913, be laid upon the Table, and, if agreed to, that it be referred to the Select Committee on Pensions, Grants and Gratuities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>stated that the petition was upon the Table.</p>

<p>This was agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_j_van_der_werf">

<heading>PETITION, J. VAN DER WERF.</heading>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">L. GELDENHUYS</person> (Vrededorp) moved:</from>

<p>That the petition from J. van der Werf, of Vrededorp, a carpenter, who, while proceeding through Commissioner-street, Johannesburg, during the Witwatersrand Disturbances in July, 1913, was shot in the leg, praying that the House may take his case into consideration and grant him relief, presented to this House on the 18th instant, be referred to the Government for consideration.</p>

<p>This was agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#petition_m_j_greeff">

<heading>PETITION, M. J. GREEFF.</heading>

<speech by="#hewat">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. HEWAT</person> (Woodstock) moved:</from>

<p>That the petition from M. J. Greeff, of Salt River, formerly employed as a labourer in the Salt River Workshops, who sustained an injury whilst on duty, praying that the House may consider the circumstances of his case and grant him relief, presented to this House on the 20th May, 1913, be laid upon the Table, and, if agreed to, that it be referred to the Select Committee on Pensions, Grants and Gratuities.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>stated that the petition was upon the Table.</p>

<p>This was agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1914-02-24T14:51:00">2.51 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

