---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol14 - WEDNESDAY 6 May 1914'
layout: debate
year: 1914
month: MAY
month_slug: May
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>WEDNESDAY, 6th May, 1914.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the chair at <recordedTime time="1914-05-06T14:00:00">2 p.m.</recordedTime> and read prayers.</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#petitions">

<heading>PETITIONS.</heading>

<speech by="#watermeyer">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">E. B. WATERMEYER</person> (Clanwilliam),</from>

<p>from C. Pretorius, formerly a foot constable, for a pension.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#king">

<from><span class="col_2243-2244" refersTo="page_1128"/>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. G. KING</person> (Griqualand),</from>

<p>from T. K. Pierson, messenger of the Court, Ngqeleni, for a pension.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. M. BROWN</person> (Three Rivers),</from>

<p>from landowners and farmers in Alexandria and Bathurst, for construction of a railway from Alexandria to a point on the Graham&#x2019;s Town&#x2014;Port Alfred line.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_eeden">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. W. VAN EEDEN</person> (Swellendam),</from>

<p>from inhabitants of Heidelberg (Cape) for legislation providing for the Direct Popular Veto.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#schoeman">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. SCHOEMAN</person> (Oudtshoorn),</from>

<p>a similar petition from Oudtshoorn.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_eeden">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. W. VAN EEDEN</person> (Swellendam).</from>

<p>from residents of Swellendam, for removal of the &#x201C;colour bar&#x201D; from the Transvaal Mines, Works and Machinery Regulations.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#neethling">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. M. NEETHLING</person> (Beaufort West),</from>

<p>from inhabitants of Beaufort West, for legislation prohibiting the cession by prospective heirs of their inheritances.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. B. HEATLIE</person> (Worcester),</from>

<p>from residents of Worcester, for removal of the &#x201C;colour bar &#x201D; from the Transvaal Mines, Works, and Machinery Regulations.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#neethling">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. M. NEETHLING</person> (Beaufort West),</from>

<p>similar petition from Prince Albert.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. B. HEATLIE</person> (Worcester),</from>

<p>similar petition from De Doorns.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#heatlie">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. B. HEATLIE</person> (Worcester),</from>

<p>similar petition from Robertson.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#laid_on_table">

<heading>LAID ON TABLE.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>Reports of the Surveyors-General of the various Provinces for 1913.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#prevention_of_cruelty_to_animals_bill">

<heading>PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS BILL.</heading>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#in_committee">

<heading>IN COMMITTEE.</heading>

<p>The House resumed in Committee on the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Bill.</p>

<p>On clause 7, When police officer may destroy any animal,</p>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. W. GROBLER</person> (Rustenburg)</from>

<p>moved in sub-section (1), line 48, to omit all the words after &#x201C;summon&#x201D; down to &#x201C;surgeon &#x201D; in line 50, and to substitute &#x201C;two owners of land resident in the neighbourhood of the place where the animal was found and if such owners of land.&#x201D; To omit sub-section (2). In sub-section (3), line 1, on page 6, to omit &#x201C;any veterinary surgeon&#x201D; and to substitute &#x201C;the said owners of land.&#x201D; He withdrew the amendment which he had previously moved.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alberts">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. J. ALBERTS</person> (Standerton)</from>

<p>thought the acceptance of the amendment might be unfair towards veterinary surgeons. A good deal of money had been spent to make able veterinary surgeons of sons of the country, and he thought the amendment practically meant a blow in the face of these people.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. W. GROBLER</person> (Rustenburg)</from>

<p>said the amendment only aimed at saving owners of cattle a good deal of expense. A practical farmer, he held, was quite able to say whether or not an animal should be destroyed. Veterinary surgeons would not be detrimentally affected.</p>

<p>The amendments proposed by Mr. P. G. W. Grobler were agreed to.</p>

<p>The clause as amended was agreed to.</p>

<p>On clause 9, Police officer&#x2019;s power to enter places where animals are kept,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. W. GROBLER</person> (Rustenburg),</from>

<p>moved the insertion of the word &#x201C;European&#x201D; before &#x201C;police officer,&#x201D; and in the same line to omit &#x201C;without&#x201D; and substitute &#x201C;under. &#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">M. ALEXANDER</person> (Cane Town, Castle) said</from>

<p>that the hon. member ought surely to know that cruelty to animals was not a question of colour. According to the amendment only a European police officer could act in these circumstances. They were going to cause a great deal of trouble by putting in this colour discrimination, because they would limit the operation of the Bill. Surely the hon. member ought to rest satisfied with the safeguards which were provided in clause 6.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. W. GROBLER</person></from>

<p>said that he would like to hear the views of the Minister of Justice on the matter. If the Minister could give him the assurance that only white policemen would be allowed to search premises he would withdraw his amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>&#x2020; The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person></from>

<p>said that, in the present circumstances of the administration, native policemen were not allowed to arrest Europeans, or to search premises. He could not give the assurance that that rule would never be departed from, but it was not the practice.</p>

<p>The amendments were withdrawn.</p>

<p>On clause 7,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person></from>

<p>said that he had omitted to put certain amendments which had been proposed on clause 7. One of these was an amendment by the hon. member for Standerton (Mr. Alberts) to delete the proviso to sub-section (1).</p>

<p>The amendment was agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#chairman">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">CHAIRMAN</person></from>

<p>then put an amendment moved by the hon. member for Wodehouse (Mr. Venter) to delete sub-section (3).</p>

<p>The &#x201C;Noes &#x201D; were declared to have it. The amendment moved by Mr. Van Niekerk dropped.</p>

<p>On clause 9, Police officer&#x2019;s power to enter places where animals are kept,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_niekerk">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. A. VAN NIEKERK</person> (Boshof)</from>

<p>proposed to delete &#x201C;without any&#x201D; for the purpose of substituting &#x201C;with a&#x201D; in the <span class="col_2245-2246" refersTo="page_1129"/>words, &#x201C;A police officer may, without any search warrant.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mentz">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. MENTZ</person> (Zoutpansberg),</from>

<p>said that as that provision was already laid down in the existing law, the amendment was unnecessary.</p>

<p>The amendment was negatived.</p>

<p>The clause was agreed to.</p>

<p>On clause 10, Arrest without warrant,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. W. GROBLER</person> (Rustenburg)</from>

<p>moved to insert at the end of the clause, &#x201C;provided that a European may be so arrested only by a European police officer.&#x201D; He said that if the clause remained as it stood a European might at any time be arrested by a native police officer. He, therefore, moved that the arrest of a European could only be effected by a European police officer.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rockey">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. ROCKEY</person> (Langlaagte),</from>

<p>accepted the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">M. ALEXANDER</person> (Cape Town, Castle)</from>

<p>said he thought that, after the explanation of the Minister of Justice, the hon. member would not have pressed his amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">GROBLER</person>:</from>

<p>This is not the same case.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>It is a different amendment, but it is on exactly the same lines as the other. If you put a clause Tike this on the Statute-book you are introducing a colour discrimination which will do a lot of harm.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kuhn">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. KUHN</person> (Prieska)</from>

<p>said that the clause went too far, as it gave a police officer the right to arrest a man for the ill-treatment of an animal. A police officer should have the right to ask the address of such a person, but should go no further. He intended to vote against the clause, and if need be call for a division.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#steytler">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. L. STEYTLER</person> (Rouxville)</from>

<p>urged that a man who ill-treated an innocent animal should be arrested. He therefore supported the clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#joubert">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. J. J. JOUBERT</person> (Lydenburg),</from>

<p>whose rising was greeted with cheers, asked what would become of the animals in charge of a man if the owner were arrested. Whilst the owner was under arrest they would be left to their fate. He supported the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. W. GROBLER</person> (Rustenburg)</from>

<p>said that the clause provided that where a man ill-treated his animals the police were to arrest him at once. There were many coloured police at the Cape, and under that clause they were bound to arrest white persons.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. F. W. STRUBEN</person> (Newlands)</from>

<p>said that in regard to the case mentioned by the hon. member for Lydenburg there was very little chance of the ends of justice being defeated by such a man escaping.</p>

<p>That was just a case where there would be no arrest without warrant. Power was only given in this clause to arrest without warrant where there was a danger of the ends of justice being defeated by delay in obtaining a warrant. He took it that this clause would really apply more in the case of congested areas where it was difficult to know who&#x2019;s who than in the case of a farm.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rockey">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. ROCKEY</person> (Langlaagte)</from>

<p>said that this clause was in the English Act of 1911 and in the Acts of the various Provinces.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kuhn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. KUHN</person> (Prieska)</from>

<p>said he would move that the clause be restricted to urban areas, so as to make it perfectly safe, (Dissent.)</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#louw">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. A. LOUW</person> (Colesberg)</from>

<p>referring to the remarks made by the hon. member for Prieska, pointed to the possibility of a man being asked for his address by a police official giving a wrong name and address. He referred to instances of ill-treatment of animals in the north-west, which he said were so serious that hon. members should agree to the necessity of persons being arrested if they cruelly treated animals. For instance, instead of using a leather band, he knew of a man who made his donkeys pull with wires, and between Oudtshoorn and Prince Albert they could sometimes see the hair of the donkeys in the trees, so badly were the animals treated. The clause was necessary, and the amendment also, as the latter would prevent difficulties.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#geldenhuys">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">L. GELDENHUYS</person> (Vrededorp)</from>

<p>said the people of the Transvaal did not like to see the principle laid down that native policemen should be allowed to arrest Europeans. He knew of cases where this had been done. He entirely agreed therefore with the amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_riet">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. J. W. VAN DER RIET</person> (Albany)</from>

<p>said he thought it was folly to start amending an Act of, this sort. If they wanted a general principle laid down, let them lay it down somewhere else. This would do more harm than good. The amendment was unnecessary and he opposed it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#watermeyer">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">E. B. WATERMEYER</person> (Clanwilliam)</from>

<p>pointed out that grave ill-treatment of animals occurred in various districts where there were many native police officers. In native districts there were only native police. He thought they should not deal with the matter in this manner, and the amendment would only create difficulties.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. DUNCAN</person> (Fordsburg)</from>

<p>said he hoped members would take notice of what had been said by the hon. member for Albany. They had passed a lot of laws without a provision of this sort, and to put it here would do more harm than good.</p>

<p>The amendment was negatived.</p>

<p>Clause 10 was agreed to.</p>

<p><span class="col_2247-2248" refersTo="page_1130"/>On clause 12, Half the fine goes to person laying the charge,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. W. GROBLER</person> (Rustenburg)</from>

<p>moved the deletion of clause 12, which he said could only lead to abuses.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rockey">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. ROCKEY</person> (Langlaagte),</from>

<p>agreed with the proposal.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#serfontein">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. P. SERFONTEIN</person> (Kroonstad),</from>

<p>urged that the clause was unnecessary, and would only have evil effects. He feared that people of bad character would make it their business to bring complaints.</p>

<p>The clause was negatived.</p>

<p>On clause 13, Powers of societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals and its officers,</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#henderson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. HENDERSON</person> (Durban, Berea),</from>

<p>moved the following proviso: &#x201C;Provided always that no certificate shall be required from the Crown Prosecutor before such prosecutions are instituted.&#x201D;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. DUNCAN</person> (Fordsburg),</from>

<p>could not see why the Crown should not prosecute.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_justice">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF JUSTICE</person></from>

<p>said he did not think the hon. member quite understood the effect of the section. It did not provide that the society should prosecute in every case, but it gave the society the chance of instituting a private prosecution when the Crown Prosecutor refused.</p>

<p>The amendment was negatived, and the clause agreed to.</p>

<p>The Committee then reverted to clause 2.</p>

<p>The amendment of the hon. member for Boshof was negatived.</p>

<p>The amendment moved by Mr. P. Grobler was withdrawn.</p>

<p>The clause was agreed to.</p>

<p>The Bill was reported with certain amendments.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#committees_amendments">

<heading>COMMITTEE&#x2019;S AMENDMENTS.</heading>

<p>The amendments were at once considered. On clause 7,</p>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. DUNCAN</person> (Fordsburg)</from>

<p>said he thought the amendment of Mr. P. G. W. Grobler in sub-section 3 would make the clause unworkable, as a police officer would have to summon two landowners if an accident happened to an animal which would necessitate its destruction. Suppose an accident happened to a horse in the streets of Cape Town or Johannesburg, a police officer would have to hunt round for two land owners.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mentz">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. MENTZ</person> (Zoutpansberg)</from>

<p>moved the insertion of the word &#x201C;or &#x201D; so that the phrase would read: &#x201C;Veterinary surgeon or two landowners,&#x201D; so that if anyone had no confidence in a veterinary surgeon he could look up two landowners, and in line 50 after &#x201C;surgeon&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;or such landowners".</p>

<p>The amendment made in Committee was negatived.</p>

<p>The amendment of Mr. Mentz. was carried.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person></from>

<p>put the insertion of the words &#x201C;the said owners of land"</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#watermeyer">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">E. B. WATERMEYER</person> (Clanwilliam),</from>

<p>moved, as an amendment to this amendment, before &#x201C;the said&#x201D; to insert &#x201C;or &#x201D;.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>The amendment as amended was agreed to.</p>

<p>The remaining amendments made in Committee were adopted.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#third_reading">

<heading>THIRD READING.</heading>

<speech by="#rockey">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. ROCKEY</person> (Langlaagte),</from>

<p>moved that the Bill be read a third time.</p>

<p>The motion was carried, and the Bill was read a third time.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#removal_or_modification_of_restrictions_on_immovable_property_bill">

<heading>REMOVAL OR MODIFICATION OF RESTRICTIONS ON IMMOVABLE PROPERTY BILL.</heading>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#second_reading">

<heading>SECOND READING.</heading>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. W. GROBLER</person> (Rustenburg),</from>

<p>in moving the second reading of the Removal or Modification of Restrictions on Immovable Property Bill, said he wished to refer to the main points of difference between the present Bill as amended in Select Committee and that originally introduced. In the present measure the reasons for allowing the removal of restrictions from the Bill were clearly stated. The Bill gave the court power to remove restrictions on four grounds. The first reason was that the property was so small that it could not be beneficially occupied by the beneficiaries, or that the land, although not too small for the present owners, might be too small for their successors, or that the land might not be beneficially occupied owing to there being a provision in the will against sub-division, or in the case of circumstances having arisen which the original testator could not possibly have foreseen. Cases frequently arose in the Transvaal of mineral bearing land not being alienable owing to restrictions placed in the will, and the natural resources of the country had to be allowed to go to waste. It was laid down in the Bill that if the court allowed the restrictions to be removed on the first ground that land bought with the proceeds of the property sold would be placed under the same restriction as the original property. If no land were bought similar restrictions would be placed upon the proceeds of the money in any way it might be invested. The only difference that was introduced in that respect was where it was found that the land was not sufficient to maintain all the heirs it might be subdivided. In the previous Bill it had been <span class="col_2249-2250" refersTo="page_1131"/>provided that before the court had power to grant an order for the removal of any restrictions in the will, the report of the Master was required. It was now laid down that reports might be obtained from the Master or from any other competent person. This change was made in view of the evidence given by several lawyers before the Committee, who pointed out that frequently the advice of practical farmers would be of more value than that of the Master. A further provision was contained in the Bill to enable the proceeds of the sale of land to be invested, not only by the Master, but by any other person authorised by the court. This provision was inserted because there was a disinclination on the part of the master to invest money for long periods, and also because private investors frequently claimed a higher interest. The right was given to anyone interested in the land to appeal against the decision of the court, without having to ask for leave. The provision in the original Bill that all applications to have wills set aside be made before three judges had been deleted on practical grounds, as it was frequently difficult to obtain a full court, and the Committee was also influenced in making this change by the fact that the court would not have to decide questions of law, but questions of fact. He thought it would hardly be necessary for him to refer at any length, to the principles of the Bill, seeing that they had on more than one occasion received the approval of the majority in that House. He had no doubt there would be some hon. members who would object to the principle of the Bill, but he did not believe that there was anybody who denied that this change was necessary. He had had numerous letters from people in the country, and several eases of hardship had been brought to his notice where people had been plunged into poverty. The Transvaal Indigency Commission had strongly recommended to the Parliament of that Colony that wills should be set aside in cases where their provisions were found to inflict hardship upon the beneficiaries, and the Select Committee of that House which was appointed last year to consider the question of poor whites had also made reference to this question, and urged an amendment of the law. He thought there could be no doubt some change was desirable which, while being safe in practice, would be able to operate in case of hardship. It was frequently found that wills imposed undue burdens upon legatees, but Parliament was the most unsuitable body to decide such questions. Private members had few opportunities to introduce Bills; the expense entailed was very heavy, and, most important of all, members seldom had the opportunity of going fully into the merits of the cases on which they were asked to adjudicate. The court would be able to do the work much more satisfactorily than Parliament, and the cost of the applications would not be anything like so expensive as the promotion of a private Bill. During the past two years two Select Committees had considered this question, and had heard the views of the most distinguished lawyers in the country. The only witness who was opposed to the principle of the Bill was the President of the Cape Law Society, and even he admitted that some change was necessary. He hoped members who were in favour of the Bill, but objected to any specific provision, would assist him to pass the second reading, as they would have the opportunity of moving any amendments they desired in committee, in particular if they objected to any of the grounds upon which the court was empowered to intervene. He wished to express his thanks, as well as the thanks of the Select Committee, to the hon. member for Cape Town, Harbour (Sir H. H. Juta), and to Senator Schreiner, for the assistance they had rendered, and for the useful suggestions they had made.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. F. W. STRUBEN</person> (Newlands)</from>

<p>said that, as one of the members of the Select Committee, he might briefly explain the provisions and objects of this Bill, for the benefit of those members more particularly who had been unable to follow the hon. member for Rustenburg. The remarks of the hon. member for Rustenburg, in regard to the Indigency Commission&#x2019;s report in the Transvaal, opened up a very big question, which he (Mr. Struben) thought it would be most inadvisable for the House to go into, if they wanted to get this Bill through, and that was the question of whether the rights of testators to devise their property for the benefit of their descendants should be restricted, that was, whether any rule such as obtained in England against perpetuities, enabling a person only to devise property for a life or lives in being and 21 years thereafter, should be brought in in the Union of South Africa, where the law as at present obtaining was that a man may devise his property for generations succeeding him in such a way that for at least four generations in the ordinary course it would hold good, and for longer, if he put in perfectly clear language showing that that was his intention. The committee confined itself strictly to certain specific points, and it had devised a Bill in substitution for the former Bill, which was in very wide terms. This new Bill strictly defined the cases, and the only cases in which the court should have the right to interfere as between the testator and the beneficiaries under his will or other instrument. That meant that there was no ruthless interference with the testator&#x2019;s wishes proposed in this Bill at all. It followed the lines of a letter which was written to the Clerk of the House by Mr. Justice Rose-Innes, who remarked that it might be necessary to lay down with more precision the principle which should guide the court and the lines on which it should go in apportioning the proceeds of the property. <span class="col_2251-2252" refersTo="page_1132"/>The Select Committee confined itself to strictly defining the cases with which the court should deal, and, in the second place, to dealing with what should happen to the proceeds of any property forming the subject of an order of court. He knew there was a conflict between certain sections on the lines he had suggested, viz., as to the question of the limitation of the rights of testation or the leaving open of the rights of testation, and the committee had agreed upon a course between the two. In the first place, the courts would have the power to deal with wills or other instruments where the shares were so small that the beneficiaries could really get no beneficial user from the property which was supposed to have benefited them under the terms of the will or other instrument. He might say that this Bill proposed to deal with wills and other instruments, but, as a matter of fact, the only other instruments that would be dealt with would be deeds of gift. They had evidence that an estate had worked out in such a way that each of the beneficiaries of a certain disposition was entitled to about 2&#x00BD;d. as his share of the proceeds. In that case it was proposed that the court should have the right to step in and say that this matter was working out to an absurdity, and the court would make such order as would allow some practical benefit to proceed to somebody. Then there was the case where, although the property might not be too small for those actually in possession, it would be too small for any real use or benefit to accrue to those next in succession. He expected that it would be on this clause that they would have some opposition, if any at all. He did not think that this clause was sufficiently dangerous to merit serious opposition. If a man devised his property to eight children and each of those children were to marry and each to have eight children, in the second generation they would have 64 persons as beneficiaries under that will. In a case of that sort, although the property might be big enough for the eighty it was proposed in the sub-section that if it were proved that the property would be too small, if divided amongst the 64, the court could step in and say that the property should be sold and the proceeds invested or made available in another form.</p>

<p>In the third case it was provided that the court should consider applications dealing with matters where there was prohibition against sub-division of the property left by a testator. A case that was quoted was where there were a good number of beneficiaries under a will, none of whom was able to take up a scheme, say, of irrigation. The property, being subject to this prohibition against sub-division, must be used and developed as a whole, while, if it were allowed to be sub-divided, very much better use might be made of those portions In that case it was proposed that the court should have the power to say that it was to the advantage of the beneficiaries to allow a sub-division. The fourth case, which would conclude the powers of the court in cases that they might deal with, was where circumstances unforeseen by the testator had since arisen, making it almost certain that, if he had known the circumstances, he would have made other provision than was actually made in the will. As an example, an estate was left under certain conditions. Some years after that a diamond mine was discovered on the property. Under the conditions of the will it was absolutely impossible to develop that if the terms of the will were strictly enforced, and although it might give great advantage to the owners of that property to have some alteration made in the conditions of the will, unless the court had power, all that benefit would be kept away from the persons obviously intended to be benefited by the testator. Only if proof were given to the satisfaction of the court would the court have power to step in and make alterations. The powers given to the court were to order a sale in whole or in part. Now he came to deal with the question of the proceeds of the sale if the court were allowed to order a sale. He wished hon. members to realise here again that the object underlying this Bill was that it was a first principle that the proceeds of any sale ordered by the court should be re-invested or held in trust on exactly the same terms as those laid down by the testator in his will or other instrument governing the property in question. Hon. members would see that the money would not be squandered or frittered away or diverted to other purposes than those contemplated by the principal. He thought that ought to allay the fears of a good many hon. members. It was only in cases covered by the first sub-section where the shares of any of the beneficiaries in being at the time of making the application were so small that they could not be beneficially occupied or enjoyed by those holding such property that the court could order that there should be a distribution of the proceeds of the sale, for the reason that the amount was so small that an investment of the money would be practically useless. The next principle underlying the Bill was that the machinery under which applications were to be made was to be as economical as possible and with that in view the Bill proposed that the court should be the Provincial or Local Division of the Supreme Court, with a right of appeal to the Appellate Division, if a person felt aggrieved by any order made. The procedure would not be by action, which was a more expensive form than the one proposed, but in the ordinary course it would simply be upon petition before a court which should have the power to call for further evidence, oral evidence, in the more difficult cases, or refer matters to a magistrate or some commissioner appointed to take evidence and report. In every case wherever possible the remedy proposed under the Bill was cheap and equally available to poor persons, <span class="col_2253-2254" refersTo="page_1133"/>who were mainly contemplated under the Bill, as it would be to other persons. This Bill, if it passed, must refer to wills or other instruments already in existence. Evidence was given before the Select Committee to show that at the present moment there were cases of great hardship which ought to be dealt with by any Bill passed by this House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. B. WESSELS</person> (Bethlehem)</from>

<p>said he rose to support this Bill with a certain amount of scruple, because he came from a good old stock of Dutch people who always felt that it was a holy principle not to alter a will or the conditions of a will. He had been bred and brought up under the belief that a man&#x2019;s will was one of those sacred documents which it was not the desire of the testator that any law-maker or anybody outside his own home should interfere with. If an attempt had been made to put the Bill through the House as it was originally introduced he would have strenuously opposed the measure, because the phraseology of the Bill was such that he was not sure of the legal effect of the various provisions. The Bill, however, had gone through the hands of a Select Committee, which had placed before the House some very valuable information on the subject, and having devoured the contents of the Blue Book he had come to the conclusion that the House must support this Bill. As had been pointed out by the hon. member for Newlands, there might be some clauses that all of them might not consider quite sound, but these might be altered when the Bill was in Committee. Generally, so far as the measure was concerned, he thought its provisions were such, now that it had been investgiated by the Committee, that it would be a very wise measure for the House to pass. It was intended to meet the requirements of a country such as South Africa, where they had so many difficulties, especially in connection with the estates. He pointed out that under the old system, a will could not be altered without a private Bill, and after a great amount of money had been spent it was questionable whether the people concerned could get the Bill passed. He pointed out that relatives of his had had bitter experience. It was not intended that the House should pose as a judicial body and pose as an authority on wills. The proper machinery for altering wills and dealing with matters of such vital importance was the judicature of the country. He did not have the fears he originally held that wills would be unnecessarily changed or that the people concerned would be prejudiced.</p>

<p>What could be fairer than the machinery which it was proposed to deal with these matters? If it could be proved that a will could be beneficially changed he said change it, and he thought it right that the court should take upon itself the risk of changing such will in a manner that would be fair and just towards the people concerned and the country in which they lived.</p>

<p>He referred to the wills of the olden days, which were drawn up by the schoolmaster or a clerk with a good handwriting. This person got a printed form, and he filled in things contrary to the first part of the will and contrary to the printed part of the will. He had seen some of the wills drawn up by schoolmasters, and he was very strong on the point. Speaking to one testator, the latter said why should he pay &#x00A3;2 2s. to have a will drawn up when he could get it done for half-a-crown. (Laughter.) Touching be the evil results of some of these ill-drawn wills, he said that when a person was drawn into a net by the drafter of a will who did not understand things it was only fair that there should be some court of appeal to which the will could be taken and the court asked whether in justice and equity those who were to benefit should take the property without the restrictions which were never intended to be placed on the property. There was the question of them explaining to those old staunch Dutchmen, and in that respect they had a pessimistic feeling.</p>

<p>If they told them that the court had the right to alter any will they would have a storm of opposition all over the country, so that it was only fair when explaining the matter to tell these people how far and in what measure the court could alter a will. It would not be fair to say that whatever will was made the court had the right to alter, but it should also be made plain that the court would only change a will after having been satisfied that such change was for the benefit of those whom the testator wished to benefit. Dealing with sub-section (b), he said that if they had any belief in the justice of the court, they would leave the matter in the hands of the court. The hon. member went on to deal with the various provisions of the measure, and touched upon the proceeds of properties sold. That was, he said, a part that was not quite clear to him. If, under the will, property was subject to certain restrictions, he did not see why, when the property was sold, the proceeds should be placed under the same restrictions. He thought an addition should be made to the effect that the court should have the right to give such further relief or make any order it might see fit, and not make a hard-and-fast ride that the proceeds of the sale should be dealt with as the property was proposed to be dealt with under the will. He thought that the provision dealing with the increase of value in property was a very fair proposition. New and improved conditions were required. It did not follow that any will could be torn up if the Bill were passed, as alterations could only be made on the order of the judicial body. He took it that the Bill provided that if the suggested change would be against the wish of the beneficiaries, the application would not be granted by the court. Notwithstanding the high authority of Senator Schreiner, he held that the Bill was a valuable one, and should be passed. Any <span class="col_2255-2256" refersTo="page_1134"/>objections to the measure could be dealt with in Committee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. J. KRIGE</person> (Caledon)</from>

<p>said the previous speaker said he was proud of the stock he came from. But how did the hon. member show his respect for the feelings of that stock? How did he treat the feeling of that stock towards the sacredness of testaments? He (Mr. Krige) regretted being unable to support the hon. member for Rustenburg. Last year he had opposed him on this measure, and he still stood by the attitude he had then taken up. In this country our laws and customs were based on free testamentary disposition. (Hear, hear.) The testaments were sacred to the population. At present only Parliament could alter testaments. That was a wise principle, because it acted towards security and stability when only the highest court in the country could modify the terms of a will. This principle was one which, he held, should be carefully guarded before it was departed from. Had any evidence been laid before the House that a change was fair and necessary? Last year a strong endeavour was made to change the present position. Two orphan masters and the president of the Cape Incorporated Law Society had given evidence before the Select Committee on the Bill. The latter then strongly opposed any change in the present system. They should read the evidence of Mr. Syfret. When last year he (Mr. Krige) objected to the measure then proposed, he was promised that the Government would, if possible, introduce a measure. No Government measure was introduced, but a private Bill was again submitted. And on what evidence was this Bill introduced? One of the witnesses&#x2014;a man for whom he had the greatest respect&#x2014;had said that he would advise the Select Committee to go to the root of the matter, and introduce legislation taking away altogether the power of entailing property. The witness who said this was the hon. member for Cape Town, Harbour (Sir H. Juta).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#juta">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. H. JUTA</person> (Cape Town, Harbour):</from>

<p>No.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person> (continuing)</from>

<p>said another witness. Senator Schreiner, had told the Select Committee that the Court of Appeal should consist of three members, and to be extremely careful before they interfered with the sacred rights of the people. The secretary of the Orphan Chamber, Mr. Steytler, a man of over 70 years of age, a man of great experience, had told the Select Committee that legislation of this kind would be unjust. The evidence which the Select Committee had obtained did not justify the Bill. Legislation had been passed by this House on occasions which the men from the rural districts regarded as unnecessary, but which members had supported, considering it of interest to the community at large. He now appealed to this House not to pass any further unnecessary legislation, especially when it made inroads on the rights of the people. (Hear, hear.) Continuing, Mr. Krige said that as the Bill stood the High Court would have the right to deal not only with immovable property, but with invested moneys, and not only with people now living, but also with future generations. Surely that was a bad principle. This Bill furthermore would apply to a rich as well as to a poor estate. Under that Bill, if thirty people living on a farm failed to get a living out of it then they could go to the court and have the ground sold. Say a man went to court under the Bill, and the court said that ground must be sold and the proceeds distributed. That was done, but in a few years a coal mine or some valuable minerals were discovered on the ground. The owner had sold his rights, and where was he? Furthermore, not only the beneficiary, but even a creditor could apply to the court under the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#grobler">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. W. GROBLER</person> (Rustenburg):</from>

<p>No; read the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#krige">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KRIGE</person>:</from>

<p>Before the Select Committee it was proved clearly that the beneficiary might be used as the instrument of the creditors of the estate. As the railways expanded, so the ground rose in value, and if they ordered the ground to be sold, they were selling the birthrights of the heirs. Mr. Krige then contended that there was no evidence before the House to prove that the people wanted a Bill of this kind. It was legislation of a most important kind. If it was necessary to have legislation of this kind, it should, after careful inquiry, be introduced by the Government. And he therefore moved to delete all the words after &#x201C;that&#x201D; and to insert the words &#x201C;Government be requested to consider the advisability of appointing a Commission during the recess to inquire into the subject matter of the Bill and to submit, if necessary, during next session, such legislation as will attain the object in view.&#x201D; The patent laws and mortgage bond systems of the country were of importance, the hon. member concluded, sufficient to justify the appointment of a small judicial Commission, but this was a matter of far greater importance. (Hear, hear.)</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#juta">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. H. JUTA</person> (Cape Town, Harbour)</from>

<p>said he was afraid that if such statements as the hon. member for Caledon had been making in the House were conveyed to people in the country he could quite agree with him that there would be a great deal of difficulty, and if an hon. member so experienced and learned as he was could so misunderstand the simple provisions of this Bill, then he (Sir Henry) could quite understand that there would be a great deal of misapprehension in the country. (Hear, hear.) Anything more simple than that Bill or anything more remote from the remarks made by the hon. member for Caledon was difficult to imagine. (Hear, hear.) In fact <span class="col_2257-2258" refersTo="page_1135"/>so little was done by that Bill that the objection might be raised against it that it was hardly worth while taking up the time of the House to discuss it. That there were many important principles involved in the inquiry was undoubtedly so, but they were now in the year 1914 living still in the time of the middle ages, when a man was allowed to tie up his property for ever. There might be 1,000 morgen with 50,000 people on it and nobody could interfere with it. The questions that went to the root of the matter were beyond the scope of the Committee. The only question before the Committee was what could be done to deal with the practical present-day difficulties, and there was nothing more misleading than to tell any person in this country that the object of the Bill was to give the courts power to interfere with any condition. That was absolutely incorrect. It was an absolute misreading. The whole object of the Bill was to find a remedy, when it was no longer possible to carry out the intention of the testator. Under our law men could leave property tied up for ever, and after several generations there were so many people upon it that if the land were sold the share of each beneficiary would be small indeed. The hon. member quoted a case where the shares amounted to the magnificent sum of 4d., and no one could move a finger, nor could anything be done with the property. The thing was a perfect farce, and they in that House were to hold up their hands and do nothing because of those &#x201C;terrible principles&#x201D; involved. They were not interfering with the will. What they were doing was to say that, seeing that the conditions of the will could not he carried out, let the unfortunate beneficiaries whom it was intended to benefit have some benefit.</p>

<p>The Bill did not go nearly far enough in his opinion even for the solution of practical present-day difficulties. Something could be done, they could come to that House and no doubt a private Bill for cutting off the entail would be carried out at once, for no legislature would be so wanting in common-sense as to let it continue for ever when there was hardly room for the beneficiaries&#x2019; feet. There would be some expenditure, of course, but instead of that they were saying that the courts should have power, and if it was found the ground was too small to be beneficially enjoyed, the court should deal with the land, and invest the money, unless it was so small as not to be worth it. That was the whole scope of the Bill. It was not a Bill which was going to give the court power to do away with any conditions imposed. If a testator was so eccentric as to tie up the land and say that the heirs for generations should not sub-divide with the result that no one could enjoy the property, surely it was only common-sense to assist those who were intended to benefit. He could not suppose that any testator would have been in his senses when he imposed such a condition. No one should ever tell anybody in this country that the object of that Bill was to prevent testators from imposing a condition or to give the courts of law the power to take away or annul any conditions; the whole object, so far as he could see of that Bill, was that where it was possible no longer to carry out the intentions of the testator, they should be able to go to the rescue and put it to practical use. (Cheers.) Proceeding, the hon. member said there were several objections he had to the Bill so far as drafting was concerned, and to the substance also. He objected to the drafting of the Bill, inasmuch as it dealt with a will or &#x201C;other instrument.&#x201D; It would have been better to say to any restriction imposed by &#x201C;testamentary writing or deed of gift.&#x201D; A contract was another instrument, but it was never the intention of the Committee to give the courts power when two people have made a contract to alter that contract. They should leave no loophole which should allow of conditions being altered in a contract. He could not see why it was restricted to immovable property, for it applied equally whether it was movable or immovable property. He could not see there was any difference.</p>

<p>Continuing, he said they were not proposing to deal with people not yet born, except in the circumstances he had mentioned. Dealing with sub-section (2), he said that in almost all these wills no restriction was placed on the person who enjoyed the life right selling that right. A man with seven or eight children gradually got into difficulties and sold his life right, and, unfortunately, the experience was that it was done without the protection of the court, and he got very little for it. He and his children then had to leave. There was no grosser mistake made than the sentimental idea that if a man left land to nine children, that they were always going to enjoy that land. They did not do it. The father got into difficulties and sold his right, and he and his children had to wander. What did the children do? They also sold their life right for a song, so that the beneficiaries were not on the land at all. What this objection with regard to the creditor was he did not know.</p>

<p>It was not in the Bill, but it might just as well have been in the Bill, because the creditors or the purchasers were on the land now. Why when land was too small to be occupied beneficially could it not be treated so that it did become beneficial to somebody? With regard to sub-section (d), he said he did not profess to know what it meant. He did not see what it did. A plaintiff would go to a court and ask for the restrictions to be taken away, as circumstances had arisen which could not have been foreseen or contemplated by the testator. Who in the world was going to prove what a dead man did not contemplate or could not have foreseen? Supposing land was entailed for the next four generations', and there was a probability of gold being <span class="col_2259-2260" refersTo="page_1136"/>found, and that land could be sold at a very high price. What he wanted to do was to give opportunity for the land to be sold at that very high price, and the proceeds invested again in other land for the benefit of the beneficiaries. Surely not a soul could be prejudiced if that was done.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>It is in the clause.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#juta">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. H. JUTA</person>:</from>

<p>This is quite a different thing. Supposing again, he continued, the land was wanted for an irrigation scheme, and a high price was offered. He did not see how they were going to get it at present. He wanted power given the court to sell the land and put the proceeds into other land. He did not understand what the clause referred to except an earthquake or an eruption. These objections, however, could be met on the Committee stage. It was the same with clause 2. It did not give power to the court to authorise that the money should be re-invested in land; as long as they allowed people to tie up their property for generations, they should at any rate try and observe the intentions of the testator. Otherwise he did not see any objection to the Bill as it now stood. It seemed to do so very little that he felt inclined to apologise to the House for taking up so much of its time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#wessels">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. H. W. WESSELS</person> (Bechuanaland)</from>

<p>said that undoubtedly there were cases where property was tied up by impossible conditions and restrictions, with the result that the heirs could not derive any benefit. Then it was necessary to go somewhere for relief. As the law stood they could come to Parliament, but everybody knew the expense which attached to such proceedings. He must say that the Bill before the House was a great improvement on the production which was put before them on the last occasion. He was surprised that the Minister of Justice put his stamp on the first Bill, because it made such a radical alteration in the law of the country, and the House was entitled to look on the Minister of Justice for guidance. He (Mr. Wessels) knew that during the session the Minister was a very busy man, but there were so many law advisers that they might have considered the measure. He thought that private members should be discouraged from bringing in Bills which made radical alterations in the law of the country. As had been stated by the hon. member for Cape Town, Harbour, the Bill only virtually dealt with restrictions and conditions on landed property, and left other matters severely alone. He thought that if Parliament passed this Bill its intention would be only to concede the rights in extreme cases, where it was proved that the conditions of a will were such that relief must be given. Opinions might differ as to the size of a piece of land which a man might farm successfully. The whole onus was thrown on the court to decide whether a farm was large enough to enable farming operations to be carried on, and Judges, although learned in law, were not always the best authorities where agriculture was concerned. Clause 2 was very useful, as it laid it down that the proceeds of the sale of entailed property must be invested in landed property, and thus to carry out&#x2014; more or less&#x2014;the wishes of the testator. He (Mr. Wessels) would not oppose the second reading, but certain alterations would have to be made in Committee, and he would move then that sub-section (b) of clause 1 be omitted.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#keyter">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. G. KEYTER</person> (Ficksburg)</from>

<p>said he was one of those who did not like testaments to be interfered with, while at the same time he did not like injustice to continue. As the Bill stood, however, he could not vote for it. There were various clauses which he could not agree with; for instance, as a member of the Select Committee he had felt bound to oppose paragraph (b) and some words in paragraph (c). The hon. member for Cape Town, Harbour, had spoken of his experience. Well, he (Mr. Keyter) also had experience. At Ficksburg he knew of cases where sons of testators lived on 200 morgen and made a good living. If these people thirty years ago had been told that they must live there they would have run away. (Hear, hear.) They could not have lived there. How could the court decide then what it would be possible to do in the future? He was prepared to remove anything in the nature of an injustice, but he was not prepared to see testaments as a whole upset. One clause, as it stood, gave the father of nine children, for instance, the right to go to court and say: &#x201C;I have a thousand morgen of ground, which is sufficient for me, but it will not be enough for my nine children.&#x201D; In twenty years&#x2019; time, however, circumstances might have altered so that these thousand morgen would be quite enough for the children. They in this House should not shake the confidence which people had in testaments. He would vote for the second reading of this Bill, but reserved the right, if certain sections remained, to vote against them at a later stage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#venter">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. A. VENTER</person> (Wodehouse)</from>

<p>said he was surprised at the arguments of some hon. members. What would the &#x201C;noble forefathers &#x201D; of the hon. member for Bethlehem have said if they had heard their grandson to-day? The arguments of some hon. members clearly showed that if they once started with matters of this kind they could not see the end of them. Even now some hon. members argued that the Bill did not go far enough. He, for one, held that when they came to deal with such drastic questions as the alteration of wills, Parliament was the right and the only body to make the alterations required. In the Court too many side issues were raised. He could not support the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#steytler">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. L. STEYTLER</person> (Rouxville)</from>

<p>said when a man died there surely still remained <span class="col_2261-2262" refersTo="page_1137"/>the probability of circumstances altering so that the wills became quite impossible. Why should the heirs then be the sufferers through this change of circumstances? It was quite right that in certain cases restrictions which injured the heirs should be removed or modified. The hon. member for Caledon had quoted the evidence of Mr. Syfret, but, like a lawyer&#x2014; (laughter)&#x2014;he had only quoted the evidence here and there. In that evidence Mr. Syfret had referred to instances where hardships might be created, and that witness had said that, although he did not like the idea, he agreed that in such cases of hardships there should be a possibility of relief. He (the speaker) was surprised at the arguments of the hon. member for Caledon, who wanted the measure again to be referred to the Government. After all, they had already had three Select Committees on this subject, and now the hon. member wanted another Select Committee. He hoped hon. members would help in the passing of this Bill. Any details could always be put right in the Committee stage. They all knew how carefully and conscientiously a court of law went into the law, and, therefore, he could see no reason why this Bill should not pass. It was altogether too expensive to have to appeal to Parliament in such cases, and a settlement by the courts would be far cheaper. The courts would not suffer any change to be made unless it was in the interests of the heirs. He intended to support the second reading. Improvements might be effected in Committee.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#kuhn">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. KUHN</person> (Prieska)</from>

<p>said that last year he had strongly opposed the principle of altering testaments. That principle he still held. But after having listened to all arguments, he held that not one iota or title of a man&#x2019;s right was taken away in regard to his will. On the other hand, a certain amount of security was given to the heirs, who would be enabled by this Bill to exist. After all, a will was made for the benefit of the heirs, and no change would be made in a will except in their interest and at their request. He personally, had recently come into touch with a case where the heirs in an estate could not live on the ground left them, and could not sell. The position was quite untenable. If he thought the Bill aimed at interfering with anyone&#x2019;s rights, he would oppose it; but, after all, the Bill only aimed at benefiting the people concerned. (Hear, hear.) For these reasons he would vote for the second reading.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#vermaas">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. C. W. VERMAAS</person> (Lichtenburg)</from>

<p>said if ever a good Bill had been drafted, it was the one at present before the House. He personally knew of cases where an absolutely impossible state of affairs had been created by the provisions of a will, and where dead men&#x2019;s bones were figuratively taken out of their graves. When there were many heirs on one farm the strongest man was usually the master. He intended to vote for the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#watermeyer">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">E. B. WATERMEYER</person> (Clanwilliam)</from>

<p>said he went into Committee feeling very strongly that there was a very great prejudice among their people having their testamentary dispositions interfered with in the slightest way. On one side there were difficulties with regard to testamentary dispositions, difficulties which must be removed; and on the other side the only alternative when they wanted to remove the difficulty was that the only course open to beneficiaries who wanted to appeal was to come to this House. What they had to consider was whether there was not another course. They discussed the matter in Committee, and the underlying feeling was that where difficult circumstances had arisen it should be in the discretion of the court to consider those matters and if necessary alter or modify the will. The hon. member for Cape Town, Harbour, had said that the Bill did not go far enough. There were other matters which ought to be assisted, but they thought in this Bill they ought only to go so far as to remedy matters where circumstances had arisen which had brought them to such a pass that if the testator were alive he would be the first to want to remedy the matter. Many of those circumstances were caused by the slipshod way in which the will had been drawn up in the first place. There was a clause often put in which the old legal practitioners introduced, and schoolmasters and others had followed one upon another and had continued to put in, that no master or other official was to interfere in the estate in any way. Proceeding, he said he was surprised at the mode in which the Bill had been received by the hon. member for Caledon. who had tried to make out that the Bill would interfere with a man&#x2019;s right to testamentary disposition, but it did not interfere. What the Bill did was to provide that where difficulties had arisen, where it was unjust to the beneficiaries for that state of affairs to continue, the court should have the right to step in. The hon. member quoted an instance where such circumstances had arisen, and went on to say that the opposition to the Bill by the hon. member for Caledon and that of the hon. member for Bechuanaland arose from the fact that they did not like to see a Bill brought in, which would have a far reaching effect, by private members. It would be a good thing if the Government would appoint a Commission so that they could go into these matters of testamentary disposition with a view to finding a law which would meet all cases without interference, for they must not interfere with a man&#x2019;s right to testamentary disposition. If they tried to do that in this country they were bound to fail. He supported the Bill without fear that it would encroach upon the sacred rights of testamentary disposition, and thought it was as necessary as any Bill which had been before the House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#rademeyer">

<from><span class="col_2263-2264" refersTo="page_1138"/>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. M. RADEMEYER</person> (Humansdorp)</from>

<p>said he knew of a case where an estate which Some years ago was worth &#x00A3;7,000 was now worth &#x00A3;30,000. A Bill of this kind opened the door to any estate being dealt with by the Courts. Since he had been in Parliament very few cases dealing with testaments had been brought before them, in fact in the last fifteen years he remembered only one case. The Bill, he remarked, was based on Socialistic lines&#x2014; it was a line which aimed at protecting the minority and damning the majority. Not five per cent, of the population would make use of the Bill if it were passed into law, and in his own district he only knew of one case where it would be used. He was opposed to legislation of that kind. He would support the amendment of the hon. member for Caledon, and hoped the Government would look into the matter.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#becker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. C. BECKER</person> (Ladismith)</from>

<p>said that last time he spoke in favour of the Bill, and he still supported the better measure that had come from the Committee, and thought the House would be doing wrong if the Bill was not passed that session. He touched on cases of wills in his district which had only brought poverty because of impossible conditions, and he thought they should do their best to get he Bill through that session. (Hear, hear.)</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#marais">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. G. MARAIS</person> (Hope Town)</from>

<p>said the whole country should be grateful to the hon. member for Caledon for his impartial opposition to the Bill, because there was no doubt but that it was to the interest of every law agent to support the measure. He (the speaker) wished to support the amendment most heartily, as he held that the subject matter of the measure should be inquired into by the Government. The hon. member went on to refer to the argument used by several hon. members in the past that the large farms should be made smaller. But now that this was being brought about they suddenly saw objections raised. It was in the interest of everyone concerned that the alteration of testaments should be dealt with by the highest Court in the land. If the Bill were passed it would provide plenty of work for the Courts.</p>

<p>The debate was adjourned until May 13.</p>

<p>Business was suspended at 6 p.m.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#evening_sitting">

<heading>EVENING SITTING.</heading>

<p>Business was resumed at 8 p.m.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#laid_on_table">

<heading>LAID ON TABLE.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_native_affairs">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF NATIVE AFFAIRS</person>:</from>

<p>Papers and correspondence relating to the proposed reservation for Church and School purposes of sites in Native areas in Natal (1 to 26).</p>

<p>The papers were referred to the Select Committee on Native Affairs.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_estimates">

<heading>THE ESTIMATES.</heading>

<p>The debate on the motion that the House should go into Committee on the Estimates was resumed.</p>

<speech by="#haggar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. H. HAGGAR</person> (Roodepoort)</from>

<p>said his self-respect compelled him to challenge a reply given to a question of his on the previous day by the Minister of Railways and Harbours. Something like a week ago he had raised a question in the House and received a reply. He did not blame the Minister for the reply, but he wished to say that he had repeated the question yesterday because he knew from evidence in his possession that the first reply was untrue in principle, and in general detail&#x2014; the answer was in conflict with the answer given a week before. At least it was not possible that both were true.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I think the hon. member is going a little too far. He can say that the reply was incorrect, but not that it was untrue.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#haggar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAGGAR</person>:</from>

<p>Then I will say that in general and in detail that it was incorrect and not in accordance with facts. Continuing, he said that in his reply yesterday the Minister took advantage of his position to deliver a lecture which, in the opinion of members who did not sit on the cross benches, was nothing less than a gratuitous insult.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. B. MADELEY</person> (Springs):</from>

<p>And impertinence.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#haggar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. H. HAGGAR</person> (Roodepoort),</from>

<p>continuing, said that when he had been guilty of a breach of good manners it would be time for the Minister to tell him so. As a member of that House he had a right and in the interest of the nation it was his duty to Speak on behalf of men, especially railwaymen, who could not speak for themselves. For sixteen years he had travelled on the railways of the country and had never seen a railway servant with one exception who was discourteous. The person concerned in the matter mentioned by him had made no complaint, but he (the hon. member) had a number of friends, commercial travellers, who had supplied him with the information, and he could supply their names. Again, yesterday he (the hon. member) had mentioned that the young ladies in the restaurants on the railways were paid 1s. 10d. a day for Sunday work. That was incorrect; they only received 1s. 5d.&#x2014;something like half their ordinary pay. It was surprising that they had to wait until a question was brought before the House to get their dues. They also, according to Regulation 57 should not pay to the sick fund, unless they received 4s. 6d. a day, yet they were compelled to pay. These unprotected women were deliberately being wronged. He expressed the hope that members would <span class="col_2265-2266" refersTo="page_1139"/>in future receive the same courtesy from Ministers as they did from the Chair. Resuming the debate on the Estimates, he said it was not surprising the expenditure was so great, when the revenue was being absorbed and squandered in directions from which they got no return. On the other hand, they had appalling poverty, and no action was being taken.</p>

<p>The amendment of the member for Georgetown was a severe indictment against Government, Parliament, and the country; all were to blame.</p>

<p>He wanted the Government, if possible, to look at our position from the standpoint of civilisation. Wise men told them that, in proportion as Government was really civilised and placed upon a sound foundation, in that proportion would Government be self-sustaining. Civilisation implied government, but a Government that had to be kept up by opportunism and by unjust proposals was not worth the name. The Minister of Finance the other afternoon told them that, in order to secure stability and security, they must have solid foundations. He (Mr. Haggar) asked where were those foundations to-day? We had no security of any kind in this country. No working-man had the security of a single week that he would be in a position to earn his bread and meet the social responsibilities that we imposed upon him. No financial house, no business house, felt secure. The Minister of Finance had laid down as his Starting-point that we must consider the interests of the country as a whole. He complimented the hon. gentleman upon this new departure. So far so good, but so far, and so far only, did he venture. He (Mr. Haggar) had looked through the history of this Parliament, and he could rarely find one single look in the direction of solving a real national problem. Did the Government, in spite of their word, still cling to the idea that there was only one section of the country which was to be considered, and that all the other sections were to look after themselves, or not be looked after at all? It was because the economic foundations of this country had either been laid with rotten wood, or not laid at all, that we were in such a hopeless muddle. Take the social outlook. The social outlook to-day was absolutely hopeless in the main, yet the very hopelessness of that outlook was the only hope he had got. He believed they would find society before long deciding that that which it could not secure by patient waiting, it would rise and take by sheer force and determination. Wherever they found large communities, what else did they find? They found there was revolt in the heart, fire on the tongue, war in the eye, everywhere they found parched lips drawing the milk of bitterness from breasts which were burning with hate, and we sat and looked idly on, as if there were nothing to be surprised at or stirred by.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_industrial_outlook">

<heading>THE INDUSTRIAL OUTLOOK.</heading>

<p>Take the industrial outlook. The industrial outlook was desperate. (Cries of &#x201C;Hoor, hoor.&#x201D;) Hon. members said &#x201C;Hoor, hoor.&#x201D; What did they know about the industrial outlook? How many of them on the Government side of the House had seen starving men and starving women? How many of them either knew or cared anything about the social conditions of South Africa? Did they know that from 8,000 to 10,000 would-be industrious men in the towns of South Africa were without any work to do?</p>

<speech by="#hon_members">

<from><person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBERS</person>:</from>

<p>Why?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#haggar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAGGAR</person>:</from>

<p>It is said that it takes a fool to ask a question and a wise man to answer it. I will tell them why. We know why and they ought to know. Proceeding, he said that this state of things must end. It would either end the Government or be ended before very long. The amendment of his hon. friend contained four propositions. One was that there was an alarming increase of poverty in the Union to-day. Another was that unemployment was pressing us very acutely. The amendment also referred to the departure of men from this country, not immigrants, but emigrants, and it alleged that the main causes of these disastrous conditions were the labour policy adopted and all the attendant circumstances. Where did they find this degrading, this grinding, this depressing poverty? Not so much on the Government side of the House, not with those poor farmers who could afford to buy their magnificent motor-cars. This poverty was at the very place where there ought to be none, at the very base of society. The poverty was found amongst those who would be required to produce the future wealth; required as fathers and mothers; as soldiers and sailors. Thousands of the working-men in this land were as poor to-day as were the working-people of England 500 years ago. To be exact, in the year 1450. A shilling in England then could buy as much as 40s. would buy in England to-day. His point was that there were thousands of poor people in this country, the working-people, the wealth producers, those people upon whom our future must depend, poorer than were the poor people in degraded England 500 years ago. The hon. member for Beaufort West talked about tuberculosis. He wished the hon. member would tell this House that tuberculosis was largely due to poor food and social degradation. Why were these people so poor? It was not because there was any lack of food or because the climate or the country was very niggardly and gave nothing in response to our labour. Adequate food, the means of a decent life, a fair income&#x2014;these things were as impossible to multitudes in this country as if they were shut up behind the bars of a gaol. He wanted to come to the position <span class="col_2267-2268" refersTo="page_1140"/>of the Minister. His own facts and figures told them the other day that the working-people of this country were under a handicap of 230 per cent. as compared with the people of Australia. The minimum wage of the labourer in Australia was 8s. a day. The minimum wage of the labourer in this country was anything down to half nothing. The labourer&#x2019;s wages here, and considered fairly good wages, 4s. a day, were 100 per cent. below the wages of the labourer in Australia. Those were the Minister&#x2019;s words. Rent was 30 per cent. higher and food was 100 per cent. higher. If they took the actual facts, the wages in Australia were 100 per cent. higher, making in all that the working people in this country were handicapped 230 per cent. compared with Australia. This country could produce wheat at a handsome profit. Had members read the report of the Industries Commission? In producing macaroni they must have the finest wheat that was grown. In the Transvaal they were producing finer macaroni than could be produced in any part of Europe, and they could produce it at a profit of from 7s. 6d. to 12s. a bag. In this country they could produce staple food as cheaply as they produced it in Australia. Proceeding, the hon. member said a large quantity of flour was brought to these shores. They were told that the average price of flour in Australia was &#x00A3;7 10s. per ton, and when it reached this country it jumped up to &#x00A3;14 10 s. per ton, and when that flour came back as bread, came back to their houses they had to pay &#x00A3;35 10s. Where did the money go to? On top of that the farmers were asking for an increased duty, so as to bring the price of our bread to &#x00A3;44 10s. per ton. In South Africa, if we wanted to buy meat we had to pay anything from 8d. to 1s., and in Australia it was anything from 2d. to 4d. for a better class. Here, too, butter was anything from 1s. 6d. to 2s., and in Australia, from 5d. to 1s. Was it any wonder that the people of England streamed across there? Was it any wonder the people there were so vigorous and strong, and was it any wonder that here with food so high, so rare and so common in quality in many respects our people were so degraded, so hopeless, and so disinclined to advance?</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#unemployment">

<heading>UNEMPLOYMENT.</heading>

<p>Turning to the question of unemployment, the hon. member said that no one would deny that there was such a thing as the acute pressure of unemployment. Hon. members were going about the country telling the people that if they were to alter this state of affairs the poor people must learn to be industrious and provident and patient until they could lift up themselves. What did the chief labour official state in his report? Men came to the offices and asked for work, but the wages were so disgracefully low that they felt it to be an insult and felt it would degrade them by working for such wages. On the Rand unemployment was caused by that damnable system of blacklisting. It had been going on for years. In the first session of the Parliament he was told by a member of the Government that steps would be taken to prohibit this system; but where was that system against blacklisting? They were worse off than in Russia. Much of that unemployment was caused by deliberate retrenchment. He called attention to a proposition by the hon. member for Port Elizabeth, who had challenged the right of any Government to create unemployment. Retrenchment had caused a frightful lot of unemployment and misery.</p>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member should not refer to that matter. Notice has been given by the hon. member for Springs.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#haggar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAGGAR</person>:</from>

<p>I will not anticipate future discussion. Continuing, he said that that unemployment was much the result of the system, and either they must destroy the system or be prepared to meet the effect which the system caused. Little Holland was the most prosperous country in Europe, comparatively speaking, and had not a single unemployed man. He believed that South Africa could have their black stain wiped out, and he believed if they were allowed to do it, they (the Labour Party) could do it; the Government could within five years arrange that there should not be an unemployed man in the country. Let the Government start great State enterprises, and give those unemployed men a chance to earn their daily bread. Let them take the whole of Europe and the United States of America and they would find that the conclusions were that from 65 to 74 per cent. of the social and industrial misery was due to causes over which the people had no control. The main cause of that misery was unemployment. What was this country doing to meet the poverty that existed? The Prime Minister had said that the House ought to do something, and he asked the Prime Minister to move in the matter.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#saving_millions">

<heading>SAVING MILLIONS.</heading>

<p>Continuing, he said they would require 500,000 acres of land in order to grow their own wheat. What would that mean in implements and other things? Four millions went out of the country every year for food and if they were to start, in five years&#x2019; time not only would they not be sending the money away, but they would be saving three millions a year. If that were done there would not be a single idle man in this country, but they were not going to be slaves at 2s. a day. He referred to the number of sleepers that lay over the country. These could be purchased for fence poles at a tickey a time, and would last another twenty years. Why could not these, together with the <span class="col_2269-2270" refersTo="page_1141"/>rails that were lying about, be taken away to the North-west and light lines laid down? They could be put together by labourers. They would open up the country, open up the land, and they would be able to grow their own food. Yet there were 10,000 idle men in the country, and God knew how much misery for the women and children. But who cared? Men were leaving the country and men were being deported. Why, the Prime Minister told them he was not sure that he had not deported the wrong men. If the Prime Minister had deported him (Mr. Haggar) he would not have been finished with him.</p>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Why?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#haggar">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAGGAR</person>:</from>

<p>I would have appealed to justice and to men who love right. Continuing, he referred to the numbers who were leaving the country, and said that the mining engineers told them that the best men had gone from the Rand. The best men were the men who went and talked and influenced the money market, and when these men went it was no wonder that the Minister found it difficult to raise loans. It was a painful sight to see honest, capable, and intelligent men go over the seas to grow food and sell it to people here at double price. If he spoke as he felt on this subject he would say many nasty things. It was wicked in the last degree that these men, women and children should be driven from their homes. The cause of many of these evils was, as his hon. friend had said, cheap, degraded, and semiservile labour. He referred to the infamous system that obtained in the Province of Natal.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#search_for_cheap_labour">

<heading>SEARCH FOR CHEAP LABOUR.</heading>

<p>Last year, he said, the hon. member for Victoria West presented a report to the House of great value. In the introduction to the report he called attention to the fact that hitherto the Labour policy of this country had been to search the world from China to Peru for labourers willing to take the position of helots, and who would not be troubled by the inconvenient ambition of wanting to better their conditions. That had been the policy of this country in the past, and it was the policy up to the present. History showed than that was a policy that had ruined any country that had carried out that policy. It was the policy of the Progressive Party in the Transvaal, and it was the policy presented to Mr. Chamberlain, and it was the policy of the Industries Commission. What was the point of the report of the Industries Commission&#x2014;more cheap labour. This disgraceful degrading labour had made the few men rich, and these people would turn round and say that they had no room for white men on their plantations. What was the cost to this country? There were the ten millions in dividends. It cost the men who got these dividends very little, but it cost the country a good deal. Dealing with Queensland, he pointed out that 96 per cent, of the sugar was grown by blacks in 1890, while in 1910 96 per cent, was done by white labour. As long as Queensland adopted the cheap labour policy it was very nearly bankrupt, but since it had gone in for white labour the country had gone ahead. In this country they were directly losing &#x00A3;500,000 a year. Last year they purchased sugar to the amount of &#x00A3;345,172. By the time the duty and other charges had been put on it cost nearly half a million. They directly lost that, and when they took the other considerations, there was another half million out of the pockets of South Africa. The Minister had told them that if they were going to start industries on a large scale in that country they would have to pay their artisans. The report of the Industries Commission stated that to do that they must have a constant and large supply of cheap labour. He was glad to see that the Minister had joined the revolutionaries, and he suggested that he should take a leaf out of the book of South Australia, Continuing, he said the country had to look at the enormous amount of money which was being spent annually, and they should consider whether that money was being spent wisely. He was afraid that the Minister was putting the cart before the horse, and that the public were promised more than they would get. They found that alt farming enterprises kicked as soon as they had talked about taxation. A man&#x2019;s income was no measure of his obligation to the Government. One man might derive &#x00A3;2,000 from Consols, money he did not earn; another, a capable merchant might earn &#x00A3;2,000; the obligation was not equal, and the tax should not be equal.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#taxation_of_unearned_increment">

<heading>TAXATION OF UNEARNED INCREMENT.</heading>

<p>If they taxed income and did not distinguish unearned income, they robbed&#x2014; they confiscated. He wanted to know what the Minister meant by unimproved land values. He could understand the value of unimproved land. According to all the economists he had read, all value was due to some improvement. If the Minister were going to start on this, he would ask him to start on the top of Table Mountain, and see how much tax he would get. Had the Minister come forward and said that they were going to tax unearned increment, then he thought they could have gone with him. This unearned increment was not due to the energy or expenditure of the owner&#x2019;s capital: it was due almost entirely to the expenditure on behalf of the community. The Minister proposed to exclude lands from taxation which were beneficially occupied. On what ground? Surely those lands were beneficially occupied for this one reason, that public revenue had been spent upon them, about them, or in connection with them. They held, <span class="col_2271-2272" refersTo="page_1142"/>under present circumstances, that a man who had the use of capital should pay interest. Did it make any difference whether that capital belonged to a private individual or to the State? Every man should be taxed, not according to his means, not according to his ability to pay, but according to the services and benefits he had received from the State. He believed in the maxim that State revenue should all be drawn from State-created sources. What did the Government propose to do to help this country? Would the country resume the land, as it ought to resume the land? Would the Government start on a policy of reproductive work? If it did that, the dark clouds which were hanging over this country to-day would burst, and there would fall a shower of blessing all over the land.</p>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. W. JAGGER</person> (Cape Town, Central)</from>

<p>said that the hon. member who had just spoken had stated that he had never seen a starving man in Australia.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#haggar">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. H. HAGGAR</person> (Roodepoort):</from>

<p>I didn&#x2019;t say that.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Well, what did the hon. member say? He said he had never seen a hungry man in Australia.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#haggar">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAGGAR</person>:</from>

<p>What I said was that I have never seen a hungry mouth in Australia that would not get filled for the asking.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person> (proceeding)</from>

<p>said that that inferred that there was no poverty in Australia. He found from the official Yearbook that they had benevolent institutions in Australia, to which the State in 1911 contributed &#x00A3;218,000. There were four homes for the destitute in Western Australia, supported by public funds. There were many men out of work at this moment in Sydney. The hon. member had also spoken about the production of sugar in Australia, and had compared it with Natal. He (Mr. Jagger) did not want to say anything in defence of the system in Natal, but he would mention that to keep up white labour in Queensland there was a bounty paid of &#x00A3;545,000. The hon. member had given expression to some views on taxation, which, coming from one who claimed to represent the working-classes and the poorer classes in this country, certainly made his (Mr. Jagger&#x2019;s) hair stand on end. He had stated that taxation should not be levied according to a man&#x2019;s income, but for services rendered by the State. (Hear, hear.) What greater service was rendered to any man than the protection of life? Surely it was equally important to the poorest man in the country that his life and liberties should be protected, as it was to the richest. The service was equal to both parties, whether rich or poor. Under the hon. member&#x2019;s doctrine, they would tax the poor just as much as the rich. He (Mr. Jagger) had always been taught that every man in the country had got to make some sacrifice for the benefit of the State, to keep the State going, and, if they accepted that, the only just thing to do was that a man should make that sacrifice in proportion to his income and to his means.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_governments_extravagance">

<heading>THE GOVERNMENT&#x2019;S EXTRAVAGANCE.</heading>

<p>Coming now to the Budget, he wished to say that they had arrived at the time that many of them had expected who had watched the growing expenditure of this country. When they had seen the extravagance of the Government in various directions, for instance, in the direction of the Agricultural Department, and in the matter of Ministers&#x2019; salaries, anybody who looked to the future could see what was coming. He remembered some years ago, when the Union Buildings were under discussion, he pointed out that they had voted on these buildings &#x00A3;1,100,000. The interest on that money was costing this country &#x00A3;44,000 a year. From a return presented to a Committee upstairs there were only 1,000 clerks in those buildings, so that, exclusive of salaries, these clerks were costing the country &#x00A3;44 a year each. Could they be surprised, then, that fresh taxation had become necessary? He knew that Ministers had reduced their salaries by &#x00A3;500 a year, but he would remind them that they were still drawing the highest salaries of most Ministers in the world, higher than Ministers in the United States of America. There was another set of salaries he would like to draw attention to, viz., those of the Administrators. We were paying the Administrators &#x00A3;2,740 a year, including house allowance. Those salaries were extravagant, and they set the pace. Could any member of this House deny that their starting with a policy like that there could be only one result, and that was increased taxation? Notwithstanding the warnings which the Minister of Finance received last year in the shape of a deficit which he covered up, no serious effort had been made in the direction of economy. He had budgeted for an increase of expenditure over last year of no less than &#x00A3;400,000. If they examined the Estimates they would find that the Minister had taken &#x00A3;160,000 for buildings which was now coming out of the loan vote. There were a lot of items in that loan vote which were below &#x00A3;1,000 which in previous years had come out of revenue. Whichever way they looked at it they could see how the Estimates for the present year had grown up to the large extent. They were justified in drawing the inference that no serious effort had been made, to bring about economy in administration. They had to recognise that the gold industry in this country was at present at its zenith. They were to some extent living on their capital. In the Estimates this year no less than 2&#x00BD; millions came out of mining. That meant 15 per cent. of the revenue of the country. Mining <span class="col_2273-2274" refersTo="page_1143"/>was a wasting asset which could hot go on. It was an asset which was getting less every year.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#extravagant_salaries">

<heading>EXTRAVAGANT SALARIES.</heading>

<p>There had been no effort to economise. Let them take salaries. They were spending on salaries according to the Estimates, not taking into account the allowance to members in both Houses and salaries in connection with the Provincial Administration, a total of &#x00A3;5,520,000. Salaries had been increased last year by practically &#x00A3;300,000. After going into details of salaries in the various departments, there were few countries in the world with a population as small as this where they spent as much as they did here on the administration of the country. The hon. member went on to mention a few items which the Government might have cut, or at any rate have gone into. In the case of higher education there were six officials administering &#x00A3;117,000, and the salary list amounted to &#x00A3;4,100. In the Agricultural Department they had appointed a wattle grader at &#x00A3;500 a year, now that this industry had grown up to good dimensions the Agricultural Department had stepped in. There were graders of grain, they had been maintaining them at pretty well every port. The country exported last year &#x00A3;80,000 worth, from Cape Town, and two officials were appointed to look after that. He would like to ask if those officials were fully occupied. He considered their salaries were an extravagance. Why should they not appoint a local man? Then with regard to the angora industry which had been built up by the enterprise of the farmers. Now that it was built up, the Agricultural Department stepped in to teach them something and appointed an angora expert at a cost of &#x00A3;400 a year. In connection with the East Coast fever, having discovered the best remedy was dipping, the Department had got the upper hand and yet they maintained no less than 230 officers at a cost of &#x00A3;36,000. That was in addition to dipping inspectors. What was the use of that? There was also another point, and although it was not on the Estimates it had something to do with the revenue of the country. He referred to guano. We produced last year 6,000 tons which was sold at &#x00A3;5 a ton. That guano was worth &#x00A3;11 a ton and they had literally given away over &#x00A3;30,000 to a certain section of the people of this country. It was the property of the tax payers of the country. What right had they to sell it at less than half the market price? He admitted that it was against the wishes of the Treasury, and he would give credit for that to the Minister of Finance. &#x00A3;30,000 would have gone to reduce the deficit. The hon. member referred to the free services given to the Provincial Administration. Under the Financial Relations Bill last year there was a clause which stated that all stores or materials supplied to any Province should be a liability of that Province.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#unpaid_services">

<heading>UNPAID SERVICES.</heading>

<p>What were the facts of the case? The Provincial Administrations had not yet been called upon for the services rendered by the Union Government. Last year these services amounted to &#x00A3;63,000. which was exclusive of the services rendered by the Public Works Department, which amounted to another &#x00A3;35,000, or a total of about &#x00A3;100,000, which was the cost of the services rendered free of charge by the Union Government to the Provincial Administrations. He knew that they had to pay half, but even if that was done there would have been a saving of &#x00A3;50,000. But that was not all. It was a most unbusinesslike thing to give free services, and it only led to extravagance. When they had to pay nothing for these services it only led to them making bigger demands. He went on to quote the report of the Irrigation Department on this very point. The report stated that the drilling services were a free gift to the Provinces and additional to any subsidies or contributions. The result was that in the Provinces, more especially the Free State, requisitions of an irresponsible nature came in. Most of these were made by subordinate officers, and nothing was done by the Provincial Secretary to justify them. The fact that refusals had been given in many cases had left a certain ill-feeling. The report went on to say that it was almost unnecessary to state that it encouraged waste and extravagance. If this was the case in connection with the Irrigation Department. what must be the case in connection with the other services? The report was dated last year, but the system still went on. There was no change. The Public Accounts Committee last year recommended that these services should be charged for, and his hon. friend knew that up to this time there had been no change. Then he went on to refer to the excessive costs of the department of the Minister of the Interior. What had that department got to do? So far as he could see, they looked after public health, asylums, and immigration, and yet the cost of the administration of this department was no less than &#x00A3;36,250. In his opinion the department was largely overstaffed. He could mention other instances, but he thought he had shown pretty conclusively that there had been no attempt on the part of the Government to economise. Despite the fact that the Government had had to bring forward fresh taxation, despite the fact that to a large extent they were living on capital, and despite the fact that the gold industry was at its zenith, the Government brought before that House increased expenditure. He wanted to turn for a moment to the Estimates, which he thought were on a fairly liberal scale.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#sanguine_estimates">

<heading><span class="col_2275-2276" refersTo="page_1144"/>SANGUINE ESTIMATES.</heading>

<p>Last year the Minister went for him because he said that the Estimates were rather sanguine. Well, he thought he would have to repeat that statement. This year, in so far as the Customs was concerned, the Minister estimated for a decrease of &#x00A3;113,000 without taking into account the new proposals, and posts and telegraphs an increase of &#x00A3;173,000. Last year he had an increase over the estimates in Customs of &#x00A3;103,000, and that was due largely to the large importation of foodstuffs, on which there was a heavy duty. Of course, there might possibly be a further large importation of foodstuffs. He thought there was not the slightest doubt that during the current year the probability was there would be a falling off in imports generally. They could not have drought for two years, and not in some degree reduce the purchasing power of the people. They had also the disturbances on the Rand, which have had a disturbing effect on business, and he thought he was right in saying that ever since January business on the Rand had been on a considerably reduced scale. Then there was the slump in ostrich feathers. Last year they exported ostrich feathers to the value of &#x00A3;2,953,000. Now they had estimated a falling off of 40 per cent, in value, which meant a drop in the purchasing powers of the people of something like &#x00A3;1,200,000. In spite of the reduced purchasing power of the people and the other things he had mentioned, the Minister was budgeting for a fall in Customs receipts of only &#x00A3;113,000. The imports for the last four months showed a falling off of &#x00A3;500,000, and April showed the biggest falling off of the lot. There was no doubt that they had felt a distinct falling off in business since the month of January. From posts and telegraphs the Minister estimated an increase of &#x00A3;173,000. Last year the receipts increased over the previous year by &#x00A3;42,000. He did not see why he should estimate for such a large increase, where the increase was only &#x00A3;42,000 last year. Of course, the Minister might have some information which they had not, but he must say he thought the Minister had estimated for every penny he was going to get; in fact, he (Mr. Jagger) would not be surprised if he found out afterwards that he had overestimated. He did not think that the Minister would get as much from the Customs as he thought.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_taxation_proposals">

<heading>NEW TAXATION PROPOSALS.</heading>

<p>Dealing with the new taxation proposals, the hon. member said he was glad that the Minister had taken steps to remedy in some degree the injustice of the present incidence of taxation in the Union. Under the present system the heaviest burden of taxation was borne by the poorest part of the population. They had to bear the heaviest share of the burden, and, at any rate, the income tax and the land tax was some attempt to remedy the injustice that existed. Continuing, the speaker said he deprecated very strongly any repetition of what had taken place in connection with these proposals. The Minister, in the course of his speech, said he intended to bring forward proposals which would have an effect on Customs revenue, but he did not lay those proposals on the Table. What had been the result? Everybody was on the qui vive, and he (Mr. Jagger) knew of three different speculations that had taken place in sugar, flour, and, he believed, a large transaction in tobacco. These things had a disturbing effect on business, and in many cases he believed the Treasury had been the loser. He did fully agree with the Minister when he said that a protective tariff was not in the highest interests of the country. He also agreed with the Minister when he said they had got to try and help the primary industries of the country, and not handicap them, as was the case with some at the present time. The fruit industry was handicapped by the tax on boxes, while the jam industry was handicapped by the tax on sugar. He also agreed with the Minister that it would be a crime to raise the cost of living in South Africa. The Minister had a good deal to say about the cost of living, and he agreed with him when he said that he thought the cost of living in South Africa was such at the present time that no Government and no Legislature, which had the development of the country at heart, would take steps to make the cost of living higher. One factor in the cost of living in this country was the cost of food, and the report of the Economic Commission showed that the relative cost of food in South Africa was the highest practically of any country of the world. On the Witwatersrand it was put at 100, and the rest of South Africa 90, while the next in order came the United States of America at 80.</p>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What about wages?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>I will deal with that later. Last year they imported food into this country to a value of &#x00A3;6,000,000, and they paid in duty &#x00A3;1,303,000, or 20 per cent. The tax on foodstuffs contributed very largely to the cost of living. The tariff today was not solely a revenue tariff. In this tariff there was a large measure of Protection. The duty on flour and wheat and mealies was 26 per cent. The duty on tea was 36 per cent., and yet the Minister wanted to increase it by a 1d. on small packages.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_white_workers_handicap">

<heading>THE WHITE WORKERS&#x2019; HANDICAP</heading>

<p>Jams and jellies were 51 per cent., sugar 21&#x00BD;, dried fish 29, preserves 17, beef 45 and mutton 37. Then they had biscuits 22 per cent., confectionery 32, prunes 52, currants and raisins 64, dried fruit 42&#x00BD;, common soap 25&#x00BD;, etc. There was thus a very large slice of protection in the tariff as we had it to-day. He did not think there was <span class="col_2277-2278" refersTo="page_1145"/>another country in the world where the evil of dear food was more disastrous in its consequences than it was in this country. The white man was handicapped in his competition for labour in this country, with his higher standard of living than the coloured man had The higher they made the cost of living the more they handicapped the white men. It was absolutely certain that if they were to start factories in this country under existing conditions the labour was going to the coloured man. The Minister of Railways had stated that he was employing between 4,000 and 5,000 white men on the railways, having taken away coloured men for the purpose, at an extra cost of &#x00A3;90,000. He (Mr. Jagger) did not condemn that, but, he asked, why should it be necessary? Simply because the white man had to maintain a higher standard of living than the coloured man. Competition debarred any private employer from pursuing the policy which had been followed by the Minister of Railways. The Minister of Finance knew the right path. He knew the importance of keeping down the cost of living in this country. Why, then, had he not gone a step further? He thought the Minister&#x2019;s proposals were going to increase the cost of living, though, he admitted, not materially, but more than, he believed, the Minister thought. Why had he not, knowing what was the right thing to do, reduced some of the heavy duties on foodstuffs at the present time? His hon. friend might say that he would have lost revenue. He could have made that up by bringing his income tax down to &#x00A3;500. The result would have been that he would have given an enormous impetus to the industries of this country.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#loan_redemption">

<heading>LOAN REDEMPTION.</heading>

<p>With regard to the redemption of loans, he cordially agreed that it was a sound policy to continue the method of redemption which had been followed since Union. We were dependent for our prosperity today upon mining. Eighty per cent. of the exports of this country last year were mining products. That was a decreasing asset and a rapidly decreasing asset. Was it not a sound policy in a case of that kind to reduce our debt or make big efforts in a time like this to reduce our debt? In regard to railways, the Estimates showed a decrease of &#x00A3;129,000 as compared with last year. If they examined those Estimates they would find that they were somewhat similar to the general Estimates of the country. Last year they made a special appropriation for betterment, rates, equalisation, etc., which amounted to a net sum of something like &#x00A3;646,000 more than they had done this year. If they deducted the decrease which was budgeted for in the current year they would see that the actual expenses of running the railways this year were going to increase by something like &#x00A3;517,000. He agreed with what the Minister said, that there were two outstanding features in the figures of last year. There was the decrease of revenue owing to the strike and also an increased expenditure on the railways. There was an increase in working the railways in 1913 over 1909 of something like 58 per cent., whereas the gross earnings showed an increase of 18&#x00BD; per cent. The earnings had, of course, been reduced by reduction of rates and so forth, but if they took the current Estimates as compared with last year, so far as the main services were concerned, they showed an increase of a little over 4 per cent., while the gross earnings for the same period showed a difference of only 1 per cent. The whole tendency showed that the working expenses were increasing much more than the receipts. To-day the percentage of working expenditure to gross receipts had increased on the basis of the present Estimates to something like 75 per cent. That is all put down to two facts, one of increased wages for something like &#x00A3;1,000,000 had been given in increases during the last year or two, and another thing had been the increase in mileage of branch lines, which were worked at a loss. If those increases went on there could only be one result, his hon. friend would have to increase the rates in the near future. He (Mr. Jagger) would be sorry to see that, because he was a great believer in cheap rates, at any rate so far as agricultural traffic was concerned. He did not think a sufficiently tight hand had been kept upon the expenditure. The number of employees on the railway was excessive.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person></from>

<p>(Surprised): The number of employees is excessive?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Yes. What did the Minister&#x2019;s own official say? In the report of the General Manager of Railways for 1911 it was pointed out that the number of employees on the S.A.R. per 100 miles of line was 537, taking three coloured men as being equal to two white men, whereas the number on Australian railways, not famous for economy, was 410. He was aware there had been an increase in the mileage, but he did not think the Minister&#x2019;s increases had been justified; there was a tendency to increase the number of men quite out of proportion to the traffic. Another matter was that of Indwe coal. They could not go on spending money on that coal. They could buy better coal in South Africa. They could go to the Transvaal. the O.F.S., or Natal, and get better coal and cheaper. That matter cost the country between ten and fifteen thousand pounds a year.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#an_amendment">

<heading>AN AMENDMENT.</heading>

<p>What inference could they draw when they saw these transactions? The only inference they could draw was that there was no attempt to keep a check over the expenditure, that there was a tendency to extravagance. He was confident from <span class="col_2279-2280" refersTo="page_1146"/>the facts he had put before the House that the expenditure of this country, both as regards Government expenditure and railway expenditure, was going ahead very fast. It was increasing not only because of the expansion of the country, but because of the tendency to extravagance on the part of the Government. He knew that they had four prosperous years, and, of course, they had an increase in revenue, and had surpluses from the Railway Department. Further, everybody, not only in that House, but outside, had had the idea that the Government had a sort of bottomless purse in which they could put their hands. He was astonished sometimes at the proposals of expenditure put before the House. The only inference they could draw was that the Government had only to nut their hands into their pockets, and they would find the money. As far as he could judge, people had the idea that Government could simply find the money without going to the taxpayer. Under these circumstances what could they expect? There must be a rude awakening, and now the awakening had come. Not a penny which the Government spent but had to come out of somebody&#x2019;s pocket. The taxpayer had always got to find the money. Surely before the Government came before the House and proposed fresh taxation they ought to have carefully revised the expenditure. Surely they ought to have gone through the Estimates. So far as he could judge no effort had been made to reduce the expenditure, and they still went on merrily in the same old way. As far as he had been able to make out no economies had been effected, and the result was that there was an increased expenditure. He was confident that large economies could be made in the expenditure of the country, if they went into these Estimates in a businesslike way. If they did that he thought they would be able to do away with any increase of taxation, especially so far as Customs was concerned. Unless some stop was put to this increase of expenditure within the next two or three years the Minister would have to come down to the House with further taxation proposals. He thought there was not the slightest doubt of that at the present rate of expenditure. He thought it was fair and just to ask the Government before they considered these proposals to go thoroughly into the expenditure and see whether reductions could not be brought about. He would, therefore, move that all the words after &#x201C;that&#x201D; be deleted, for the purpose of inserting &#x201C;the Estimates of expenditure be referred back to the Government for revision and reduction, with a view to avoiding the necessity of imposing any unnecessary taxation.&#x201D;</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#labour_members_and_unemployment">

<heading>LABOUR MEMBERS AND UNEMPLOYMENT.</heading>

<speech by="#du_toit">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">G. J. W. DU TOIT</person> (Middelburg)</from>

<p>regretted to see that so much of the time of this House was taken up by long speeches on miners&#x2019; phthisis, strikes, Trade Unions and matters like that. The taxpayers wished to see something done for their benefit, but hon. members on the cross benches thought differently. Who were the cause of so many men being out of employment and of so many men on the Premier Mine having lost their position?&#x2014;Nobody but hon. members on the cross-benches, he held. (Hear, hear.) He considered that the dismissal of the 368 workmen at the Premier Mine was the indirect result of the inciting speeches which had been delivered by members of the Labour party. The hon. member proceeded to emphasise that if the farming community prospered, the whole country prospered. He hoped the farmer would be given an opportunity to develop these waste grounds of which there were so many in the country. For that purpose railways should be built so as to enable farmers to get their products easily to the markets. He was glad to learn that large sums of money were to be spent in the making of dams on the Crocodile River, at Worcester, and other places. But even that would be useless unless they had railway communication with the markets.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#more_railways_wanted">

<heading>MORE RAILWAYS WANTED.</heading>

<p>In Pretoria, Waterberg, Middelburg, and Lydenburg there were great undeveloped areas of ground only waiting for a railway line to be laid. A cooperative society in the vicinity of Middelburg had purchased large quantities of produce grown locally. Four farmers near Bethal had grown thousands of bags of potatoes. He mentioned these facts to show the improvement which had taken place in agriculture. But all that was wanted was a railway. The creamery at Middelburg daily produced from 600 to 800 lbs. of butter and if there were railways to the neighbouring parts farmers would be able to send in their cream and the creamery would be able to handle 4,000 lbs. of butter a day. The hon. member proceeded to state that on the Olifants River there was a very rich iron reef. If the Minister wished to see for himself, he (Mr. Du Toit) was prepared to show him round. (Laughter.) The whole country near Middelburg was rich in gold, iron, silver, tin, and coal. If they had a railway there the country could be properly developed and the country as a whole would prosper. The Minister of Lands would be able to have large irrigation works constructed and large quantities of grain and cotton could be grown.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#to_abolish_municipalities">

<heading>TO ABOLISH MUNICIPALITIES.</heading>

<p>Proceeding, the hon. member urged that all municipalities should be abolished. (Laughter.) Hon. members might laugh, but they should look at America where there were no municipalities. He wanted to see a Government Commissioner appointed to administer the villages. People <span class="col_2281-2282" refersTo="page_1147"/>in the villages would not be so heavily taxed then. (Laughter.) Before the war he had administered Middelburg, and everything was in good order. (Laughter.) He also wished to see the Provincial Councils abolished, as they were an infliction on the country, and District Councils established in their place. The Prime Minister should take this advice if he wished to see the country peopled. The hon. member next dealt with branch lines, remarking that he was in favour of branch lines being built wherever possible. (Laughter.) On the question of taxation Mr. Du Toit said motor-cars and motor-cycles should be more heavily taxed. (Laughter). Farmers were greatly injured by these motor-cars. Instead of having to feed horses with fodder they had to feed the motors with oil. He then wished to deal with education, which, he said, was in a parlous way, but of the total number of candidates who had gone in for examinations last year no less than 73 per cent. had failed, owing to the difficulty of the questions set. The examiners did not show their experience and wisdom by the way they conducted those examinations. (Laughter.) Candidates were not given sufficient time to answer questions put them. He wanted to see a candidate who failed in a few subjects, but passed in all the others, allowed an opportunity to try again in four months in the subjects in which he had previously failed&#x2014;as was done in England, he added. (Laughter.) And a child who was good in one subject on one occasion should not be asked to pass again in the same subject on the next examination. (Laughter.) But examiners purposely prevented candidates from passing, so as to give the impression that the teachers of the country were useless and that they wanted imported teachers. (Laughter.) Then the tasks put to the candidates were too heavy. (Laughter.) Imported teachers were required to pass a slight examination in Dutch, but it was only a form. A clever girl from Bulawayo had obtained a bursary of &#x00A3;100, but when she came to Pretoria she was put in the third class. The examination system was totally wrong, and the Minister of Education ought to devote his attention to it, and to do no other work. He was sorry the Minister of Education was not here, but he hoped he would read all he said in the paper. (Laughter.) Mr. Du Toit went on to say that he considered the Minister of Mines should not at the same time hold the Portfolio of Education, as he could not give both subjects in his charge sufficient attention. (Laughter.) He was thoroughly in accord with the suggestion of the Secretary for Education, that primary education should fall under this Parliament. (Hear, hear.) He did not hold with school inspectors, and considered that the position of school inspector should be abolished. (Laughter.) The work of inspecting should be performed by headmasters and teachers.</p>

<p>He further complained of the action of the Director of Education in the Transvaal in the matter of appointing teachers. Turning to the Minister of Justice, the hon. member said he regretted that Afrikanders in the training section of the Pretoria Police Department were treated in an ignominious manner by inspectors, which he feared might lead to trouble. Referring to schools in the country districts, the hon. member said they were separated by wide distances, and the children were unable to attend them owing to the lack of boarding-houses.</p>

<speech by="#hewat">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. HEWAT</person> (Woodstock)</from>

<p>moved the adjournment of the debate.</p>

<p>The motion was agreed to, and the debate adjourned until to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1914-05-06T23:05:00">11.5 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

