---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol14 - WEDNESDAY 13 May 1914'
layout: debate
year: 1914
month: MAY
month_slug: May
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>WEDNESDAY, 13th May, 1914.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the chair at <recordedTime time="1914-05-13T14:00:00">2 p.m.</recordedTime> and read prayers.</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#petitions">

<heading>PETITIONS.</heading>

<speech by="#mentz">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. MENTZ</person> (Zoutpansberg),</from>

<p>from inhabitants of Touws River for legislation providing for Direct Popular Vote.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">P. DUNCAN</person> (Fordsburg),</from>

<p>from C. H. Bamford, T. E. Picknell, and W. Weatherhead, railway clerks, for leave to contribute arrears to pension funds.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hewat">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. HEWAT</person> (Woodstock),</from>

<p>, from inhabitants of the Cape Peninsula, for legislation providing for the Direct Popular Vote (seven petitions).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#schoeman">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. H. SCHOEMAN</person> (Oudtshoorn),</from>

<p>similar petitions from inhabitants of Somerset West and Oudtshoorn (two petitions).</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#neethling">

<from>Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. M. NEETHLING</person> (Beaufort West),</from>

<p>a similar petition from inhabitants of Stellenbosch.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#mentz">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. MENTZ</person> (Zoutpansberg),</from>

<p>(for Sir David P. de Villiers Graaff), from W. J. du Toit, teacher, for condonation of a break in his service.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_riet">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. J. W. VAN DER RIET</person> (Albany),</from>

<p>from residents of Graham&#x2019;s Town, for removal of the &#x201C;colour bar&#x201D; from the Transvaal Mines, Works and Machinery Regulations.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#laid_on_table">

<heading>LAID ON TABLE.</heading>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>Papers relating to land grants (61 and 62).</p>

<p>These papers were referred to the Select Committee on Waste Lands.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_lands">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF LANDS</person>:</from>

<p>Governmen Notice No. 769 of 1914 having reference to the appointment of James Lil&#x2014; burn as member of Land Board (Natal).</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_estimates_budget_debate">

<heading>THE ESTIMATES BUDGET DEBATE</heading>

<p>The adjourned debate on the motion for the House to go into Committee of Supply on the estimates of expenditure was resumed.</p>

<speech by="#watermeyer">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">E. B. WATERMEYER</person> (Clanwilliam)</from>

<p>said that he had listened with great interest to the speeches of hon. Ministers and members on the Estimates. He was not one of those members who was privileged to investigate the public accounts and therefore he was one of those who had to look to those members for warnings as to the annual expenditure. The hon. member for Fort Beaufort had been talking about the terrible extravagance of the Government, but he (Mr. Watermeyer) had been waiting to see whether hon. members on the other side of the House would put their fingers on any item of extravagance. <span class="col_2461-2462" refersTo="page_1237"/>He thought the Minister of Finance ought to be congratulated by the House on his statement. The hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir T. W. Smartt) had mentioned the enormous amount that was paid in salaries. He (Mr. Watermeyer) agreed that the amount was amazing, but it was one of the evils they had inherited since Union&#x2014;other evils were the Transvaal&#x2019;s &#x201C;swelled head,&#x201D; Natal&#x2019;s distrust, and the Free State&#x2019;s racialism. But he did not despair on account of these evils, because they were disappearing fast. He hoped the enormous expenditure on salaries would only last for a time and would also disappear. It had been pointed out by the hon. member for Port Elizabeth, Central, that their expenditure since Union had gone up by four and a half millions, but the hon. member for Port Elizabeth, Central (Sir E. H. Walton) had emphasised that their expenditure had decreased by that amount of four and a half millions from 1904 to 1910, so that now it had returned to the normal condition.</p>

<p>Hon. members had held it up as an argument that a great incentive to Union was that great economy of administration which would result, He did not think that the sordid view of &#x00A3; s. d. weighed with most people when they decided to join Union, but what they had all said, and what they had all felt, was that they had four different colonies, which had people of the same blood and of the same stock, drifting away into different communities, each one jealous of the other, and drifting apart; and, in fact, forming another nationality; and everyone had felt that it was in the interests of the born inhabitants of the country that they should come together. At all events, he knew that that was the feeling with which he had approached the matter, and of the people with whom he had been most in contact. He agreed that their expenditure was very high, but he could not say that that expenditure need frighten them. The right hon. member for Victoria West (Mr. Merriman) had said that they were over-governed in this country and that they had one Civil Servant to every six of the European population. He did not agree with that statement at all, but taking the statement as it had been made, they had in this country, with its enormous area and the enormous distances which they had to cover, one man who was practically governing them, and doing every blessed thing for them, to six of the European population. Even on that basis he did not think there was much to complain about. But they must not forget the huge native areas which they had to govern, and they had their staff, not only to govern these people, but to keep them in order. (Hear, hear.) They knew that it was useless to talk of reducing their Civil Service establishment which they had inherited from Union, and they had to keep it. Hon. members must agree that the enormous expansion which the country had made must mean increased expenditure, and there was no getting away from that fact. He would be very sorry to see the country coming back to the position in which it had been some years ago during the time of depression, when they could not get a policeman in their district who was required. He did not think the worst enemy of the hon. member for Port Elizabeth, Central (Sir E. H. Walton), would accuse him of having thrown money away wilfully and wantonly when he was Treasurer of the Cape Colony, although at that time they had had an expenditure of 4&#x00BD; millions greater than in 1908 He did agree that they ought to keep a very watchful eye on the expenditure. If they got slack as to the mode in which they spent their money they knew what was going to happen, because they in the Cape had been through the mill before, and did not like to repeat that experience. There were several items of expenditure which did look to one as if they might be more usefully spent. (Hear, hear.) He thought that the printing item could be cut down considerably. (Hear, hear.) It was a terrible waste of money printing everything in the dual language, and he hoped that discretion would be used, so that every hon. member or person who wanted it in the proper language could get it in that language, but let them not overdo it. Why not let each man get the documents in the language he desired only. (Hear, bear.) He thought that the money could be better spent on education than throwing it away in the waste paper basket like that. (Hear, hear.) As to the expansion of the country, were they going to sit down for fear of their wages bill and expenditure increasing, and say that they were going to sit still for fear of that? That argument did not appeal to him, and he thought that they were spending money in the right direction; that the money spent had been necessarily spent, and that it would be absolutely foolish if they were to stop the progress which was going on for a nervous fear of supplying funds which they required for the purpose of development. The Minister of Finance had shown that by the reduction of the railway rates and the remission of other taxation they had benefited to the extent of &#x00A3;2,000,000, and that the expenditure on education had increased by 1¼ millions. During the last three years they had bettered the balance in their favour (of exports versus imports) to the extent of 77&#x00BD; millions, which was the balance of trade to their credit. Of that 77&#x00BD; millions, 35 millions was due to produce otherwise than that due to the mines. What produce was not represented in the other 42 millions which stood to the credit of the production of the mines? That amount of mineral produce was exported, but it was coming back in another form, in the way of cash to pay for South African produce which had been used, so that if they came to look at the way in which their production had been increasing, he simply <span class="col_2463-2464" refersTo="page_1238"/>asked whether they would be wise now to go and curtail their Estimates and stop development? The hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir T. W. Smartt) had remarked the other day that they were going on a policy of extravagance, and that the warnings against that had been justified by the position in which the Minister of Finance found himself. Was the great terror which the hon. member attempted to hold over them by the figures of such &#x201C;extravagance &#x201D; fairly justified by the position in which they found themselves? He supposed it was one of the sticks with which the hon. member (Sir T. W. Smartt) shied at the hare,&#x201D; although he never intended to hit it. He did not think they could go in for better development than by spending their money on education and defence. He had always held, and he still held, that the doctrine that they should keep a close eye on their expenditure and tax in times of prosperity was a sound one. He did not say that they ought to tax so that they could waste money, but if they did tax in times of prosperity, they should devote part of the money to the reduction of their debt charges, so that in times of acute depression they could reduce expenditure, and in the lean years borrow, if necessary.</p>

<p>He thought that for a growing country like South Africa this was a sound policy to pursue. A man would be better able to pay a &#x00A3;3 tax in times of prosperity than a 10s. tax in times of depression. He could not agree with the Minister using the bewaarplaatsen money and other surpluses for general expenditure, and he thought that this money should be replaced, and only used for the payment of debt. He could not agree with hon. members who said that these warnings of extravagance were justified in the position in which they found themselves. He welcomed the fact that the Minister had taken his courage in both hands and come to the House and taxed, instead of going in for a niggardly policy of cutting down the Estimates, and thereby checking the development of the country. He did not agree with the income tax or land tax proposals of the Minister, and he only partly agreed with his Customs tariff proposals. He did not agree with the land tax proposals, because he thought the Minister would not achieve the object he wished to achieve. The Minister was actually going to hit the man who was beneficially occupying the land. He drew attention to the case of the Zak River Estates Company, in the district of Calvinia. This large company, with an enormous capital, had come in, and were working 35,000 morgen of arable land, and he knew that at present they were employing about 300 people, of whom about one-third were white, and not poor whites, but young farmers. This company was beneficially occupying the land. They were doing what it was impossible for the small man to do. Instead of the ground being farmed in a haphazard fashion, they were farming in a systematic manner. How was the tax going to work? Altogether the company had 102,000 morgen. Now the company was benefiting the district to a great extent, and when the railway came, he was sure they would be able to benefit South Africa. They were producing wheat to such an extent that last year and the year before there was no scarcity in the district, though they had to contend with drought. That 35,000 morgen, as it lay, was worth, say, &#x00A3;350,000. They had 75,000 morgen of pastoral land attached to it, which he would put at 5s. What was going to happen? The Government would tax them on 92,000 morgen, and make them pay a tax on &#x00A3;365,000. Was that fair?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What about the railway?</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#smothering_beneficial_occupation">

<heading>SMOTHERING BENEFICIAL OCCUPATION.</heading>

<speech by="#watermeyer">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERMEYER</person>:</from>

<p>The railway is not there yet, but that is not the question. The question is: Are you going to smother the beneficial occupation and the beneficial exploitation of land by taxing the man who is able to put the capital in? Continuing, he said that if a company locked up the land, he would be the last man to defend them. This company was employing 100 white men and about 200 coloured men, and he believed that the staff was going to be doubled. Then take the case of a man who had a homestead farm, and his farm, perhaps, was worth &#x00A3;10,000. He farmed sheep on 30,000 pastoral land besides, because that was the only thing that could be done with the land, and at certain seasons he had to trek with his sheep. That land was worth perhaps 5s. a morgen. That man was beneficially occupying the land for the only purpose for which it could be used, it was added to his small valuable homestead and he was going to be taxed. He came to the conclusion that the tax was not going to hit the man who locked up the land. There was a little dash of protection about the Customs proposals that he liked, and he hoped it would lead to the encouragement of industries in this country. He was surprised, in looking through the returns, to find that the whaling companies, between 1909 and 1913, carried away whale produce to the amount of &#x00A3;537,000. What did we get for that? His objection was that they carried away whale residue, which we required as fertiliser, to the value of &#x00A3;63,000. Here we were crying out for fertilisers, and the best fertiliser was being taken away.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. W. SMARTT</person> (Fort Beaufort):</from>

<p>You can buy it, the same as anybody else.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#watermeyer">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERMEYER</person> (continuing)</from>

<p>said that the fact remained that this was being exported from South Africa. We wanted some protection, and he thought this was a matter into which the Minister might look. He could not agree with the mournful <span class="col_2465-2466" refersTo="page_1239"/>speeches made by some hon. members, because he felt that their position was so sound that they could look forward to the prophesied signs of depression with equanimity. He pointed out that the produce of South Africa had increased by two millions in value in 1912, and by one million in 1913. He agreed that the mining revenue would be a diminishing asset, but he thought that the increasing amount of South African produce would be a compensation. He might be an optimist, but he had faith in this country, and if the gold mines gave out, the people concerned, who were large consumers, would have turned to other occupations by that time and he did not think there would be any decrease, but rather an increase, in consumption.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#closer_settlement">

<heading>CLOSER SETTLEMENT.</heading>

<p>The great panacea of closer settlement had once more been brought forward for all the ills South Africa was suffering from. The hon. member for Fort Beaufort had urged them to put the profits from the mining industry into development schemes, so as to develop the country. He had also told them to look at the way in which the cost of railway working was going up. Now, from the report of the Railway Board, he found that the traffic in 1913 had increased by 654,000 tons. In addition to that, 332 miles more of railway had been built. If that would not increase the railway expenditure, then he did not know what would. The hon. gentleman (Sir T. W. Smartt) had resorted to the old wheeze of preaching closer settlement and immigration. Then he proceeded to rate the Government because they did not throw open those enormous tracts of Crown land in the North, and put on them the poor whites. The only large areas of Crown lands which he (Mr. Watermeyer) knew of that the Government had got were really the residue after all the best lands had been picked out. He was now speaking more particularly of the area of Gordonia, Kenhardt, etc., where there were still large areas of Crown lands. If the hon. gentleman were going to settle poor whites and strangers on those lands, then he was sorry for the poor whites and the strangers. (A laugh.)</p>

<speech by="#smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. W. SMARTT</person> (Fort Beaufort),</from>

<p>rising, said he desired to explain that he had said distinctly that, in connection with the poor white settlement which the Dutch Reformed Church had established at Kenhardt it would be well, after these people had rehabilitated themselves, if the Government assisted them&#x2014;people who were accustomed to the conditions in that area&#x2014;by giving them land in the North-west, for they were the only people who could possibly develop it. He had never said it was at all suitable for settlement. At the same time he thought he had made it clear that if they were to have any success in their settlement schemes they must put people near the railways and not in the very remote parts of the country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#watermeyer">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERMEYER</person> (continuing)</from>

<p>said that the man who had been in an establishment like that for two or three years was not the man who should be put upon that land. You cannot make a pastoralist of an agriculturist and vice versa. The man who should be put upon that land was a man with a fair amount of capital. They would never do any good by putting the small man on those lands. He quite agreed with those who said that they should throw open these lands as soon as possible, but the Government was not going to do any good by putting the small man upon them. The hon. member went on to say that he welcomed the conversion of the hon. member for Cape Town, Gardens, who had at last found out that the prosperity of the country depended upon the land.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#baxter">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">W. D. BAXTER</person> (Cape Town, Gardens):</from>

<p>I have always thought so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#watermeyer">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERMEYER</person> (continuing)</from>

<p>said that he believed the hon. member was very earnest in his idea that closer settlement was absolutely necessary for South Africa. He agreed with the hon. member in that view. He wanted as many white people as he could get into this country, but we wanted the right class of men. The hon. member had complained that when an organisation he was connected with took the trouble to advertise the South-west, they discovered, on making inquiries, that they could not get any land. The explanation was very simple. The men who were on the land were occupying it in the same way as the hon. member occupied his own business. He would have a portion of his business that he could not develop immediately but he did not for that reason propose to sell it. The people who were on the land and had large families had to have some regard for the possible requirements of their children in the future. In this matter of closer settlement attention must be paid to the conditions peculiar to South Africa, and it was no use girding at people because they went rather slowly compared with other countries, in which the conditions were not the same. Few men who had talked about closer settlement knew what it was to develop the land.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#crime_covered_up">

<heading>CRIME COVERED UP.</heading>

<p>Now, continued Mr. Watermeyer, he was going to work the handle of his own parish pump. In the Calvinia district, one policeman practically controlled sixteen hundred square miles, this being totally inadequate protection.</p>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>They are honest people there.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#watermeyer">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERMEYER</person>:</from>

<p>They are not so honest, that is the drawback. One man, he added, left the district because there were not enough police in it to put down crime. The condition of affairs led to worse than crime&#x2014;it led to crime being covered up. Liquor smuggling and stock <span class="col_2467-2468" refersTo="page_1240"/>thieving went on, and everything was hushed up because people were afraid of having to attend the Circuit Court as witnesses. Then the people of Brandvlei desired telegraphic communication, the nearest telegraph office being <b>100</b> miles away.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>What is the population?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#watermeyer">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WATERMEYER</person>:</from>

<p>That has nothing to do with it. (Laughter.) The population varies, it being nomadic. Continuing, he said that people were so shut off from the rest of the country that there was no development. Postal communication was so slow that people preferred to have their letters carried by private individuals, who made it a point of honour to pass the letters from hand to hand until they reached their destination. In conclusion, Mr. Watermeyer stated that the Deeds Office in Cape Town was so terribly undermanned that it took three weeks or a month before one could get a diagram submitted for transfer purposes examined. This was a hardship on people who desired to sell portions of their farms or subdivide to raise mortgages on them. Then the Deeds Office fees were too heavy, and he did not think the Act contemplated that the Deeds Office should be a taxing machine. As to the amendment of the hon. member for Uitenhage, he (Mr. Watermeyer) did not think it should be supported in any way. The Government was responsible for the financial condition of the country, but if they were to have a committee to tell the Government how it was to tax or spend money we might as well do without Responsible Government altogether. (Hear, hear.)</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#henderson">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. HENDERSON</person> (Durban, Berea)</from>

<p>said that now that the great financial guns on the front benches had fired off their volleys at the Minister of Finance, perhaps a humble rifleman on the back benches might have a look in. (Hear, hear.) There was no doubt that the expenditure was increasing very rapidly; some said that it was going up at the rate of &#x00A3;500,000 per annum. The number of Government servants was also increasing every year. He thought the time had arrived when they should look into that matter and see whether it would not be possible to call a halt now. They were promised at the time of Union that the expenditure would be reduced as the result of Union. He thought it would be generally admitted that that had not been done. The expenditure was now higher than it had ever been before. Even the Government members were taking more interest in the Estimates than they had ever done. (Laughter.) It was only right that they should do so, because they were largely responsible for the position to-day. They had had many opportunities of voting for reductions on certain Estimates&#x2014;they had had that opportunity year after year, but had always refused to take advantage of those opportunities. They were evidently now beginning to realise that they must; set about that business. They would still have opportunities this year of dealing with the matter and of showing whether they desired to reduce expenditure. They would have opportunities of voting for the various amendments which had been proposed. The Minister of Finance had himself said that they should establish economy before they introduced fresh taxation. Therefore he (the Minister) should not be surprised if the House took him at his word. If taxation were brought in now on the basis of the expenditure which was foreshadowed it would be difficult, if not impossible to reduce expenditure or taxation in future. He did not believe that an income tax was the sort of tax that should be brought in unless it were absolutely necessary. The original idea of an income tax was that it should only be imposed in times of war or in certain other eventualities. He thought that anyone who had an income at all should come under the tax. He thought that if they were to impose the tax they should impose it on incomes over &#x00A3;200 a year, but that they might impose a very low rate and increase the rate more rapidly on incomes over &#x00A3;2,000 per annum. Under the present taxation proposals there would be very few voters in the country who would be taxed&#x2014;who would have to pay at all&#x2014;and, therefore, those who did pay would have very little say in regard to the expenditure of the country. With regard to Customs duties, he thought the proposed tariff would be considered reasonable by the majority of the people, though, of course, a number would be disappointed. He was disposed to agree with the Minister that what the Government should do now was to go slow. The Minister had said that the cost of living was such that no Government in South Africa should take any steps which would be likely to increase the cost of living. Therefore he had been astonished to hear the Minister suggest that there should be increased duties on foodstuffs&#x2014;for instance, butter, cheese, cocoa, coffee, etc. He would like to know the object of putting an additional tax on imported tea. There had already been a tax of 4d. per lb., and if it was thought that an additional tax would protect the tea industry, he was sure it would not have that effect. The tea industry in Natal was a dying industry. If the object was to build up another industry, he did not think that any such industry would be of benefit to the country. He had very little to say with regard to the land tax. It did not affect him personally. But if it did, he did not think that he would object to the very mild, not to say timid, proposal of the Minister. That tax would not do a great deal in the way of establishing closer settlement in South Africa.</p>

<p>Continuing, Mr. Henderson said that that year they had had an additional importation of foodstuffs, amounting to one million more than in 1912. Even if the prophecy made last year by the Minister of <span class="col_2469-2470" refersTo="page_1241"/>Finance had come true, he would have been in a rather awkward position, in not receiving the revenue from Customs duties on foodstuffs which he had received. The hon. member proceeded to ask what had been the result of sending Mr. Moffat to Europe and America to study statistics? He presumed that the object of that gentleman&#x2019;s study was to establish a Bureau of Statistics in this country, which was badly needed, and there was no doubt that this country&#x2019;s position was a disgrace, as far as statistics were concerned, and should not continue for another year. (Hear, hear.)</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#increasing_railway_expenditure">

<heading>INCREASING RAILWAY EXPENDITURE.</heading>

<p>Coming to railway matters, the hon. member said that he did not think they got the attention in that House on the Budget which they ought to get. The railway expenditure was going up by leaps and bounds, and the figures (which he quoted) were very significant, and showed that, despite the fact that the railways were developing and increasing their mileage, the expenditure was going up more rapidly than the state of affairs warranted. (Hear, hear.) Even the Railway Board admitted that the increase in the railway staff was not warranted by the increase of development. The railway surpluses had disappeared, and the deficits had now begun. The Railway Administration had been too eager, he thought, to get rid of their surpluses&#x2014;(hear, hear)&#x2014;and too desirous of showing what Union had done for them, and what he thought they ought to have done was to go into the whole question of railway rates throughout the whole of the Union, and devise an intelligent, scientific, systematic, and impartial system of rates throughout the whole of the Union. They had not done that; and the consequence was that there were numerous anomalies throughout the Union which would stand no explanation and would admit of no defence, and would be likely to remain for some considerable time to come. That was all the more disastrous, in his opinion, in consequence of the position in which they were at present in regard to their railways. If the losses in connection with the railways of the Cape Province were to continue (the other systems showing profits more or less), what possible chance had the rest of the country of getting their rates reduced if these losses had to be met every year? These losses had been going on during the years before Union, and nothing had been done after Union to minimise the losses of the Cape railways for the purpose of bringing in a uniform system for the Union. Not content with that, the Government had made great reductions of rates on the Cape system, and in addition to that carried coal from the Transvaal to the Cape at great loss. He thought it was high time that the railways were put on a business basis and on business lines, as had been intended at the time of Union. The railway should get away from Provincialism, and they should do everything for the country as a whole. (Rear, hear.)</p>

<p>That the railways and harbours were not being administered on business principles, as intended by the Act of Union, was obvious from the following facts: The department had no consistent or definite policy, either as to rates of carriage on goods from the different ports to the inland centres, or on goods from the inland centres to the ports. It carried goods from the interior to any port of the Union for shipment at the same rate&#x2014;no matter whether the distance was 100 or 1,000 miles&#x2014;though it made no difference to the cost of the goods which ports they were shipped from. It charged different rates on the same classes of goods from the various ports of the Union to inland centres, even where distance and mileage were the same. It charged different rates on the same classes of goods exactly for the same distance, according to whether they were called &#x201C;imported&#x201D; or &#x201C;South African,&#x201D; even though the expense to the department was equal. It purchased coal for railway purposes at a high price, when it could purchase much better coal for less than half that price. It manipulated rates so as to foster an industry in one part of the Union, to the detriment of a similar industry in another part of the Union. It carried coal to some ports of the Union at non-payable rates for the purpose of building up a bunkering trade which could be done and was being done without any loss to the Administration. It carried coal to the Cape ports of the Union at a specially low rate, and refused an equivalent rate per ton per mile to Natal. He could produce facts and figures to substantiate these statements, but it would take up too much time to do so at present, and he would produce them, if necessary, when the House was in Committee; but, as the Minister knew, they had already been placed before him. The Railway Board had been instituted at the time of Union for the purpose of preventing the railways being used for Provincial and political purposes, but that, it would appear, had not been the case. Col. Greene, who had been one of the members of the Railway Board, had publicly stated that on several occasions decisions of the majority of the Commissioners had been overriden by the casting vote of the chairman. The hon. member also read an extract from the latest report of the Railway Board in regard to the Indwe coal contract, and on business principles criticised that contract being entered into. There they had, he proceeded, an instance of the Board taking instructions from the Government, even though they had not approved of them. He gave an instance of a contract being entered into without a public tender and without all members of the Board being present. The decision to reduce the coal rates from the Transvaal to the Cape <span class="col_2471-2472" refersTo="page_1242"/>had been taken in Col. Greene&#x2019;s absence, he said, although it was known that Col. Greene was strongly against it.</p>

<p>Continuing, he pointed out that the report of the Railway Board only contained statistics and facts that had been before the House and which would no doubt be repeated in the report of the General Manager. But there was not a word as to what the Railway Board had done during the past year and what its policy was to be for the future. He thought that such a report would lead the country to wonder whether the Board was worth the &#x00A3;16,000 per annum which it was paid. On page 17 the report stated: &#x201C;It is true that certain preferential rates for South African products and manufactures in the Cape and Natal Provinces are regarded as a grievance. The Board has already recorded its views in favour of their abolition, but it feels constrained to recognise the claims of the vested interests in existence for many years, and that these should be protected through the Customs before the existing rates are abolished. He said he would like to know why the Board should go out of its way to express an opinion on Customs. Their business was to deal with railway rates, and if they were able to put these on a satisfactory footing they would be doing very well indeed. According to the report &#x00A3;3,126,000 had been paid by the railways into the Consolidated Revenue Fund. This report was signed by Henry Burton (chairman), and recently they had a statement from the Minister of Railways and Harbours to the effect that the railways had paid 4&#x00BD; millions into the fund. He would be glad if the chairman of the Railway Board and the Minister of Railways and Harbours would consult with each other and arrive at the correct figures. (Laughter.) The hon. member who had just spoken had referred to the valuable statement at the end of the report dealing with the tonnage of South African goods carried. He (the speaker) was at a loss to know what the statements really intended to convey, because he could not follow it at all. He had not been able to check all the figures, but it struck him that the figure for South African sugar was somewhat large. The carriage of South African sugar was stated to have been 211,054 tons during 1913. He looked up the Estimates of the sugar crop in Natal, and he found that it did not amount to 100,000 tons.</p>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>It must have been carried more than once.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#natal_and_her_trade">

<heading>NATAL AND HER TRADE.</heading>

<speech by="#henderson">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HENDERSON</person> (continuing)</from>

<p>said that that was probably the explanation. It was the same with tea. It was stated that 2,803 tons of South African tea were carried over the railways in 1913, but he found that the total quantity grown was 844 tons. Continuing, he said that the Minister in his speech and the Railway Board in its report had stated that Natal under the Mozambique agreement was getting too much of the traffic and had taken traffic away from the Cape. Under this agreement Natal had to get 30 per cent. not only for a few months or years, but during the run of the agreement from beginning to end. Taking the Minister&#x2019;s figures he found that up to the end of 1913 Natal only got 27.74 per cent. of the traffic, while Delagoa Bay got 59.51 per cent., and therefore Natal did not get its fair share. Before the Government altered the rates it should see that Natal got its fair share. It was an iniquitous agreement that forced half the trade to the competitive area of the Union, through a foreign port, and they were tied up for six years more. Government should see that it worked as little to the disadvantage of the Union ports as possible, and see that Delagoa Bay did not get more than its fair share. Dealing with the amendments, he said that the Labour amendment, of course, was not intended to be taken seriously, and was only meant for consumption in certain quarters. His objection to the amendment of the hon. member for Uitenhage was that it would take away from the Government the responsibility of the Budget and the finances of the Union, and he did not think the House would agree to that. The Government must be responsible for its finances and must stand or fall by its Budget. It was those who were behind the Government that were backing up the Government in this unnecessary expenditure; it was they who were responsible for bringing in taxation at this time; it was they who would have to explain to their constituents why taxation was necessary at this time, and they who would have to justify their actions to their constituents. (Cheers.) *</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_profits_tax">

<heading>THE PROFITS TAX.</heading>

<speech by="#cullinan">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. M. CULLINAN</person> (Pretoria District, North)</from>

<p>said that in reply to the hon. member who had just sat down (Mr. Henderson), he would say that those behind the Government would take the responsibility of the actions of the Government. In the early days of the Transvaal he had pointed out that it was necessary for them to earmark the profit tax from the diamond and gold mines for the purpose of developing the country. Unfortunately that principle had been neglected, and now they heard murmurs from all sides of the House that the revenue from this source should not be appropriated for the purpose of meeting ordinary expenditure. (Hear, hear.) He thought it was time that the Government took into consideration the question of earmarking a portion of the revenue derived from the profits tax for the purpose of developing the country in other directions. The only way of developing the country, in his opinion, was by the establishment of large conservation schemes and bringing under cultivation large areas of land that were not <span class="col_2473-2474" refersTo="page_1243"/>being used at the present time. It was quite easy to do it, but in order to be successful they would have to take the matter into serious consideration without delay. Unless they took action on these lines he was afraid that they would soon be looking about for fresh sources of revenue. There were numerous avenues for development. For instance, the Minister of Railways was continually crying out that he could not get material for his rolling-stock, carriages, rails, etc. Orders to the tune of two millions had been sent oversea every year. Was it not time (the hon. member asked) when we in this country should look round and see whether it was not possible to produce these things here? He mentioned one part of the country where iron ores were obtainable, and said that within eighteen months or two years anybody who wanted to do it could be turning out rails and sleepers. In the Pretoria district they had coal and iron within an area of about 50 miles, but year after year we went on, and the only idea was that we must import everything into South Africa. (Hear, hear.)</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_fiscal_policy">

<heading>THE FISCAL POLICY.</heading>

<p>A new Customs policy had been foreshadowed by the Minister of Finance, which was neither going to be a protective policy nor was it going to be a free-trade policy. He was afraid that we were going to fall between these two ideas. We must have either one or the other. We must either protect an industry or not protect it. He thought it was time we made up our minds what we were going to do. Let him take the matter of cement. Supposing they were to put a duty on cement to-morrow, they could simultaneously with that duty&#x2014;</p>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. W. JAGGER</person> (Cape Town, Central):</from>

<p>There is a duty on cement now.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cullinan">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. M. CULLINAN</person>:</from>

<p>How much?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>A very stiff one.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cullinan">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. M. CULLINAN</person>:</from>

<p>About 10 per cent.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>More than 10 per cent.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cullinan">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. M. CULLINAN</person>:</from>

<p>If you put a duty on cement to-morrow, you can go to a good English firm and arrange a contract, and they will supply that cement locally at less than local cost.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. W. SMARTT</person> (Fort Beaufort):</from>

<p>Cement is paying 40 per cent. That is a fair amount.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cullinan">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. M. CULLINAN</person>:</from>

<p>No, it is not. That is the idea that I wish to counteract, and I say it is a wrong idea. Forty per cent. is not sufficient to induce the English manufacturer to come and start that industry. There are many people in the Old Country to-day who are willing to come here and start that industry on those lines. If the duty is not sufficient, the taxpayer is going to pay it, and he will keep on paying it until the duty is raised, and you will never produce anything in South Africa.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#in_the_importers_clutches">

<heading>IN THE IMPORTERS&#x2019; CLUTCHES.</heading>

<p>Proceeding, the hon. member said that if we did not lay ourselves out to secure production here, we were not going to have it, and we were going to be continually in the hands of the importer. The importer to-day had got in his clutches the whole of South Africa. (Hear, hear.) The aggregation of capital from oversea knocked out the local producer every time. The importer was the man we had got to blame to-day for the state of things in South Africa. (Dissent.) He hoped that the Government, notwithstanding the speech of the Minister of Finance, would take seriously into consideration the question of protecting those industries which had a chance of success here. We were working in this country against protective countries like Australia, America, Canada, and Germany&#x2014; countries that had become great because they had followed Protectionist principles.</p>

<speech by="#smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. W. SMARTT</person> (Fort Beaufort):</from>

<p>You say in your own report that the duty on cement is quite sufficient.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cullinan">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. M. CULLINAN</person>:</from>

<p>I suppose I may change my mind?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. W. SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>The ink is hardly dry yet.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#preferential_rates">

<heading>PREFERENTIAL RATES.</heading>

<speech by="#cullinan">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. M. CULLINAN</person> (continuing)</from>

<p>said that he wished to go into the question of railway rates as affecting these industries. In the report of the Industries Commission it was laid down that the railway preferential rates should be abolished, and that any protection that was given should take the form of an equivalent from the Customs. There had been a great deal of abuse in connection with the preferential rates, and the man whom it was thought to benefit never received that benefit. Let them take wheat. Wheat was grown herein the Cape, very largely in the Malmesbury district, and the inland consumer was supposed to get it at the cheap preferential rate. The farmers who gave evidence before the Commission said they would rather have a tax at the coast, and then they would know where they were. The farmer had to be satisfied with the preferential railway rates, but his contention was that his rate or price for his wheat was regulated by the imported wheat at the coast.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. W. JAGGER</person> (Cape Town, Central):</from>

<p>Plus the preference he gets from the railway.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cullinan">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">T. M. CULLINAN</person>:</from>

<p>Plus the duty only. The price to the consumer in Johannesburg is the price of the imported wheat, the dear price on the railway. You are not told that you can have this preferential rate on flour The position is that the consumer has to pay the high price of the imported wheat. Proceeding, the hon. member said that neither the farmer <span class="col_2475-2476" refersTo="page_1244"/>to his mind, nor the consumer, was benefited by this preferential railway rate. There was another point. The millers here had got all the trade, and they sent flour inland. The economic condition was that meal should be ground at Port Elizabeth and then sent inland, because, under the present system, 300 miles of railway service was done for nothing. From Port Elizabeth, Bloemfontein was distant 450 miles and Johannesburg 750 miles, while from Cape Town, Bloemfontein was distant 750 miles and Johannesburg 1,100. Bloemfontein was 300 miles nearer to Port Elizabeth than it was to Cape Town, yet trade was taken away from Port Elizabeth by Cape Town because of the preferential railway rates, the whole of the business being done by the millers here. Rather let them compensate the millers than continue the noneconomic condition we had to-day. It the railway rates were properly adjusted Cape Town would be consuming the wheat grown in its own neighbourhood which did not produce more than was necessary for the consumption of the Cape district. The same principle was manifested in regard to Natal sugar, which had a preferential rate on the railway, with the result that imported sugar was consumed in Natal, and the Natal sugar was sent inland, the consequence being that the railway suffered, the South African product being carried at a lower rate than that charged for the imported article. We appeared to be sending inland 214,000 tons of Natal sugar, as against only 6,000 tons of imported sugar, and he wished to query these figures, as he queried those regarding wheat. The railways seemed to be carrying far too much flour inland at the preferential rates. As to the preferential rates on coal, 14s. a ton was charged for conveying coal 1,000 miles to Cape Town. Well, on the Cape railways there was a loss of &#x00A3;391,355, against profits made by the following: Free State, &#x00A3;238,278; Johannesburg division, &#x00A3;930,000; Pretoria division, &#x00A3;416,000; Natal, &#x00A3;444,000; bringing the total profits on the railway up to &#x00A3;2,025,000.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_north_disappointed">

<heading>THE NORTH DISAPPOINTED.</heading>

<p>On entering Union the northern parts of South Africa looked to reduction in railway rates. It was promised that within four years of Union taxation by means of railway rates would be done away with and that the railways should be run on business lines. The Act of Union was supposed to be carried out, but the inland portions of the Union were still providing the railways with a profit of two millions, which was still being used in the same direction as previous to Union. (Hear, hear.) That was wrong. The voice of the people of the inland centres was not heard here. The people there felt that they were being taxed in the same old undesirable way &#x2014;(hear, hear)&#x2014;but unless the Government reduced that taxation it would have a lot of trouble in the inland portion of the Union. Sir Thomas proceeded to read out a number of comparative figures, showing the higher railway rates paid by the inland ports of the Union as compared with Natal and the Cape. These figures, he stated, had been given before the last Economic Commission. Coal, he went on, was the very vital breath on which all industries lived. But our great idea was that we must have an export trade in coal, and for that purpose the cheapest possible railway rate was given. He was not against that, but he would point out that when the coal left South Africa it was finished with so far as we were concerned, but when it was consumed here we produced something with it. (Hear, hear.) The giving of a cheap rate for the conveyance of coal to be used for manufacturing purposes in South Africa would be more beneficial than having a cheap railway rate on coal for export. He thought they were too much in a hurry to try and export anything in that way. He was against the mealie idea. They could go on getting cheap export for mealies; at the same time they were importing bacon, eggs, cattle and so on, and he thought they should try to use up that product as much as possible in this country. He wanted to emphasise the absurdity of the idea that a duty on anything would raise the cost of living. That had been proved a fallacy in other countries. They were asked what would the farmers do when they had grown sufficient wheat. Why, that was a condition they should try to bring about, for when that was brought about the other things which were protected would be cheaper for them. They were all too prone to run away with the idea which had been instilled into the people of this country by the importing class that they could not do anything in this country. South Africa would be a big country if they would go in the right way to develop its resources.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_mines_and_agriculture">

<heading>THE MINES AND AGRICULTURE.</heading>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">E. NATHAN</person> (Von Brandis)</from>

<p>emphasised the importance of the mining industry, which he said was the greatest industry in South Africa, and one which certain hon. members had been inclined to decry. They had been frightened by the statement placed before the Economic Commission by the Chamber of Mines. He (Mr. Nathan) thought they had rather misread that statement, because it would appear that within five years the production had been brought down very considerably, and in the year 1930 the gold-mining productions would be brought down to half their present state; but sight had been lost of the statement made by the mining engineer (Mr. Kotzee), who had said over and over again that dormant and undeveloped payable ore existed to as great an extent as in the existing mines. But it would cost &#x00A3;50,000,000 sterling. What had been done to encourage capital to come into the country? They had been frightening capital out of the country, rather than encouraging people to bring their capital in. Such <span class="col_2477-2478" refersTo="page_1245"/>capital as had been brought into the country had been practically taxed out of existence, and consequently prospecting for new areas, he might say, had absolutely ceased for the time being. The Government had also largely hindered the mining industry by the enormous amount which it had exacted from the small mining investors. The Government had made an initial error, and it was one which was unfortunately encouraged by certain hon. members in that House, namely, taxing effort and capital, instead of taxing productions. Again, what had the Government done to throw new fields open to prospectors? It would be very much better if it were possible to prospect on farms, provided security was given that there would be no damage, and also that when the farms were left, they would not be in an insecure or dangerous condition. He thought that would be sufficient protection for the farmers, but nothing whatever had been done. Proceeding, he said that the Gold Law required very careful amendment. The last law passed was in the Transvaal in 1908, and since Union they found it necessary that there should be many alterations in that law. In the first place, he would urge the Government not to continue to exact the large amount which was exacted from people who pegged out claims. It was a most iniquitous form of taxation&#x2014;the worst form of taxation. It was up to the Government to foster that marvellous industry which had been poured into the lap of this country. Other industries, as well as the gold industry, but the gold industry in particular. He himself had lost considerably in claim licences. He had paid between three and four thousand pounds. He had gained experience; he was poorer for it, but had to pay a less income tax. It had been urged in connection with the amount of money taken from the mines that a large portion of that should be put into the permanent interests of the country; that was being done already. Where did those large amounts come from that was being paid to agricultural schools and for other purposes? Did not they come out of that amount? It was up to that House and up to the Government to do all it could to foster the mining industry, because it was the best they had got in the country. If they did not, it would be the old story of killing the goose which laid the golden egg. They would frighten capital out of the country, and they, would have the failure of their loans in the loan market. He would admit that agriculture should be the backbone of the country, and no doubt the farmers would admit that the Transvaal and Johannesburg market was the market upon which they principally depended. Upon the success of Johannesburg depended largely the price they would obtain for their commodities. The success of the Union was largely due to what was brought in from the North. The people of the North were complaining that they could not purchase cheaper. Meat, for instance, was just as dear as in 1912, despite the fact that live-stock had been taken up at a saving of &#x00A3;72,000 to the livestock farmers.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#throttling_the_mines">

<heading>THROTTLING THE MINES.</heading>

<p>He understood that there was a ring there, and that it was the business of the Government to protect it. He supposed the ring was what was equivalent to a trust. The mines were throttled because they were taxed not on profits but on effort. He had put a question to the Minister of Mines the other day with regard to that matter. The Minister of Finance had been asking what they were doing to introduce further capital into this country. In Victoria, Australia, they had devoted &#x00A3;300,000 sterling in ten years in giving assistance to the poor man, but here no encouragement was given for the purpose of encouraging industry. In 1913 on the Mines on the Witwatersrand &#x00A3;7,537,000 was spent in wages. That was made up as follows: The technical staff cost &#x00A3;742,000, the clerical staff &#x00A3;367,000, and white miners &#x00A3;6,724,000. The coloured people got &#x00A3;5,304,000, and the stores purchased by the mines for them were valued at 10&#x00BD; millions. That was the industry that was decried in that House. The purchases of the mines were nearly all made in South Africa. They were not imported from outside the Union. There had been a hint&#x2014; in fact more than a hint&#x2014;in that House that there was a desire that white labourers should be substituted for coloured labourers. The evidence given before the Economic Commission with regard to that matter showed that if a standard wage of 7s. 6d. were established 62 mines would have to close down. If the standard wage were 15s., 15 producing mines would have to close down, and so on. It behoved them to be very careful how they dealt with the mines of the Transvaal. With regard to the farmers, he wished to mention that the Minister of Finance in the Transvaal had said on one occasion that &#x201C;the land was too far away from the backs of his friends.&#x201D;</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I never said anything of the sort.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>The inference was that the ground was too far away for his friends to bend down to it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_finance">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF FINANCE</person>:</from>

<p>I did not say that. I never made that statement.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>If the Minister is ashamed of his statement I am prepared to make it now. (Laughter.) Proceeding, Mr. Nathan said that they had been importing more eggs into South Africa than they had been exporting. Instead of importing eggs they should be exporting them. Surely the time had arrived when eggs should be exported instead of imported. He pointed out that they were importing fresh vegetables to the extent <span class="col_2479-2480" refersTo="page_1246"/>of &#x00A3;55,000 and were exporting to the extent of &#x00A3;26,000. (Laughter.) Perhaps the hon. member for Oudtshoorn would tell them to what extent they produced vegetables in the Oudtshoorn district. He (Mr. Nathan) was in Oudtshoorn last year, and was informed that vegetables were brought from Uitenhage, Port Elizabeth, and other places. (Laughter.) The time had arrived when they should produce those articles in this country. There had been a little &#x201C;dash<i>&#x201D;</i> of protection in the proposals for fresh taxation which had been made by the Minister of Finance. He doubted whether any protective tariff would bring about encouragement to the industries of the country. What would produce that effect would be hard work and industry. There was not sufficient hard work and backbone put into the country. (Laughter.) A sum expended on the mining industry during 25 years had been only &#x00A3;8,000,000&#x2014;only a little more than the capital invested. He would like the Minister to lay on the Table the total amount expended on the goldfields alone. He thought he had now said sufficient about the mines to wake up that House and to wake up the country. (Ministerial cheers and laughter.) What was the outlook they had now? It was again additional taxation. The hon. member for Durban (Mr. Henderson) had sufficiently dealt with the question of the Government&#x2019;s shortcomings in regard to extravagance. (Laughter.)</p>

<p>The late Mr. Sauer had stated, when he had spoken in Johannesburg, that if Union had not achieved considerable saving, it had not achieved its object, and others had said the same thing. In fact, it had been commonly stated at the time, and had not been attributed only to the late hon. gentleman. Despite all the warnings which had been given by the right hon. member for Victoria West (Mr. Merriman) and the hon. member for Yeoville (Sir L. Phillips), that the Government were riding for the rocks, the Government heeded not. The Government had brought that country into a muddle, and on their shoulders rested the responsibility, and not on those of the Opposition. (Ministerial laughter.) They found the staff of the Civil Service abnormally high, and far greater than the requirements of the country needed. He did not want to say a word against the Civil Servants, but it was the Government who had brought the present position on themselves. He did not want to offend anybody, but there were too many friends knocking at the door for situations, applications for higher pensions and the like. Then, again, people had been retrenched who should not have been retrenched, because they had years of labour before them, and were now drawing pensions, while others had been taken on in their stead. As to the Union buildings at Pretoria, he had always supported the hon. member for Cape Town, Central (Mr. Jagger), and he said it was a white elephant and a disgrace to the country. (Ironical Ministerial cheers.) With reference to defence, the increase in the expenditure was alarming, the figures being: 1910-11, &#x00A3;262,592; 1911-12, &#x00A3;540,699; 1913-14, &#x00A3;1,345,031 (with a supplementary estimate of &#x00A3;177,000), and 1914-15, &#x00A3;1,394,300 The revenue and the population of the country should not warrant that extraordinary expenditure, and if that money had been used in productive works, or even in irrigation works, the country would have benefited by it more. He contended that in that branch of the service the country was not getting value for the money. The administrative expenses were nearly &#x00A3;10,000 more, headquarters nearly &#x00A3;30,000 more, military schools &#x00A3;8,000 more, medical officers &#x00A3;9,000 more, and so it went on. Where was it going to end? (Ministerial laughter.) Was the Defence Force going to keep Russia or Japan in check if they ever came? In that case they would have to depend on the British Navy. The Defence Force was top heavy, and they were building from the top instead of from the bottom. The only salvation for the country was to deal with the country as they would deal with an insolvent. Let them put the Government out and put the Unionist Party in. (Ministerial laughter.) But God save the country from the Labour Party! Did they know that in Johannesburg a man who came there and had been there for three months could get a vote and have a say in the affairs of the country, without possessing any property.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fichardt">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. G. FICHARDT</person> (Ladybrand)</from>

<p>said that the hon. member who had just spoken seemed to be under the delusion that the agriculturist did not work at all.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nathan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NATHAN</person>:</from>

<p>I did not say so.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fichardt">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FICHARDT</person>:</from>

<p>Well, the hon. member said that the agriculturist did not put his back into his work, and it does seem to me that it is a libel on the agriculturist that it should be suggested to him that he does not put his back into his work. Not only was that sort of thing said, the hon. member continued, but the farmers had to escape from all the advice which the legal members tried to give them. (Laughter.) As to what the hon. member for Pretoria District, North (Sir T. M. Cullinan) had said, that he would take the responsibility of the Budget on him, that was rather a large contract. He feared that when there was a deficit, the statement that the hon. member was prepared to take the responsibility of the Budget on him would be very little assistance to them in meeting that deficit. The hon. member for Clanwilliam (Mr. Watermeyer) had been rather unkind to his leader in his remarks on land settlement, because the Prime Minister had said that the only hope of that country was in land settlement, and the hon. member had criticised some of the suggestions of the hon. Leader of the Opposition (Sir T. W. Smartt) as wild cat schemes. Continuing, he said he would like to refer to the speech made by the hon. member for <span class="col_2481-2482" refersTo="page_1247"/>Caledon. The hon. member might be called the Caledonian or at least the Hibernian supporter of the Government, and if the hon. member only spoke more they would be able to add to their exports by an increase in the export of bulls. (Laughter.) In reference to those remarks, he said that he (Mr. Fichardt) and his friends were going to satisfy themselves as to what party they belonged. The Prime Minister said that they at the Bloemfontein Conference formed a Labour Party, but his (the Prime Minister&#x2019;s) own newspaper said that they had drawn up a programme very like the programme of the Prime Minister. They would support the legitimate aspirations of labour, but they had never subscribed, did not now subscribe, and would not subscribe in the future to any revolutionary or Socialistic doctrines. Because they had proposed an amendment that the Estimates should be sent to a Budget Committee they were told that they were following on the lines of the Labour Party in the Transvaal Provincial Council. Of course, what the latter had done was to appoint a Recessional Committee which would exercise the functions of Government. He was tempted to speak on the Budget owing to the speech made by the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister not only tried to teach finance to the hon. member for Cape Town, Central, the right hon. the member for Victoria West, and the hon. member for Port Elizabeth. Central, but to the hon. member for Barberton, whom he attacked and towards whom he used most unbecoming language. This language was used by the leader of Parliament, and the Prime Minister, who had lectured to them on Parliamentary expressions in the past. He was sorry the Prime Minister was not there, because he always enjoyed his (Mr. Fichardt&#x2019;s) speeches. The truth of the matter was that all the trouble to-day and the stagnation in the country arose from this disposition of the Prime Minister to kick away the rungs of the ladder upon which he had climbed to his present position. The Prime Minister had a great deal to say about natives and native taxation, and he propounded a most immoral doctrine, and that was that they must not attempt to tax the natives or they might go to war. He thought that the most extraordinary and immoral doctrine he had ever heard, and it was a deliberate incentive to violence. The Prime Minister then went on to entirely misrepresent the state of affairs with regard to native taxation. The hon. member for Barberton, when he spoke, referred to Union taxation. The Prime Minister represented that there were other taxes paid by the Cape natives and kept away from the fact that the pass law in the Transvaal and the O.F.S. produced nearly half a million. Mr. Fichardt referred to the heavy municipal and other taxation in the Free State, and said that the native there paid about 10 per cent. on the average salary in taxation. Then on the subject of natives the Prime Minister made a most extraordinary statement. He said that if they deviated at present from the policy they had followed they would create a state of unrest in the native mind, which would have nothing but disastrous consequences. This at a time when they were considering the whole question of initiating a national policy in South Africa in regard to natives was a distinct incentive to the natives, should any suggestion be made to co-ordinate the laws. The Prime Minister had said that the members of Parliament in the Transvaal would go back and call the natives in their constituencies together to tell them what had been done. That seemed to him (Mr. Fichardt) to be deliberately inventing a grievance for the natives.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#a_policy_of_drift">

<heading>A POLICY OF DRIFT.</heading>

<p>The fact of the matter was that, in regard to this great question of the natives, the only policy the Government had was one of drift. The Prime Minister had said that this matter could not be dealt with piecemeal, but must be dealt with as a whole. Everybody in South Africa knew that this question of; native policy could not be dealt with as a whole. He would like to tell the Prime Minister that, if it were not for the fact that the natives in the Cape Province had votes, they would long ago have had some definite policy in regard to the natives in South Africa. Then in regard to land settlement the Prime Minister had said that there was no land available. He had quoted a farmer who had 5,000 morgen, and said that this ground devolved on his sons and grandsons, and they worked every morgen of it. Then he turned to the leader of the Opposition and said that he (Sir T. W. Smartt) wanted to expropriate this. Nobody wanted to expropriate land of that kind, but there was a good deal of land in this country that should be expropriated. The Prime Minister said he would sooner have his hand cut off than take any step in that direction. Why, the Government expropriated land every day. Having shown that there was no land available, the Prime Minister had told them how at the Eighty Club he said there was room for people in South Africa and England was to send her best. If the right hon. gentleman should go to London again, as no doubt he would, he might try that speech again and see if it were cheered by the members of the Eighty Club.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#land_settlement">

<heading>LAND SETTLEMENT.</heading>

<p>The Prime Minister had stated that there were tens of thousands of people out of work in the larger cities. He warned the House that there was a serious drift of the country population into the towns, which ought to be stopped in one way or another. Then he said he believed in land settlement, because it was the only salvation for the country. How did he encourage it? He drew a dismal picture of farming prospects in this country. Having muddled up land <span class="col_2483-2484" refersTo="page_1248"/>settlement and immigration schemes, he proceeded to muddle up capital and ordinary expenditure. He said that members complained of extravagance, and asked for a railway or a Post Office. He (Mr. Fichardt) thought all members in that House were prepared to support money being spent on development. For the past four years the country had been praying for a development scheme, but there seemed to be precious little of such development taking place. He could only speak of what was taking place in the Orange Free State. Except, of course, for private enterprise, in the Free State they were in a state of miserable stagnation. Replying to a question that he had tabled recently, the Minister of Lands said that no lands had been purchased in the O.F.S. for settlement, no Crown lands were available for settlement, and no irrigation schemes had been undertaken. The Government, instead of leading the way, were (said Mr. Fichardt) sitting quite still and farmers were abandoning private irrigation schemes because there was so little opportunity of carrying them out. In the matter of railway development they had done rather better. Of the programme which was passed last year there had been completed in the last 12 months one mile of railways. (A Free State hon. member: &#x201C;Hear, hear.&#x201D;) It was not a great deal, but it went a little way towards carrying out that development.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#more_about_extravagance">

<heading>MORE ABOUT EXTRAVAGANCE.</heading>

<p>The Prime Minister had wilfully misunderstood the protestations of hon. members regarding extravagance. What they protested against was the extravagance in administration. The Prime Minister had asked: Where was there any extravagance? He (Mr. Fichardt) was under the impression that the hon. member for Cape Town, Central, had mentioned one or two outstanding instances of extravagance. If those were not enough, was there no extravagance in respect to the bare-backed Barbary ostriches, or to the appointments of the Pretoria railway station? Was there no extravagance in the massive double platform at Lakeside, where the wooden platform would have served for many years to come? Then with regard to Civil Servants, the clerks occupied more sumptuous offices than leading attorneys. In Bloemfontein one man had an office where, if it had been his (Mr. Fichardt&#x2019;s) own office, four or five clerks would have been able to be accommodated with the greatest comfort. Was there no extravagance in the stationery department or in the infinite number of Commissions which travelled up and down the country and prepared reports which no one wanted to see and nobody ever read? Was there no extravagance also in connection with the office of High Commissioner in London? What there was for a staff of 84 clerks to do there, Heaven only knew. But he wondered above all things how this country got its &#x00A3;13,000 worth out of field-cornets. How many of the field-cornets worked overtime? An hon. member of that House, an ex-field-cornet, had told him that the only time he did any work was when he rode into town at the month end for his salary. (Laughter.)</p>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>Was that in the Free State?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#fichardt">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FICHARDT</person>:</from>

<p>Yes. Proceeding, he said they in the Free State had appreciated the way in which the Minister of Agriculture had tried to meet them, but he could not say anything so satisfactory about the Minister of Lands. He did not think that the taxation proposals were necessary at the present time. The income tax was particularly vexatious. There were many people in this country who kept no books, and it would be very difficult to arrive at the various trade charges. He wondered if a farmer&#x2019;s cart would be considered a trade charge, and if so, would a motor-car owned by a merchant be considered as one also? The hon. member quoted other instances of difficulty in arriving at the revenue of the farmers, and said that the whole scheme bristled with difficulties. The income tax would lead to a great deal of misrepresentation; he agreed with Mark Twain, who said the income tax was the most prolific source of lying he ever came across. Then there was the land tax. Upon whom was that tax going to fall? The men who were developing the country were going to be taxed. Those proposals were unhappily so new to this country that they should not be exposed to the country until the people had had an opportunity of expressing their opinions regarding them.</p>

<p>Business was suspended at 6 p.m.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#evening_sitting">

<heading>EVENING SITTING.</heading>

<p>Business was resumed at 8 p. m.</p>

<speech by="#fichardt">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. G. FICHARDT</person> (Ladybrand),</from>

<p>continuing his speech, said that in the remarks he had made about Civil Servants he wished it to be understood that he recognised there were departments in which the members of the service were very much overworked, which was another proof of a lack of organisation. If taxation were necessary he preferred one of the suggestions made by the hon. member for Barberton (Mr. Hull). The hon. member had suggested an estate duty, and he (Mr. Fichardt) would prefer that to an income tax. An estate worth &#x00A3;20,000 in the Free State would bring in to the ordinary farmer about &#x00A3;2,000 a year. On the income tax basis he would probably pay about &#x00A3;25 a year, and taking the average number of years a man would contribute income tax at forty altogether such a man would pay &#x00A3;1,000 in income tax, and if compound interest were added the payment would be considerably more. But under the proposal <span class="col_2485-2486" refersTo="page_1249"/>of the hon. member for Barberton, he would only pay &#x00A3;600. An income tax would be vexatious and inquisitive, would cause a great deal of trouble, and would fall mostly on the salaried and honest man.</p>

<p>He very strongly favoured the whole Budget being sent to a Select Committee, which would be able to adjust matters, so as to avoid taxation. It was not a question of who was responsible, but of how they should best manage the affairs of the country. (Cheers.) A Budget Committee was not a new departure so far as the Union was concerned, and there used to be a similar committee in the old Free State Volksraad. He did not say that a committee would be able to do more than the Government had done, but if it were appointed hon. members would be able to tell their constituents that they had done all that was possible to prevent the imposition of fresh taxation. This was a time of prosperity, and if we had to introduce drastic taxation now Heaven help us when we found ourselves in a period of depression. (Cheers.) In spite of what the Prime Minister had said, he (Mr. Fichardt) could not help thinking that the financial experts in this House had not spoken without consideration and reflection. They might be wrong, but the statements they had made were worthy of consideration. (Hear, hear.)</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#how_to_meet_the_deficit">

<heading>HOW TO MEET THE DEFICIT.</heading>

<p>According to the suggestion that had been put forward by the experts the deficit could be reduced by &#x00A3;431,000, leaving a deficit of &#x00A3;331,000. But as this included the abnormal expenditure of January and July, if that were charged to the railway account there would be a deficit then of only &#x00A3;40,000. That was leaving out the bewaarplaatsen money. If this result could be arrived at by following the advice of the financial experts why could they not get these experts to go into the whole question and see if these savings could be effected? (Hear, hear.) The Prime Minister had met the suggestion of the hon. member for Barberton that the cost of the strikes should be charged to the Railway Funds with ridicule, but if there was an accident on the railway that would be charged to the Railway Funds, and the people of the interior would have to bear it, as they had to bear the loss on the working of the harbours. He (Mr. Fichardt) believed a Select Committee would be able to devise some temporary source of income. For instance, we might, for the time being, suspend the Imperial preference, which, he understood, was largely enjoyed by the Germans. (Laughter, and hear, hear.) Then an increase of &#x00BD; per cent on the ad valorem rates would cover the &#x00A3;40,000 deficit, and the collection of this increased ad valorem duty would cost nothing. These suggestions would serve until Government could introduce a properly revised Customs tariff and a scheme for equalising taxation throughout South Africa. In conclusion, Mr. Fichardt said he did not think the proposal of the hon. member for Cape Town, Central (Mr. Jagger), went far enough. He hoped the hon. member would consider the advisability of withdrawing it and supporting the amendment of the hon. member for Uitenhage (Mr. Fremantle). (Hear, hear.)</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_ja_broer_commando">

<heading>THE &#x201C;JA BROER COMMANDO.&#x201D;</heading>

<speech by="#mentz">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. MENTZ</person> (Zoutpansberg)</from>

<p>said they always waited with a certain amount of curiosity to hear what the hon. member for Ladybrand had to say. The hon. member was at times so friendly, and at other times could so pleasantly stab his friends in the back, that they always expected something good from him. When he had a point to make he was skilled in mockery of his own people, but did it in a language which was not theirs. To-day he had been even more bitter than they could have expected, and he had taken up the cudgels for the hon. member for Barberton. The hon. member for Barberton had been so badly hit, it appeared, that the hon. member for Ladybrand had felt himself called upon to try to repair the damage, and had even gone so far as to show himself an open enemy of the Government and of the people amongst whom he sat. He had even called the members of the Government Party a &#x201C;ja-broer commando&#x201D; (an army of sycophants). On a former occasion he had been good enough to explain how that commando of ja-broers acted in the caucus. He also told them that he liked to attack the Prime Minister because he was so great. But why always at the heels? The hon. member was always talking about a commando. But what did he know about a commando? The same hon. member had formerly amused them a good deal with his articles under the pen-name &#x201C;Blikoor,&#x201D; which the speaker hoped would soon reappear.</p>

<p>If the hon. member for Ladybrand was as completely wrong in other things as he was in his financial policy, then his condition was hopeless. The hon. member had told them that he had no time to consult the natives on the native question. Of course that could be well understood, as the hon. member wanted so much time to devote to addressing public meetings in the constituencies of other hon. members. Amongst other remarks made by the hon. member was one to the effect that there had not been sufficient economy in the public service. Now they all felt that in the State service there should be no extravagance, and the speaker shared the feeling that the Government should see as far as they possibly could that due economy was observed. In his own constituency he had observed that attempts had been made to secure proper economy of administration, and with good results. For instance, in the Department of Justice, work had been taken over which belonged to the Department of Native Affairs, and it worked very well. It was easy for the hon. member for Yon Brandis to wash his <span class="col_2487-2488" refersTo="page_1250"/>hands in innocence, and to say that the Opposition were not responsible for the State service, but the speaker still remembered very well what had taken place during the first session of the Union Parliament. When the Government had tried to introduce economies in the public service, they were furiously attacked by members of the Opposition, and every dismissal of an official was made the subject of a debate in the House. And the same thing had been done year after year. The hon. member for Cape Town, Central, had alleged that some 1,168 officials had been retrenched, and it was no wonder after what had taken place that the Government preferred to retain them rather than to dispense with their services. It was impossible, therefore, for the Opposition to say that they were not responsible.</p>

<p>Then the hon. member for Ladybrand had stated that nothing had been done for the advancement of agriculture, in which statement he was supported by the hon. member for Cape Town, Gardens. The speaker rejoiced that the hon. member last mentioned had shown so much interest in farming matters. Disapproval had also been expressed at what the Government had done in the matter of land settlement, and in order to help the poor whites in the towns. The hon. members for Fort Beaufort and Cape Town, Central, had also attacked the late Transvaal Government for what they did on behalf of the poor whites in providing them with cattle. Those people had been kept under careful supervision, they had kept their cattle, and the bulk of them were once more on their legs. In that way they had helped 4,500 people, but the hon. member for Cape Town, Central, had nothing but censure for it all. He was opposed to the system, despite the fact that the people concerned had made progress again, and despite the fact that they now owned far more cattle than they had received. Perhaps they were a little behind hand now and again in paying the interest, but the Government had full security. Did the hon. members for Fort Beaufort and Cape Town, Central, prefer to retain the system of settlement which had been applied in the Transvaal in the time of the Crown Colony Government? The hon. member for Fordsburg was a member of that Government, and that system was one of his masterpieces, so that the hon. member was an authority on the subject of land settlement. The Crown Colony Government had spent &#x00A3;276,000 on the settlements at Potchefstroom and Klerksdorp. They had incurred a loss there of &#x00A3;54,000, without taking into account the question of diminished values. Those settlements had not been a success, and yet the Opposition recommended that system. They could see from that how much value ought to be attached to the criticism they received from the Opposition. If the Government had had money enough, of course they would have been able to do much more in the way of land settlement, especially if they were supported in it by the Opposition. But what had the settlements in the Transvaal already cost? The figures were amazing. Of the advances made they had written off &#x00A3;45,000, &#x00A3;27,000 on account of rents, and &#x00A3;26,000 for interest and irrecoverable debts. The ground was bought by the Government at a price which the settler could never pay, and on that account &#x00A3;142,000 had had to be written off, whilst for supplies another &#x00A3;100,000 had also been written off. Altogether that came to &#x00A3;540,000, and it gave them a good example and much food for reflection. It was very much better to support a Government which went to work more quietly, rather than to pay out a lot of money which they would later on have to regret. The hon. member for Fort Beaufort had tried to make the Department of Lands ridiculous for its manner of advertising the available farms. The hon. member had pointed out that in its advertisements the Department had stated that malaria prevailed on the farms. The speaker thought it would have been a crime if the Department had made it public that the farms were healthy, when as a matter of fact they were malarial. Then references had been made to Canada but they would remember that Colonel Gorgas had stated that it was easier to get protection against malaria than against the cold in Winnipeg. (Laughter.) The Government was perfectly justified in going slowly. It was quite true that no great settlements were being established, but there was a lot of ground of great value being given out. What did the Director of Irrigation say on the subject of settlements? He said that, in his opinion, nothing else could be done than to see in the first place that water was found on the farms before the ground was given out for settlement purposes. The Department of Irrigation had undoubtedly done a great deal for Zoutpansberg, Waterberg, and Rusten berg. They found boreholes wherever they went, and young farmers were coming from all directions, and helping to convert what were formerly desert lands into good farming lands. The Lands Department also were doing excellent work, and that was why the speaker felt so strongly in regard to the remarks which had been made by the hon. member for Ladybrand, and his complaints about that department. In the course of his professional duties the sneaker came much into contact with the department, and it was often his duty to advise people to apply to that department, Help was always given, in fact he did not know of a single case which had met with a refusal. The engineers came from great distances, they stayed with the people, and gave them the best possible advice. Then the hon. member for Ladybrand had also made mocking references to the field-cornets, and it was to be hoped that the hon. member would repeat what he had said in his own Province.</p>

<p><span class="col_2489-2490" refersTo="page_1251"/>They were told nearly every day what was being done in Australia and New Zealand in the matter of settlements. It appeared to him, however, that South Africa need in no wise be ashamed of what it had done when compared with those countries. They had, for instance, recently appointed a Commission in Victoria in order to find out whether the settlements had really been as successful as they had been made out, and whether they were not costing too much money. What had the Government done under the Crown Lands Settlement Act of 1912? Under clauses 10 and 11 of that Act 61,937 morgen of ground had been bought to a value of &#x00A3;36,809, on which 913 settlers had been placed. Under Clause 13 some 324,991 morgen had been bought at a cost of &#x00A3;338,000, which had enabled them to assist 600 people. Now they talked about &#x201C;change of ownership,&#x201D; but it was not that. He personally knew how the thing was worked. Formerly those who were in possession of a little capital could not buy from the absentee landowner, because the latter asked too big a price. But when the Government bought the ground, the applicant paid one-fifth of the purchase price and the Government the remainder. Then the ground was well worked, and there could be no question of speculation, because the ground remained the property of the State until the purchase price had been paid in full. The hon. member for Cape Town, Central, disapproved of the system, and the hon. member for Fordsburg attacked the Land Bank because the latter advanced moneys as loans in order to pay off other loans. But why was the Land Bank created? When Responsible Government was given them in the Transvaal the position of the farmer was that he simply could not get money. The banks wanted eight or ten per cent., and nobody would lend money on farms in the Zoutpansberg. Then came the Land Bank, which lent money at low interest. The bonds at high interest were cancelled, and the farmer was able to get on. It was now said that this was being done at the expense of the taxpayer, but the taxpayer did not suffer at all, because the securities were excellent. They heard nothing about the taxpayer when the hon. member for Fordsburg was busy with his land settlements.</p>

<p>Formerly those who were in the possession of a little capital could never buy ground from the big land companies, but since the land tax was in the air there were a number of farms in the market. With the help of the Land Bank those farms could now be purchased.</p>

<p>The hon. member for Bethlehem possessed a wide knowledge of taxation affairs, and he was the first to applaud the speech of the hon. member for Barberton, but that, of course, was before the blunder was discovered in the calculations which the hon. member for Barberton made. The hon. member for Bethlehem had sharply criticised the Government because they had not been sufficiently economical. The hon. member was, of course, strongly in favour of economy so long as it was not applied in Bethlehem. He wanted, however to see an item of &#x00A3;50,000 placed on the Estimates for agricultural education. But where were the Government to get the money from?</p>

<p>What was actually the chief thing in the proposals of the hon. member for Barberton? The hon. member wanted to get an additional &#x00A3;200,000 in taxes from the pockets of the natives. If there should be a deficit, and the Government decided to levy a higher tax on the Kaffirs, he (the speaker), would regard such a thing as entirely wrong, and in that respect he agreed with what had been stated by the Prime Minister. He did not wish to be understood to say that at the first increase of the tax on the Kaffirs, they would go into rebellion, for they knew that there was now a Defence Force in existence, but the present was not the proper time to meddle with the taxation of the Kaffirs. The hon. member for Bethlehem wanted &#x00A3;50,000 for the agricultural education of the whites. The object was praiseworthy enough, but he wanted to get the money out of the pockets of the natives, and that was totally wrong. The hon. member had no right to propose that. It was very easy to say that the Kaffir must pay more, but those in the Transvaal were already paying &#x00A3;350,000, and what did they get back in a direct form? They got nothing more than &#x00A3;15,000. That was all, and certainly it was not too much. There was a general objection to direct taxation. To increase the taxes on the Kaffirs was a much more dangerous proposition than the proposed land tax. In the speech which had been delivered by the hon. member for Barberton he had taken no account of the 47,000 Kaffirs on the Witwatersrand who came from elsewhere and paid no taxes. That was an error which would certainly be put right by the Budget Committee which had been proposed by the hon. member for Uitenhage. (Laughter.) The speaker did not doubt that good use would be made of the proposals which had been made by the hon. member for Barberton. They would tell the people that the whites would have to pay taxes now, and not the Kaffirs. They must not think, however, that the Kaffirs knew nothing, for in fact they knew exactly when injustice was done to them. They could treat the Kaffir strictly, but also with justice. Speaking generally the natives were very obedient to the law, and a handful of police were sufficient to restrain thousands of them. On the other hand, it would never do to make enemies of them.</p>

<p>The hon. member for Fordsburg was not satisfied with the land tax, and had stated that the tax would fall on people who did not know what they were to do with the land. But had not the hon. member seen in the newspapers what had taken place in London? A meeting of landowners had <span class="col_2491-2492" refersTo="page_1252"/>been held there representing three and a half million morgen of ground, and those were the people who would fall under the land tax. They should read the report of the Landowners&#x2019; Association, representing about five million morgen of ground. Much of that ground lay in districts which were not suitable as settlement areas, but the society also owned ground which was eminently suitable for that purpose. Many of their farms were situated in the neighbourhood of Government farms which were already destined for use as settlements. Since the land tax was in the air a number of those farms had come into the market. That was the first result of the tax. If the taxation proposals were withdrawn, then at once 75 per cent. of those farms would be withdrawn from the market.</p>

<p>The hon. member for Rustenburg had heartily supported the Government in connection with the Natives Land Act, and it was to be regretted that the hon. member could not also support the Government in their land tax proposals. The effect of that tax would be to render available to the sons of South Africa many farms which were at present unobtainable. The Opposition could not bring up anything against the imposition of such a tax. They had in fact always advocated a land tax, and would introduce one to-morrow if they had the opportunity. The Labour party also would support the tax, seeing that they had already introduced a similar sort of tax in the Transvaal. The collection of the tax would not be so very expensive, as the Government would be able to avail themselves of the services of the Land Bank inspectors for the purpose of valuing the farms.</p>

<p>They had had a number of alternative proposals placed before them, but they had won very little support. The hon. member for Rustenburg wanted to levy a tax on the exports of raw diamonds, and had referred them to a report of the Select Committee in the Senate. Both the minority and the majority reports of that Committee recommended the imposition of such a tax, but that was not for the purpose of getting revenue, but in order to encourage the establishment of a local diamond polishing industry. Such a tax was not to be commended. Should there be another slump in the diamond market as was now the case with the market for ostrich feathers, they would hold the Government responsible for it. The hon. member for Rustenburg would not be willing to accept the responsibility for it.</p>

<p>It was very hard for members who supported the Government to approve of taxation proposals, until they Came to consider the alternative suggestions, and then they came to the conclusion that the Government&#x2019;s plans were the best. Still, he wished to say that if the Government, or any other Government, went so far as to apply the tax to the smaller farms, it would become the duty of those who now supported the Government to fight against such a proposal as hard as they could. In the form in which it was at present placed before the House, however, he had no objection to it. (Cheers.)</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_native_question">

<heading>THE NATIVE QUESTION.</heading>

<speech by="#meyler">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">H. M. MEYLER</person> (Weenen)</from>

<p>said he was afraid at one time that they were going to have no information about that very large proportion of our population which had no direct representation in this House, but the hon. member for Barberton (Mr. Hull) had raised the matter on the question of the equalisation of the taxes paid by the coloured races. But the hon. member was somewhat premature, because before doing that we should do something towards unifying the policy with which we treated these people. This giant who had been sleeping in our midst was beginning to awake, and we should study what the effect would be when finally he roused himself and took an active part in the affairs of South Africa. Governments in Natal in the past would rather go out and put their enemies in office than face the native question. He hoped the Union, however, would face the question in the near future, for if it did not South Africa would rush to disaster. 78 per cent. of our population were non-Europeans, which put us in a different position to any other part of the British Dominions with the exception of India. In the Southern States of America only about 30 per cent. of the population consisted of non-Europeans. The tendency in studying the native question in South Africa was to do so almost entirely from the point of view of labour&#x2014;&#x201C; this valuable asset &#x201D; as it was called.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hon_member">

<from>An <person refersTo="hansard_za">HON. MEMBER</person>:</from>

<p>A reservoir of labour.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#meyler">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MEYLER</person> (continuing)</from>

<p>said that when the voortrekkers arrived in the Free State there was hardly an indigenous black man in that country, but now the main population of the Free State was rapidly becoming coloured. That was a startling matter. Although we had such a very large disproportion between the coloured and white races, we were utilising 212,000 coloured people all the time from outside the Union.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#why_labour_was_scarce">

<heading>WHY LABOUR WAS SCARCE.</heading>

<p>The effect of using this labour wasset out by the magistrate in the course of their reports. It had been caused by the great desire in the past to bring in servile labour, and avoid using people they had already got in this country. The effect of the magistrates&#x2019; reports in the Cape Province went to show that there was a cry as to the scarcity of unskilled labour. The magistrate at Carnarvon, for instance, stated that those farmers who treated their servants well had no difficulty in getting labour, and they found that reflected on the reports from the other Provinces. The <span class="col_2493-2494" refersTo="page_1253"/>magistrate of Steynsburg pointed out that fit took six unskilled coloured labourers to do the work of one European with a shearing machine. The magistrate at Zoutpansberg said there was no doubt that many owners regarded the natives as a valuable commodity, to be exploited with as much feeling as a mine-owner showed towards a vein in a quartz reef. (Labour cheers.) In Natal it was shown that these people were asserting themselves, and were now getting more wages than they used to get. The magistrate of Alexandria re ported that Indian labour was becoming scarcer, and those who were willing to reindenture got double the wages they used to get in the past. In the Free State there was a terrible state of affairs, some of the magistrates stating that the farmers had to herd their own flocks, but he believed that even under such a startling system farmers managed to flourish in other countries. The magistrate of Jacobsdal stated that one reason for the scarcity of labour was the lowness of the wages paid. It was very obvious that the old system of paying the merest pittance had got to go, and it was throwing the country back. In the meantime, although labour was getting scarcer, it was not because the non-European section of the population was decreasing, as the last census showed. So great was the natural increase of the non-European population that if the Prime Minister wanted to prevent this disproportion of European and non-Europeans still further growing he would have to get 100,000 people into the country every year.</p>

<p>The hon. member then went on to refer to the efforts to bring in European agriculturists with Government aid, and the result was that, on the 31st December, 1913, three men&#x2014;two accompanied by their wives and two children&#x2014;were introduced into the Union. (Laughter.) The Prime Minister had a long way to go if he wanted to make up the 100,000 for this year. Even if he got a scheme going, it would take five years to get it in proper order, and by that time the non-European race would have advanced by a further half a million. The British immigration statistics showed that during 1913 302,000 people left Great Britain, and 385 out of that number came to South Africa. No fewer than 164,000 went to Canada and 77,000 to the United States. Between 1904 and 1911 the proportion of Europeans to non-Europeans decreased by 1.35 in the Cape Province, 1.53 in the Transvaal, less than 1 per cent. in Natal, and 3.65 per cent. in the Free State. In the latter Province they now had two black men to every white, and the proportion was rapidly sinking against the white. Although up to 1911 we had only 414,000 non-Europeans in the country who could read and write, the product of perhaps 50 years of education, there were today in Government schools no less than 178,000 of these people. Dealing with education among the natives, he pointed out that at Durban, where the natives had no vices to distract their attention, nearly every native who came to the city went to a night school and learned to read and write, while the Pretoria magistrate pointed out that most of the native children in the district were being taught to read and write despite the fact that only one native school was getting a Government grant. He also pointed out that some of them were going up as far as the Seventh Standard, and even through the normal course. He then referred to the career of the Rev. John Dube, who, he said, was one of the best educated among the Zulus, and who had made his life&#x2019;s work the education of those round him. These people were advancing, and the effect on this country at a very early date would be most astonishing. It was high time they looked into the matter. There were 178,000 in the Government schools, and in Natal, although they got a grant of only &#x00A3;15,000 from the Government, out of which highly paid officials were paid, they managed to educate 24,000 people out of that amount.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#combinations_of_coloured">

<heading>COMBINATIONS OF COLOURED.</heading>

<p>They must realise, too, as they went into the towns, their education was not only book learning; they were absorbing new ideas all the time. One effect of that was that there was going to be a change in the labour market. They had had it preached regularly, and there was a great deal in it, that the white worker would never be really effective so long as he had only his wages to depend upon. He wanted a reserve to fall back upon, and so the Unions were working to be blackleg-proof. At present the white worker was at the mercy of his wage. If he was out of work not only he but his wife and children were soon on the verge of starvation. The native was in a different position from the white worker, for he had a reserve. It was easy for him to go back home from the industrial centres for six months if he wanted to do so. If the natives were combined they could do that at any time, and there was no question that they were going to combine. They knew as much about combination as the Europeans did to-day. If they spoke to any coloured man who was taking an interest in those questions of organisation they would find that they had got the idea and were only waiting the opportunity. They might start in this country a system of servile labour, but they would find that the coloured were not as servile as they thought they would be. Where would the industries of South Africa be if the natives determined to have their fair share of production? The Government might try to keep up their policy of forcing people into violence. Were they going to continue to attempt to keep the natives under the rifle? Between 1st July and 31st January last natives and Indians had been shot down in six different <span class="col_2495-2496" refersTo="page_1254"/>industrial centres. The total butcher&#x2019;s bill was, he believed, 17 natives killed and 61 wounded, and 8 Indians killed and about 35 wounded. A ghastly total of 121 people, all injured by gunshot wounds. If they insisted on the rule of the rifle the natives would combine for the purpose of violence, but they must pull up before that took place. On the Witwatersrand, where members of all races south of the Equator mingled, there were a large number of agitators, not those gentlemen who were sent over the seas, but native agitators, who were making great forward steps. Turning again to the question of education, Mr. Meyler said that in 1911 64 per cent. of literate people in the Cape were European. Of those being educated at the Government expense to-day only 43 per cent. were European; less than half of the children at school in the Cape who were being educated at the Government expense were Europeans. The same thing applied in Natal, where there were 46 per cent. only of Europeans. If they took round figures they would find that since Union there had been an increase of European children being educated in the Cape of 13,000, while the non-European had increased 18,000. In Natal the increase of non-Europeans was 6,000, while in the Transvaal and Free State since Union there had not been such a big increase until last year, when they found that 1,000 more coloured children were being educated in the Transvaal and 1,700 more in the Free State, compared with 1912.</p>

<p>The effect on the electorate would be very marked, for the non-Europeans were not only being educated but also increasing in numbers, and it was not surprising to find that they were getting a larger say in the affairs of the country. In five divisions of the Cape Province, there were over 30 per cent. of coloured voters. In six more divisions there were between 25 and 30 per cent. coloured. In 11 divisions of the Cape there were over 25 per cent. coloured voters, and he would point out that when there were 25 per cent. of the electorate likely to vote solid they could generally carry the division. There were 16 divisions in the Cape Province that had over 20 per cent. of coloured voters. Within 25 years from the commencement of Union we should probably find the coloured vote completely dominating the Cape. One of the first troubles would be the coloured people throughout the Union demanding a say in the government of the country.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#keep_the_natives_on_the_land">

<heading>KEEP THE NATIVES ON THE LAND.</heading>

<p>The basis of the mining industry throughout South Africa rested on the coloured people, for although there were only 30,000 whites employed on the mines there were a quarter of a million blacks. But South Africa was not the only place where large quantities of docile labour could be obtained, for according to an advertisement in the &#x201C;Straits Times,&#x201D; &#x201C;Good, healthy Javanese coolies can be delivered at once and in any quantity by the Anglo-Dutch Agency, Ltd.&#x201D; (Laughter.) Mr. Meyler then quoted from the magistrates&#x2019; reports to show the present condition of the natives and coloured classes throughout South Africa, incidentally pointing out that the gentlemen who compiled the index to the reports had, under the word &#x201C;pauperism,&#x201D; put &#x201C;See prosperity.&#x201D; (Laughter.) The prosperity of the few and the pauperism of the many, that was the system on which South Africa was trying to build itself up, but it was a system which was bound to fail. In the Cape, according to the magistrates&#x2019; reports, the farming community was purchasing motor-cars to an increasing extent, while the European unskilled workman was going under in the competition with the coloured man. Our present condition, went on Mr. Meyler, had been brought about because we endeavoured to build up industries on the basis of coloured labour. Our coloured population had one very great value, because their natural habitat was on the land. There was a strange development amongst the natives in agriculture and stock-raising, and they had shown a marked desire to obtain more modern agricultural implements. It was in keeping the natives on the land that the safety of the country lay, but had we done anything under Union to keep them on the land? Last session an Act was passed which was going to cause endless trouble, for although its intent was made to appear good the result would be evil. Natal was now beginning to feel the effects of the Native Land Act, and many things were coming to pass in the next two or three months which were pointed out as dangerous last year. The natives could not get into the locations, because there was no room for them, and they could not rent any land. Nearly half a million natives were living on private farms, but the magistrates had been instructed not to enforce the Act too strictly. Now the private owners were exercising the powers which the Native Land Act gave them, and there were many of the natives at the present day in Natal who were under notice to quit at the end of the reaping season, or about July or August, and where could they go There was nowhere to go, and the alternative was that the rents went up 25 per cent., and the Natives Land Act was used to rackrent these people. Notice had been given to some of them that if they wanted to stay on the farm all males in the kraal must give six months&#x2019; labour, and get no passes to work elsewhere. If the magistrate ordered the huts to be pulled down, there would be trouble, because these men would stay there. These people, whose natural place was on the land, were going to be, or they thought they were going to be, forced into industrial places. There was serious trouble building up for them in these directions. In the Orange Free State absurd attempts were being made to introduce pass laws, <span class="col_2497-2498" refersTo="page_1255"/>and to discriminate against the natives. With all that vast territory in South Africa, surely they could give these people a chance to work out a natural existence where they were not forced into the hands of the white men. In conclusion, Mr. Meyler referred to the appalling prevalence of a certain disease amongst the natives which, he said, had been introduced by the white man originally into the country, just as the white man was responsible for the half-caste population they saw around them. It was time these questions were faced, however unpleasant they might be.</p>

<speech by="#cronje">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. R. CRONJE</person> (Winburg)</from>

<p>said that the hon. member for Ladybrand (Mr. Fichardt) had that afternoon made an attack on the Government, and what had been the object of it? Was it to the benefit of the people and the country, or was it merely to bring the Government into bad odour outside the House? The hon. member had also made an attack on the Prime Minister, who was well able to defend himself, but if the hon. member made such an attack he should do so in an honourable manner, and not twist the right hon. gentleman&#x2019;s words. All that the Prime Minister had said about the hon. member for Barberton (Mr. Hull) was that he was glad that the hon. member had not made such a mistake of a million (as he had in his speech the other day), when he had been Minister of Finance; and perhaps that mistake was due to not being in such good company now. (Laughter.)</p>

<p>It struck him that if one woke the hon. member for Ladybrand at one o&#x2019;clock in the morning, the first thing he would say would be, &#x201C;That Eighty Club speech&#x201D;; because on every platform Mr. Fichardt referred to that speech. And what was wrong with that speech. The Prime Minister had said that Africa only wanted England&#x2019;s best&#x2014;and that was what they did want. (Ministerial cheers.) And now the hon. member for Ladybrand criticised the Prime Minister and the Government in regard to the establishment of an agricultural college at the Glen. Why had the hon. member not opposed the proposal when the matter was before the House, instead of now going through the lobbies spreading all kinds of rumours? Did the hon. member for Ladybrand know Tweespruit and Grootfontein? Did he think they would be suitable places to have large amounts spent on? The hon. member for Ladybrand criticised the Government for having appointed too many officials. Did the hon. member not know that these men had been appointed under the old self-government, and not by the Union Government? He (the speaker) did not think the Free State would be grateful for what the hon. member had said. The hon. member had mentioned a field-cornet who did no work but go to town to draw his salary. Shame on that field-cornet! And then the hon. member for Ladybrand had said that Civil Servants went on work at 9.15 and finished at 3.45. Where were these Civil Servants&#x2014;at Ladybrand? (Laughter.) Then the hon. member for Uitenhage had said there were too many officials. Where were there too many officials? (An hon. Member: Perhaps at Ladybrand.) Then the hon. member wanted the Estimates to go to a Select Committee. This was rather inconsistent, seeing that not so long ago the hon. member had said that he was opposed to Select Committees. (Laughter.)</p>

<p>Dealing with the taxation proposals and the charges of extravagance, Mr. Cronje said that it was not so long ago that many hon. members had urged that Cape officials should be placed on the old basis of salary. Then, when in the past the Government had appointed one head official in the Agricultural Department to take the place of the four head officials of the past, there had been a hue and a cry. Hon. members were very inconsistent in their attitude. He did not know whether there were too many officials in Cape Town, but he could say that in the rural districts there were not too many officials. As to police, he could say that more police officials were required in the outlying districts. Dealing with education, he was pleased to see what had been done to bring education within the reach of every child. In the Free State people were gratified at what had been done, so that to-day, instead of 18,000 children having to go without education, there are 17,000. Mr. Cronje went on to urge the necessity of additional postal, telephone, and telegraphic facilities being given to the rural districts. (Hear, hear.) He could, however, not understand why the rural districts should have to pay so much more for telephonic communication than the big towns. In regard to the establishment of industries, he urged that members should not look so much to the Government for the establishment of industries. If hon. members in their own districts took the initiative to start industries, they would see that the country would benefit. Let hon. members see what had been the outcome of the co-operative societies started in the Free State. He could not agree with the action of the Government in establishing creameries, and then letting them for the payment of a small interest on the capital. The Bethal Creamery cost the Government about &#x00A3;9,000 per year. This was not a sound position. Industries should be made co-operative, and although the Government should assist, they should not actually run them. The creameries at Standerton and Middelburg were really Government institutions. Turning to the Department of Public Works, it seemed to him there was a screw loose there. Expensive buildings were put up, and they were told that this was due to the fact that the building material was so much more expensive to-day than in the past. He urged that public buildings should be made cheaper. As to repairs, he held that these were effected most unsatisfactorily, which, to his mind, was due <span class="col_2499-2500" refersTo="page_1256"/>to the fact that the inspectors were too few and far between. In this connection, he wished to see the old system of Building Committees revived.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#extravagance_not_proved">

<heading>EXTRAVAGANCE NOT PROVED.</heading>

<p>In regard to the amendment of the hon. member for Uitenhage, Mr. Cronje said that the hon. member should have pointed out where the Government had been extravagant. In 1911 the hon. member had said that the salaries of officials were not too high and that no officials should be dismissed. The hon. member should now be able to point out in what respects the Government had since become so very extravagant. (Hear, hear.) The hon. member for Uitenhage had said that they should go back to the old Republican days. He was pleased that the hon. member found something good in the Republican days. But did the hon. member know that when a Budget Committee was appointed in the old Republican days, there was no Finance Minister to introduce the Budget, which was done by the chairman of the Budget Committee? (Hear, hear.) It would be necessary to alter the terms of the Constitution if they wanted to do as the Free State formerly did. The hon. member for Fauresmith had said the Estimates had been drawn up too hastily, but the hon. member for Uitenhage wished the Budget Committee to report in a week. The Minister had had a year to prepare his Budget. How could the committee do anything in a week? As to the taxation proposals, the hon. member for Fauresmith had said that the only aim of the new proposal was to catch the rich man. Well, the hon. member, who was such an advocate of the rights of the poor man, should be pleased. (Laughter.) Two years ago the hon. member for Uitenhage was in favour of an estate duty. That being so, he should now be consistent and support the present taxation proposals. Dealing with other remarks of the hon. member for Fauresmith, Mr. Cronje asked what more had been done in the other Provinces than in the Free State?</p>

<speech by="#wilcocks">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">C. T. M. WILCOCKS</person> (Fauresmith):</from>

<p>Irrigation works.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#cronje">

<from>&#x2020; Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">CRONJE</person>:</from>

<p>Irrigation works were done on a co-operative system in the Free State. (Cheers.) Mr. Cronje then turned to Mr. Brandt Wessels, who, he said, wished to tax the inland Provinces through railway rates to the tune of &#x00A3;250,000. (Laughter.) The hon. member had further said the railway tariffs were too low and should be increased. He (Mr. Cronje) hoped the Government would not act on the hon. member&#x2019;s suggestion. Dealing with the remarks of the hon. member for Von Brandis, Mr. Cronje said the hon. member was very ungrateful. He had asked: &#x201C;Where is the Defence Force?&#x201D; Had the Defence Force not protected Johannesburg in January? (Cheers.) In conclusion, Mr. Cronje said that of course no one was too anxious to see fresh taxation imposed. It had been remarked by the hon. member for Fauresmith (Mr. Wilcocks) that Estimates were drawn up just as the Government pleased. If that were so the Government would have balanced revenue and expenditure, but Estimates like that would not have been honest.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#expenditure_and_development">

<heading>EXPENDITURE AND DEVELOPMENT.</heading>

<speech by="#neethling">

<from>&#x2020; Dr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">A. M. NEETHLING</person> (Beaufort West)</from>

<p>said he did not think too much money was being spent on the administration of the country. They should take into consideration the fact that the country was expanding and developing, and naturally in view of that heavy expenditure must follow. The Civil Servants could not be dismissed, that was out of the question. (Hear, hear.) He thought that the House should be grateful to the hon. member for Barberton for what he had said in regard to the natives, because he thought it would be a good thing if they could place native taxation on the basis of equality. The speaker said he did not agree on that point with what had been said by the Prime Minister. Dealing with the remarks of the Labour members, Dr. Neethling said he was afraid the ideals which these members had put before the House would never materialise. (Hear, hear.) These hon. members were the cause of much of the misery in the country. In Johannesburg the labourers made large wages, and yet claimed more money and less work. (Hear, hear.) It had recently cost the country &#x00A3;300,000 to restrain the actions of working-men, who forgot that no less than &#x00A3;1,500,000 had been spent in connection with the miners&#x2019; phthisis. Did hon. members know what expenditure was involved by the proper. administration of affairs on the Rand? The Government was not to blame for the present state of affairs in Johannesburg, but all the blame should be attributed to the Labour members themselves. (Hear, hear.)</p>

<p>The Labour Party had wrong ideals in regard to immigration and taxation, and many Afrikanders were being led astray by them. It had been stated by the hon. member for Georgetown that after the next general election there would be forty Labour members in the House. God preserve the country from such a thing! The Labour members were the enemies of the country, and would have to be resisted. The Unionists ought to help the Government to do that, and indeed they ought all to stand together to fight such a great evil. One section of the Government party also ought to help them in that respect, because if they did not show a united front to those detestable persons in Johannesburg <span class="col_2501-2502" refersTo="page_1257"/>then the evil would make giant steps forward.</p>

<p>Well, the Government had been pretty generally criticised, even the hon. member for Bethlehem had essayed a financial speech. The hon. member was still young, and it was their duty to forgive him much &#x2014;(laughter)&#x2014;and the Prime Minister had dealt with him in the gentlest manner possible. The hon. member had built up a castle on the sandy foundations which had been laid for him by the Hon. member for Barberton. And now the castle had tumbled down. He also wanted to increase the railway tariffs, which was quite a novel system of finance. The hon. member was furthermore amazed at the size of the public debt, though he ought to have known all about that before. How had the hon. gentleman been able to enlighten his constituents on such subjects? He should be most prudent in dealing with them. Other hon. members also had ventured in the same dangerous territory.</p>

<p>The speaker said he regretted the secession of the hon. member for Fauresmith from the party, as he thought seriously over affairs. What was the cause of the change? How could he go back to Kroonstad and say that he was now supporting the Labour Party? It was noticeable that the hon. member for Boshof now ceased to call out &#x201C;hear, hear.&#x201D; Some hon. members who remained faithful in their allegiance to the Government were made out to be invertebrates, although their wives and other relatives were Hertzogites. They continued their loyal support to the Government, however; they had not gone far astray, and it was easy therefore for them to return. The interests of the country were better preserved in that way.</p>

<p>Finally, he was bound to express regret that so much money was being spent on irrigation in one district only, namely, in Worcester. No doubt, it was said to be done by means of co-operation, but the Minister ought not to lose sight of Beaufort West; where there were fine facilities for the damming up of the water. A wall could be built between the two mountains so as to conserve the water in the Zout River, and the Minister of Lands should give some attention to the matter. Waterworks could also be laid down along the Zak River, as it ran towards the two rivers. The same thing could be done at Prince Albert, where the water could be dammed up as it came out of the mountains, but there would be further opportunities to discuss those points. (Cheers.)</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_riet">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">F. J. W. VAN DER RIET</person> (Albany)</from>

<p>moved the adjournment of the debate.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<p>The debate was adjourned until to-morrow.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1914-05-13T23:11:00">11.11 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

