---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol2 - FRIDAY 19 JANUARY 1962'
layout: debate
year: 1962
month: JANUARY
month_slug: Jan
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 19 JANUARY 1962</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>

</narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#meeting_of_parliament">

<heading>MEETING OF PARLIAMENT</heading>

<p>Pursuant to Proclamation No. 119 of the State President, dated 23 October 1961, the members elected to serve in the House of Assembly met in the Assembly Chamber, Houses of Parliament, at <recordedTime time="1962-01-19T09:30:00">9.30 a.m</recordedTime>.</p>

<p>The SECRETARY read the Proclamation.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#official_opening">

<heading>OFFICIAL OPENING</heading>

<p>The SECRETARY announced:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) That the following letters had been received from the Secretary to the Prime Minister:

<ol>

<li>(a) Letter, dated 30 October 1961, intimating that the State President would open Parliament at 12 noon to-day in the Senate House;</li>

<li>(b) Letters, dated 9 September, 17 and 21 October 1961, respectively, notifying the names of persons declared duly elected as members of the House of Assembly to represent the Coloured voters in the Province of the Cape of Good Hope;</li>

<li>(c) Letter, dated 28 October 1961, notifying the names of persons declared duly elected as members of the House of Assembly; and</li>

</ol></li>

<li>(2) that the Honourable Mr. Justice Steyn, Chief Justice of South Africa, had been authorized by a Commission from the State President to administer to members of the House of Assembly the oath or affirmation in terms of Sections 52 and 115 of the Republic of South Africa Constitution Act, 1961.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#oath_or_affirmation_of_allegiance">

<heading>OATH OR AFFIRMATION OF ALLEGIANCE</heading>

<p>The SERJEANT-AT-ARMS announced the Hon. Mr. Justice Steyn, who was received by the members standing, and having taken his seat at the Table of the House, administered the oath or affirmation to the members present and thereupon retired.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#election_of_speaker">

<heading>ELECTION OF SPEAKER</heading>

<p>The SECRETARY intimated that the House would proceed to the election of Speaker.</p>

<speech by="#potgieter">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">J. E. POTGIETER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. McFarlane, I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Mr. Henning Johannes Klopper do take the Chair of this House as Speaker.</block>

<p>Short of one day it was precisely a year ago that I moved a similar motion in this House. Hon. members will recall that on that occasion I reminded them of the invaluable services rendered by Mr. Klopper to the country and to this House in his capacity as Chairman of the Select Committee on Railways and Harbours, as Deputy-Chairman of Committees, and later as Deputy-Speaker and Chairman of the Committee of the whole House. On that occasion I also reminded hon. members of our experience of Mr. Klopper as Chairman and as a member attending the deliberations in this House. He was then elected by the whole House to the highest office in this House. Thereafter we had further experience of Mr. Klopper in the role of Speaker, and I think I am voicing the opinion <span class="col_3-4" refersTo="page_18"/>of the House when I say that the confidence that we had in Mr. Klopper as Speaker, as the result of our experience, has been increased still further. I think that I should also mention here that Mr. Klopper was the first Speaker to be elected in the Republic of South Africa. And if hon. members unanimously adopt the motion that I have moved, which I do not doubt for a moment, he will also be the first Speaker to be elected by the House of Assembly of the Republic of South Africa. I am convinced that Mr. Klopper will occupy the office of Speaker with dignity. I am convinced that the venerable and, shall I say, proud traditions established by previous Parliaments and Speakers will be maintained and strengthened by him and that he will act in the spirit of the words of Erskine May, &#x201C;as the representative of the House, its powers, its proceedings and its dignities&#x201D;. It is not necessary for me, Mr. Secretary, to enlarge upon the suitability of Mr. Klopper as Speaker of the House of Assembly of the Republic of South Africa. But I do think I should pay a tribute here to the fact that he is almost completely bilingual and to the impartial manner in which he presides in this House. Not only we but even the Opposition have no hesitation in admitting the impartiality and the objective attitude of Mr. Speaker when he occupies the Chair. I think I should also mention here the contact that he has with the people who compose this Parliament. I do not want to expatiate on this; I just want to say that I am convinced that this motion of mine will be accepted unanimously this morning because Mr Klopper is held in high esteem by us and his services are deeply appreciated.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#faurie">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">FAURIE</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. McFarlane, it is with pleasure that I second this motion. Mr. Klopper, with his impartial conduct, has given satisfaction in the past to hon. members on both sides of this House. We are convinced that in the future too he will occupy his office with distinction and discharge his duties with great efficiency.</p>

<p>There being no other proposal, Mr. Klopper was called to the Chair by the Secretary.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#klopper">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">KLOPPER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. McFarlane, if this House is prepared once more to do me the great honour of electing me as Speaker of the House of Assembly, I shall submit to the choice of the House. May I express my sincere thanks to the proposer and the seconder, as well as to all the hon. members who support the motion, for the confidence they have reposed in me. I realize fully the great responsibility resting upon the Speaker and the great demands made upon him. I therefore realize my shortcomings. I can simply undertake, with the assistance and with the good spirit of all hon. members, with the regard they cherish for the true democratic traditions of Parliament, as well as the respect they have shown towards the Chair, to implement to the best of my ability the duties connected with this high office. I subject myself to the will of the House.</p>

<p>Mr. J. E. Potgieter and Mr. Faurie conducted Mr. Klopper to the Chair.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Before taking the Chair, I have to express my sincere thanks to hon. members for the high honour they have once again conferred upon me. From my past experience as Chairman of Committees and Speaker, I fully appreciate the great responsibilities resting upon the presiding officer. I can assure hon. members that I shall always endeavour to discharge my duties to the best of my ability and in an impartial manner. Next to the services of the Almighty God I again dedicate myself to your service and the service of this hon. House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, seeing that I have already congratulated you on a previous occasion, I just wish briefly to congratulate you again to-day on your reappointment as Speaker of this House. I want merely to remind you of what my hon. friend the hon. member for Brits (Mr. J. E. Potgieter) presumably said, viz. that the high honour has been conferred upon you of being the last Speaker of the House of Assembly of the Union of South Africa and the first Speaker of the Republic of South Africa. You have held this high office with honour and dignity. That is why we felt at liberty to-day again to restore you to that high post. It is not only through your impartiality, but also because of the sense of humour you have succeeded in introducing into our proceedings now and again that you have stolen the hearts of all of us on all sides of the House. We thank you for the services you have rendered in this way, because for the dignity of a body such as this it is essential for its Speaker to be faithful to the nice words with which he usually accepts the post. It is so easy to say what one would like to do; it is often so difficult to do what one says. But in the year that has passed you have shown that you can fill your post with dignity, that you can devote yourself to the service of this House with impartiality, and that you are able to do justice to everybody represented here, who also have their duties to perform. I want to congratulate you on your re-election. I particularly want to congratulate you on the way in which hitherto you have filled this post, and pray that you will be granted the power and the wisdom to continue in the way in which you commenced. I congratulate you.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House should like to associate ourselves with the congratulations extended to you on the Government side on your unanimous re-election as Speaker of this hon. House. It is because we have had experience of you in this office that your election has been unanimous and unopposed. We have learnt that you are one who will do your <span class="col_5-6" refersTo="page_19"/>best to maintain the dignity and the traditions of this House, and at the same time pay particular attention to the rights of minorities in the House, which are so particularly of interest to this side of the House. May I say, Sir, you occupy a most distinguished position. You are the representative of this House and at the same time you are its servant. I think it is in that spirit that we welcome you again to this high office and wish you well in the execution of your duties, and assure you that we shall do our best to assist you to carry them out in the manner we have learnt to expect from you.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bloomberg">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLOOMBERG</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues and myself I should like to congratulate you on your unanimous re-election to this important position, and to identify myself with the well-deserved tributes paid to you by the previous speakers. Mr. Speaker, we wish to assure you of our wholehearted support and co-operation in upholding the dignity of this hon. House. We wish you a happy term of office.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I want to express my sincere thanks to the hon. the Prime Minister, the hon. the Leader of the Opposition, as well as to the hon. member for Peninsula (Mr. Bloomberg) and other hon members for their congratulations. I appreciate it very much. It will of course be difficult to fulfil all their high expectations, but I shall do my best. The Speaker, however, cannot do justice to the execution of his duties unless he has the full support and co-operation of all members.</p>

<p>Once again I wish to thank the House for the honour it has conferred upon me, and for the good wishes expressed by hon. members representing all parties in this House. I shall at all times endeavour to maintain the dignity attaching to this high office, and I feel sure I shall receive the assistance of all hon. members in the discharge of my difficult task.</p>

</speech>

<p>Business suspended at 10.20 a.m. and resumed at 11.40 a.m.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#speaker&#x2019;s_report">

<heading>Mr. SPEAKER&#x2019;S REPORT</heading>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I have to report that after the House had suspended proceedings this morning, I proceeded to Government House accompanied by my proposer and seconder, Ministers of the Republic and other honourable members of the House, where we were received by the State President, to whom I presented myself pursuant to the Standing Orders of the House. The State President then congratulated me on my election.</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and members proceeded to the Senate House to attend the ceremony of the Opening of Parliament, and on their return,</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker took the Chair and read prayers.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening_speech">

<heading>OPENING SPEECH</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER reported that the House had this day attended the ceremony of the opening of Parliament, and this His Excellency the State President had been pleased to deliver an opening speech to both Houses of Parliament, of which, for greater accuracy, he had received a copy as follows:</p>

<p>Mr. President and Members of the Senate:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">I am glad to welcome you to this the First Session of the Second Parliament of the Republic of South Africa. <br/>Parliament&#x2019;s deliberations during the coming session, will no doubt take into account the present international situation. This will necessarily affect the legislative programme. Those who are charged with the responsibility of government must ensure that factors which are of importance to South Africa are seen in the right perspective. This message to Parliament and the people will therefore in broad outline state the tasks which lie ahead, as seen against the background of the present world situation. <br/>The outstanding feature of the present international situation is the progressive deterioration of the United Nations, which was intended by its founders to be an instrument for international unity; a force for the maintenance of world peace; a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations by means of genuine consultation; and which could secure and retain the respect of all peoples by dignified behaviour and strict impartiality. Nobody expected the United Nations to be a perfect organization in an imperfect world. Its shortcomings may, however, no longer be discreetly ignored, when they threaten, as they do, the very objectives intended by its founders, namely peace and justice. <br/>The defects of the United Nations clearly came to light when, during the recent Assembly, the Republic of South Africa was the victim of planned and sustained attacks. <br/>Some of these defects are the emergence of hostile blocs of nations and the aggressive attitude of the new African member-states which, during the past two years, have considerably grown in numbers, but many of which are small and inexperienced. There is also the link, at least for some purposes, between the communist and Afro-Asian blocs. There is the weakened position in the United Nations of the leading Western nations, <i>vis-&#x00E0;-vis</i> the Afro-Asian and communist nations, but at the same time these Western nations bear the main burden of financing the organization. Equally disturbing is the readiness (albeit under the cloak of morality) of many Western <span class="col_7-8" refersTo="page_20"/>nations to win the favour of the Afro-Asian states, even at the expense of sacrificing old friends and allies. There is also at times the disunity among the Western nations when they should stand together in defence of fundamental principles of democracy, such as freedom of speech, proper parliamentary behaviour and disapproval of double standards. <br/>Two recent events have dramatically but tragically shown up the direction in which the United Nations is moving. There was its active participation in the internal struggle in the Congo, instead of promoting peaceful settlement. It thereby laid itself open to accusations of co-responsibility for inhumanities and injustices and of interference in the internal affairs of neighbouring states. <br/>The latest instance of the ineffectiveness of the United Nations was India&#x2019;s aggression against Portugal in Goa, with the Western nations confining themselves to critical comment, while some Afro-Asian and communist nations have been openly jubilant in their support of Indian aggression. Other similar events may be in the offing. <br/>Most Western countries will no doubt formulate their international policies in the light of the sorry position in which the United Nations finds itself. They must also take into account the factors which are responsible. Two such factors can be mentioned: <br/>Firstly, man has by technological advancement equipped himself with the means for ensuring material progress and for providing benefits hitherto unknown. Unfortunately the products of man&#x2019;s creative genius are being used to threaten the world with disaster. With prosperity for all within reach, there are nations that are prepared by political means rather to wrest from others the material benefits which they have acquired. Thus fear is influencing thoughts and policies. <br/>The second factor in the disturbed world situation is the clash of ideologies which results from the ambition for world domination by aggressive Communism. The result is debasement of great ideals, values and principles of modern civilization. So, for instance, the ideal of separate independence for natural national entities, with genuine democratic government by their peoples, was abused by raising the banner of anti-colonialism in the cold war against the West. <br/>This led to the over-rapid establishment of states enjoying international status, but without sufficient experienced and trained leaders in all fields, to enable them fully to bear the burdens and responsibilities of statehood. They were not allowed, even temporarily, to advance the good government and the material and cultural wellbeing of their respective peoples, but were immediately subjected to the blandishments of outside states that sought their alignment in the cold war, and for that purpose did not hesitate to inflame nationalistic passions. <br/>The new nations were mainly of Asian and African origin, and the former metropolitan powers were their guides to knowledge, prosperity and potential nationhood. Communistic propaganda, despite the enslavement of nations and individuals under communist control, took the line of depicting this development, for which the controlling powers were responsible, as a struggle for freedom, and more often as a struggle by non-Whites against White oppressors. The communist factor which is responsible for much of the frustration, incitement, hatred, attacks and slogans, so rife in the world to-day, often shelters behind humanistic, liberal and moral propaganda. <br/>It is against this international background that the difficulties which face the Republic of South Africa must be seen. Those in charge of its affairs must maintain law and order within its borders, when these tendencies make themselves felt here. They must oppose by every means at the Republic&#x2019;s disposal, any attack, in whatever form, upon the integrity of the State, particularly campaigns deriving from forces which allegedly pursue the path of peace and coexistence, but which in practice seek the destruction of the legitimate rights of communities, and even of nations with different identities. Those in charge of the Republic&#x2019;s affairs must more particularly continue, with zest, the implementation of its own solution for providing a genuine political future for all its racial groups. <br/>This, in fact, is the most important issue with which the Republic is faced in the international field. In all other matters its good intentions are fundamentally unquestioned. Wherever the Republic has to meet pressure or attack&#x2014;whether in regard to South West Africa or the Republic itself&#x2014;it is related to the matter of political rights. The form which the pressure takes is stated unambiguously, namely full political franchise for all. The objective is equally clear, namely that Southern Africa and the whole of Africa must be ruled by Black peoples. The main force behind this aim should also be stated frankly, namely the communist policy of world domination. <br/>What course must South Africa follow? There is the path of expediency. Expediency would not, however, be served by minor measures. Experience elsewhere in Africa has shown chat neither the demands of the Afro-Asian bloc, nor the instigations of the communist group, would be satisfied by anything less than full acceptance of a policy of &#x201C;one man one vote&#x201D; in one multiracial state and therefore the recognition of majority rule by the Black voters. Any political system to retain White control in a <span class="col_9-10" refersTo="page_21"/>professedly multi-racial state&#x2014;however subtly contrived, and even if put forward as an intermediary step to Black rule in the future&#x2014;would diminish neither the attacks nor the pressure and uncertainty. Some Western nations might wish to satisfy themselves and others with so-called concessions, whether in regard to South West Africa or the policy of separate development. If, however, they should find, as they will, that this does not appease those Afro-Asian states which they court as possible allies in the cold war, then, until disillusioned by other events, they will most likely feel compelled to follow in exerting further pressure. <br/>The path of expediency must therefore lead to political and, in fact, to national suicide for the White nation in South Africa. It will also result in economic disaster for Whites. Coloured and Bantu. Whether the method of quick surrender is followed or recourse is had to rearguard action, the result would be inevitable. Justice for the White man in South Africa will have been sacrificed. For a time the Western nations may find comfort in the belief that a problem has been removed. For Communism, however, an objective more satisfactory than any of its successes elsewhere against the West, will have been achieved. Sooner or later, through the deterioration or chaos which must follow, the whole of Africa could be dominated, its wealth exploited, the seaway between East and West controlled, and the shrinking West hopelessly encircled. <br/>For the Republic of South Africa the path of expediency in any form is therefore quite impossible, both as a matter of national survival and as the duty of a loyal member of the West in the struggle against world Communism. <br/>The only alternative is the road of national reconstruction based on differentiation and with due regard to the interests of the different sections of the population.</block>

<p>*Good race relations must therefore be a prime objective of national policy. In addition, it is clear that this will not be achieved by White domination, as the result of our present status or skill, over all non-Whites as a permanent aim in one common multi-racial fatherland; nor will good race relations be achieved by Black domination, as the result of their numerical superiority, over all smaller groups in such a multi-racial state. In order to establish peace and tranquility and harmonious relations, each racial unit must therefore be guided, in accordance with a clear pattern, to a form of self-government suited to it.</p>

<p>The task on which the Government will therefore concentrate, while continuing as guardian with its broader administration, will be to adapt economic development, systematically and as fast as possible, to coming circumstances. It wishes to train and exercise the necessary leaders within each racial group to serve their own people. It further wishes, in consultation and co-operation with their authorities, to promote the process of emancipation of the Bantu from their familiar traditional systems to democrate self-government. The Government&#x2019;s purposeful policy in this connection is thus not suppression or discrimination based on race or colour, as has been alleged, but in fact its removal by the separation of the White and Bantu communities. This must be accompanied by granting to each the fullest rights in its own area, as well as imposing the same limitations on each in the area of the other.</p>

<p>It is self-evident that economic development on a large scale for each group must receive the closest attention. Scaremongering with exaggerated assertions about tax increases are, however, out of place, as it must be borne in mind that the same population groups and their growth would in any event have to be trained, cared for, housed and provided with employment opportunities. In view of the growing endeavour abroad to achieve economic interdependence, even between already independent states, the further problems involved in this connection will be coped with more easily here than there.</p>

<p>The major matter with which Parliament and the people will thus be concerned, will be how to grant self-government to the Bantu as speedily as they themselves wish and are able to accept it. This will have to be done in such a way as to allow these communities to function on a healthy, efficient and truly democratic basis, and so as to ensure the maintenance of friendship and co-operation with the Whites. Thus the position of the Whites will at the same time be safeguarded.</p>

<p>Jointly with this process, provisions will have to be made even at this stage, on an organized basis, for mutual consultation and co-operation with the new authorities in matters of common concern. Administration, and legislation where necessary, will have to be concentrated upon this sphere of new political growth.</p>

<p>As far as the Coloured people are concerned, the Prime Minister in his discussion with members of the Coloured Advisory Council has already explained the Government&#x2019;s intentions concerning the Coloured community.</p>

<p>Each section of the population&#x2014;White as well as non-White&#x2014;will have to be fully equipped for its own task and services. The provision of the necessary health and social services and, above all, of education, training and employment opportunities, will offer no new problems as South Africa has already made much more progress in these spheres than was been made elsewhere in Africa and in many other parts of the world. It will be necessary only to adjust the tempo, extent and diversity to the new requirements which will accompany this development.</p>

<p>Linked up with the main task will be the handling of problems created by developments in neighbouring territories such as the High Commission Territories. The problems connected <span class="col_11-12" refersTo="page_22"/>with the latter arose prior to and independently of South Africa&#x2019;s withdrawal from the Commonwealth, namely as a result of the change made some years ago by the United Kingdom in the policy concerning these areas as envisaged in 1910. It suited both states, however, to negotiate on the relations with the High Commission Territories concurrently with the discussions about future arrangements between the Republic and the United Kingdom after next May, when the standstill agreement following South Africa&#x2019;s withdrawal from the Commonwealth will expire. It was the Government&#x2019;s attitude that the aim should be to maintain to the greatest extent possible the existing mutual benefits and points of contact, and to ensure continued co-operation in all matters of common interest.</p>

<p>As was to be expected, the discussions took place in a spirit of goodwill. Details will be made available as soon as possible. The necessary measures to give effect to arrangements arrived at, will be taken or submitted to Parliament for consideration.</p>

<p>It is self-evident that the relations between the Republic and certain other members of the Commonwealth are also receiving serious attention with a view to maintaining and developing the relations and mutual benefits as far as possible.</p>

<p>In regard to other countries, and particularly those in Africa, it remains the Government&#x2019;s policy to offer its friendship, as well as such assistance as lies within its power, if there is an indication that it is welcome. The Government does not regard as permanent any enmity which is based on incitement or suspicion or genuine misunderstanding, but it cannot ignore enmity coupled with aggression or malicious action against South Africa.</p>

<p>A further contribution towards clarifying the Republic&#x2019;s position in the world community will be made by the greater emphasis that will be placed in future on the distribution of information, as well as on the enrichment of the population by immigration. The latter can also contribute to a better understanding in other countries of conditions and policies in South Africa.</p>

<p>In spite of everything being done and still to be done towards positive development and the clarification of South Africa&#x2019;s case, a blind eye should not be turned&#x2014;in the light of what is happening in the world&#x2014;to the dangers which may threaten its-full development as a nation or even the survival of the State. The Republic must take into account the unjustified demands and pressures which may come from within the country or from outside as a result of the specific ideological struggle to which reference has already been made. Adequate provision will thus have to be made for internal security, and the necessary steps continued to ensure the effective defence of the country.</p>

<p>It remains the earnest desire of the Republic to live with all nations in peace and friendship. The Republic must, however, have a defence force able to protect it against dangers which the future may hold. For this reason, the implementation of the defence legislation adopted by Parliament last year will be continued. It is also the Government&#x2019;s policy to provide the country&#x2019;s manpower with the most effective equipment. By means of the local manufacture of military equipment and ammunition, it is the aim to be independent as far as possible of overseas sources.</p>

<p>To be able to carry out this entire programme, very special attention must be paid to the national economy and the maintenance of a reasonable rate of growth in all sectors. One of the important aims is to provide employment opportunities and to make a steadily rising standard of living possible for the growing population.</p>

<p>The Republic has a wealth of natural resources, ample manpower, as well as inhabitance with the necessary resourcefulness, mental ability and perseverance to enable it to bring about the necessary rate of economic development. It will have to concentrate particularly on achieving the competence of its greatest asset, its human material, for the task that lies ahead, by means of education and training in the technological, scientific and managerial fields. It will also have to find the capital to be able to make the best use of its rich material and human resources. As the population has already proved sufficiently that it is able to supply its own capital to a very great extent and is no longer completely or mainly dependent on imported capital, which in any case is not limitlessly obtainable, it is considered most essential that more purposeful steps be taken towards internal capital formation, as well as its correct channelling and its careful, economic utilization. In addition provision must be made for the further expansion of the country&#x2019;s service undertakings and basic industries, including the expansion and modernization of communications media and transport facilities, the provision of power and water and of housing.</p>

<p>The national economy will, in fact, be promoted in every direction.</p>

<p>The mining industry is making a steadily growing contribution. The indications are that the rising tempo of the nation&#x2019;s gold production will be maintained for several years. There is more intensive prospecting activity in the field of precious stones. The maximum exploitation of the Republic&#x2019;s mineral resources is being assured, while the local processing of minerals to the greatest possible extent is being encouraged.</p>

<p>There are ever-increasing prospects for agriculture, not only as the result of soil conservation and farm planning to overcome natural disasters, thereby giving the necessary stability to the farming industry, but also by the exploitation of extensive new areas with the assistance of irrigation schemes on the Pongola and Orange Rivers.</p>

<p><span class="col_13-14" refersTo="page_23"/>It is, however, particularly in the factory production sector that a wide field of great possibilities is receiving attention. Marketing opportunities both at home and abroad will be studied and developed.</p>

<p>Particular care is being taken to ensure that this country&#x2019;s finances remain on a sound basis. As a result of the extensive scope of foreign shareholdings in South African companies, the Republic&#x2019;s balance of payments has always been vulnerable. The partial withdrawal of such foreign capital in fact recently resulted in the country&#x2019;s foreign reserves falling to a low level, so that it became necessary in June 1961 to place restrictions on the purchase by South Africans of shares from foreign shareholders. As a result of the steps taken by the Government, together with a favourable balance of trade on current account and several overseas loans, reserves have since risen considerably.</p>

<p>The relative strength and resilience of South Africa&#x2019;s economy has proved itself once again and guarantees the highly essential background for carrying out the ambitious undertakings which have been referred to.</p>

<p>The Republic is built on firm foundations. It was created by the devotion, the steadfastness and sacrifices of earlier generations. It is a heritage to be left to those to come. The facts about world trends and the struggle for survival which they entail, must strengthen the Government, Parliament and the nation in the will to triumph over all difficulties which may lie ahead in the momentous times through which South Africa and the world are passing.</p>

<p>The Government will not deviate from the course which, taking into account the circumstances beyond its control, it has set for the country and the nation. Although South Africa is not a great and powerful state. This nation&#x2019;s determination to survive is absolute, and its preparedness to defend itself unlimited. It cannot be otherwise. But it also desires for others the freedom and rights which it demands for itself. Above all, it desires peace. It will willingly join all those striving honestly for world peace and security, and it will energetically co-operate with them in all spheres of common interest.</p>

<p>Mr. President and Members of the Senate:</p>

<p>Mr. Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly:</p>

<block name="quote">I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may guide and sustain you in your labours and deliberations. <br/>I now declare this the First Session of the Second Parliament of the Republic of South Africa to be duly opened.</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#vacancies">

<heading>VACANCIES</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that vacancies had occurred in the representation in this House of the following electoral divisions viz.:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Vasco, on the 30th November 1961 owing to the resignation of Mr. C. V. de Villiers;</li>

<li>(2) East London (City), on the 19th December 1961 owing to the death of Dr. D. L. Smit; and</li>

<li>(3) Durban (Musgrave), on the 14th January 1962 owing to the death of Maj. E. B. Isaacs.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#condolence">

<heading>CONDOLENCE</heading>

<p><i>Late Dr. D. L. Smit</i></p>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I beg to move as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on the 19th December 1961 of Dr. Douglas Laing Smit, who represented the electoral division of East London (City), and desires to place on record its appreciation of his Parliamentary service extending over a period of more than 13 years. <br/>This House further resolves that its sincere sympathy be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased in their bereavement.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we mourn the passing of one of our members who although advanced in years, seemed to be endowed with the energy of everlasting youth. His passing therefore caught us unexpectedly in spite of his age. The honourable member had a long and distinguished career in the service of South Africa. He was born on the 21st March 1885 in the Eastern Province. In 1903 he became a Clerk in the Magistrate&#x2019;s Office, Grahamstown. In 1912 he became a Public Prosecutor. In 1925 he became a Magistrate and thereafter served in that capacity in East London and Port Elizabeth. In 1933 he became UnderSecretary for Justice. In 1934 he became Secretary of the Native Affairs Department. In 1945 he left the Civil Service after 42 years&#x2019; service. From 1945 to 1950 he was a member and vice-Chairman of the Native Affairs Commission. In the meantime, in 1948, he was elected a Member of Parliament. He died in December 1961 after no less than 13&#x00BD; years of parliamentary service after his 42 years as a Civil Servant. He served his country from 1903 to 1961, a period of 58 years, which is almost the duration of the life-time of an ordinary person. We on this side all remember the hon. member as a strong and sometimes a harsh critic and an unrelenting opponent. I could not express in sufficiently strong terms the way in which he fought for his cause, but that was in public. In private he was a fine gentleman, courteous, even gentle. I personally in the course of my duties had experience of him in both moods. He was meticulous to a tremendous degree, a pillar of strength, no doubt, to his own side. We often saw him moving about during debates, presumably providing ideas and statistics and exhorting other members to the <span class="col_15-16" refersTo="page_24"/>attack. He was a thorn in the side of his opposition. We do not need to honour him less because of that. Death has now ended all struggles and together we can pay respect to a son and a servant of South Africa, who according to his lights served his country long and well. I wish to convey to his family and to his friends our deep sympathy in their sad bereavement.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House would like to associate ourselves with the kindly words which have fallen from the hon. the Prime Minister, concerning the late Dr. Douglas Smit. To speak of Dr. Douglas Smit is to speak of an old, beloved friend who had a reputation for integrity unrivalled, I think, a reputation for hard work and who gave the utmost loyalty to the causes for which he stood. He was a fine friend, a great Christian, and a wonderful example to every Member of Parliament and to every public servant. It is perhaps not generally known that he was the first Public Prosecutor in East London. He was the first lecturer at the college for Public Prosecutors established in the Public Service. He represented South Africa at the International Labour Organization. He went with General Smuts to San Francisco in 1946 to participate in the debates at the founding of the United Nations Organization. He fought in the South African War at a very youthful age. In the last war he was an honorary Colonel responsible for recruiting non-Europeans for the services. When he took over the Department of Native Affairs it was known as a Cinderella department; by the time he handed it over to his successor in office it was one of the most important departments conducted by any public servant. I think there is one characteristic which we shall always remember of him and that is the fact that apart from his kindliness and his politeness he was a stickler for etiquette. I think he was a man who stood absolutely firmly for what he believed was right, for what he believed should be done. He never minded being in a minority of one, even in his own caucus. He was a stubborn, fearless fighter but a kindly gentleman. It is perhaps not surprising that his dearest hobby was gardening. I think one might say of him that he was a man of many parts. One might say perhaps of him what Mark Antony said of the noble Brutus: &#x201C;His life was gentle, the elements so mixed in him that nature might stand up and say to all the world, &#x2018;This was a man I think&#x2019;.&#x201D; Sir, we would like to have a very special message sent to his widow and his surviving children who can indeed be proud of the record left by him.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bloomberg">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLOOMBERG</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the members of our group I would like to associate myself with the words of sympathy which have fallen from the lips of the hon. the Prime Minister and the hon. the Leader of the Opposition, in connection with the death of our friend and colleague, the late Dr. Douglas Smit. We wish to identify ourselves with the eloquent and well-deserved tributes paid to the memory of our late friend.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#van_der_bijl">

<from>Maj. <person refersTo="hansard_za">VAN DER BIJL</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I know it is unusual although not unprecedented for an hon. member other than a leader of a party to address the House on an occasion such as this. But I trust that hon. members will bear with me just a very few moments while I pay my last tribute to one of my oldest and dearest friends, Dr. Smit. If you were to ask, Sir, what his three outstanding virtues were, I would say firstly his unswerving loyalty to a principle or to a friend, and secondly, as has been emphasized by the Leader of the Opposition, his fearlessness. Whether he would be misunderstood: whether it was going to injure him politically; even if he stood in a minority of one, that made no difference; if a thing was wrong he spoke against it and if he thought it was right he put it forward. His third outstanding virtue was his unshakeable integrity. Not only was he physically honest, which it is comparatively easy to be, but&#x2014;something that is more difficult&#x2014;he was intellectually incorruptible. When my time comes to go I would like to say with Shakespeare, in his immortal and profound homage, &#x201C;Would that I were with him wheresoever he is.&#x201D;</p>

<p>Motion agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

</speech>

<p><i>Late Maj. E. B. Isaacs.</i></p>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I beg to move as an unopposed motion&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 14 January 1962, of Maj. Edgar Baden Isaacs, who was elected on 18 October 1961, as a member of the House of Assembly for the electoral division of Durban (Musgrave), and resolves that its sincere sympathy be conveyed to the relatives of the deceased in their bereavement.</block>

<p>Mr. Speaker, very few of us had the opportunity to make the acquaintance of this Member of Parliament who could never take his seat, but he too, according to the information at our disposal, spent a fairly long life in the service of South Africa, in many ways. Over many years he took an active part in the activities of the Jewish community, particularly in welfare work, and he took an active part in the Durban Jewish circle. He was very active in the religious and social life of the Jewish community. In business he was a founder and past President of the Institute of Estate Agents and Auctioneers and a fellow of the Institute of Valuers, and an associate member of the Chartered Institute of Secretaries. He also had a military career. He was Divisional Ammunition Officer in the First South African Division <span class="col_17-18" refersTo="page_25"/>and was subsequently promoted to Officer Commanding the First Division Ammunition Company serving in East Africa and Egypt. Although wounded at Gazala he continued to command his unit through the battle of El Alamein. After the war he was Chairman of the Discharged Soldiers Demobilization Committee&#x2019;s Housing Committee. Wherever he went he could always be relied upon in charitable work and to give sympathetic support to those who needed his aid. It must be a real tragedy for his family that a man who had just been chosen to embark upon a new career, a career which would have suitably ended one already distinguished, should be taken away at the last moment. An undoubted ambition thus remains unfulfilled. As far as I can find out this has not happened often, in fact only once, and that was a little while ago when the Rev. de Lange, just before leaving for Parliament, was also removed under tragic circumstances from this earthly terrain. Now it has happened again within a matter of five years. To Maj. Isaacs a new period of service would have started to-day. He must have looked forward to it with great eagerness but it was not to be. All that we can do therefore, those of us who knew him and those of us who did not make his acquaintance, is to pay tribute for what he did and to feel regret for what he could not do and to express our sympathy to his family and friends, that his life has ended so soon.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#de_villiers_graaff">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">DE VILLIERS GRAAFF</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, I should like to associate the Opposition with the words of condolence which have fallen from the lips of the hon. the Prime Minister and the tribute he has paid to the late Maj. Isaacs. Edgar Isaacs, Sir, was a man whom we looked forward to welcoming to this House. He was a self-made man, but a man known for his unimpeachable integrity and the fact that he always sponsored the cause of the underdog. He was someone who seemed to have a mission in life to try and ameliorate the lot of others wherever he could do so. At the age of 61 he decided to move into the political field, in an attempt, I believe, sincerely to see what he could do to improve things for the country and for the people whom he hoped to serve. I have not the slightest doubt that he would have brought to this House those characteristics which distinguished him in other walks of life&#x2014;that bravery, that efficiency, that fearlessness which he showed on the battlefield, that determination and ability which he showed in the field of business, that kindliness and understanding which he showed in his contact with people of his own faith and people of all faiths in the community in which he lived.</p>

<p>His death came suddenly, perhaps kindly, but I think nevertheless we should like to express a very particular word of sympathy to his family for this very great loss at the time of the opening up of such great opportunities. It is strange in this world, Sir, that opportunity comes to some early, to others, perhaps more deserving even, only late, for some not at all, no matter how good their contribution might have been had that opportunity come to them at another stage.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#bloomberg">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">BLOOMBERG</person>:</from>

<p>Mr. Speaker, the members of our group would like to associate themselves with the motion before the House.</p>

<p>Motion agreed to unanimously, all the members standing.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at<recordedTime time="1962-01-19T13:42:00">1.42 p.m</recordedTime>.</p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

