---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol3 - THURSDAY 9 APRIL 1925'
layout: debate
year: 1925
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>THURSDAY, 9th APRIL, 1925</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1925-04-09T14:20:00">2.20 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#petition_simonstown_municipality">

<heading>PETITION SIMONSTOWN MUNICIPALITY.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE, as Chairman, brought up the Report of the Select Committee on petitions of Simonstown Municipality and others.</p>

<p>Report and evidence to be printed, and considered on Wednesday.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#select_committee_appointments">

<heading>SELECT COMMITTEE APPOINTMENTS.</heading>

<p>Mr. SPEAKER announced that the Committee on Standing Rules and Orders had appointed the following members to serve on the Select Committees mentioned, viz.&#x2014;</p>

<p><span class="col_2061-2062" refersTo="page_1112"/>Amendment of Public Holidays Act: Messrs. Strachan, Krige, Du Toit, Rockey and the Rev. Mr. Fick.</p>

<p>Old Age and Invalidity Pensions: Dr. Stals, Messrs. D. M. Brown, Strachan, Blackwell, Barlow, Maj. Richards and Dr. Van der Merwe.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#revised_customs_tariff">

<heading>REVISED CUSTOMS TARIFF.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES laid upon the Table&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Report (No. 51) of the Board of Trade and Industries on the Revision of the Customs Tariff, together with the proposed Customs Tariff Bill and the Revised Customs Tariff.</block>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>Is it printed?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_mines_and_industries">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF MINES AND INDUSTRIES</person>:</from>

<p>I will have it printed.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_members">

<heading>NEW MEMBERS.</heading>

<p>The CLERK read letters from the Secretary to the Prime Minister, dated the 9th April, 1925, reporting the election of the following members for the representation of the electoral divisions stated, viz.&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Isaac Petrus van Heerden, Esq., for the Electoral Division of Graaff-Reinet in the room of Dr. Karl Bremer, resigned; and</li>

<li>(2) Petrus Charles de Villiers, Esq., for the Electoral Division of Klerksdorp in the room of Jacobus Stephanus Smit, Esq., resigned.</li>

</ol>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_of_the_house">

<heading>BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE.</heading>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>Before you put the notice of motion, Mr. Speaker, may I put a question to my hon. friend the Prime Minister, which, I believe, he is prepared to favourably consider? Owing to the fact that many members have gone away and that we are to have the speech of the Minister of Railways and Harbours which will take some time, will the Prime Minister agree to Order No. 2 standing over, because that Bill is an extremely important one, only some ten members of the House have so far spoken and members on both sides of the House take a very great interest in this matter? Under the circumstances, I would ask the Prime Minister to consider the question of allowing Order No. 2 to stand over especially as it is the intention, I understand, to adjourn at 6 o&#x2019;clock.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, I think that is quite right under the circumstances and I intend later on when we come to No. 2 to move in that direction. If there is not much time probably we shall adjourn after the Budget, but if there is time I would later on suggest that we take Order No. 3.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railways_and_harbours_service_bill">

<heading>RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS SERVICE BILL.</heading>

<p>Leave was granted to the Minister of Railways and Harbours to introduce the Railways and Harbours Service Bill.</p>

<p>Bill brought up and read a first time; second reading on 20th April.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#committee_of_supply">

<heading>COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY.</heading>

<p>First, Order read. Adjourned debate on motion for House to go into Committee of Supply, to be resumed.</p>

<p>[Debate, adjourned yesterday, resumed.]</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS</person>:</from>

<p>Before dealing with the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the financial year on which we have just entered, that is 1925-&#x2019;26, it probably will serve a useful purpose if I review the actual results of working the Railways, Harbours and Steamships for the financial year which has just closed, that is on the 31st of March of this year.</p>

<p>As the final accounts for last financial year are not available, it will not be possible to give the House anything more than a revised estimate of the results obtained during 1924-&#x2019;25, but they will be found to be sufficiently close to the actual result when it is known, to warrant our regarding them for the moment as actual.</p>

<p>The Estimates submitted to Parliament during last session provided for a gross expenditure during the year 1924-&#x2019;25 of £23,908,128, and an estimated gross revenue of £24,120,276, which showed an anticipated surplus for the year of £212,148.</p>

<p>The accumulated deficit at the 31st March, 1924, was £770,244, so that if the anticipated surplus of £212,148 was obtained, the year was expected to close with the accumulated deficit reduced to £558,096.</p>

<p>The actual position at the close of the financial year 1924-&#x2019;25, however, is expected to reflect very much better results than were forecasted.</p>

<p>Instead of a surplus of £212,148, an actual surplus of £930,707 is expected, which will enable the whole of the accumulated deficit of £770,244 to be extinguished and leave a balance of £160,463 available for other purposes.</p>

<p>It will be explained later how it is intended to dispose of that surplus.</p>

<p>The exceptional washaways in the summer rain belt have resulted in a heavy loss of revenue during the last two weeks of the year, and have considerably reduced the surplus it had previously been hoped to announce, and which at one time, was expected to exceed £1,000,000 instead of the £930,707 forecasted. The washaways have caused a loss in revenue alone of approximately £100,000 in two weeks.</p>

<p>The Green Book, which will be placed in the hands of honourable members this afternoon, shows that although the earnings&#x2014;notwithstanding the sacrifice of revenue by the tariff reductions made in January of this year and the loss consequent upon the washaways&#x2014;are £686,648, more than what was originally estimated for, and that the additional traffic represented by that large increase in revenue has been conducted not only without any excess on the estimated total expenditure, but actually at £31,911 below that estimate. This satisfactory position reflects no little credit upon those responsible for the <span class="col_2063-2064" refersTo="page_1113"/>management of the South African Railways and Harbours.</p>

<p>An examination of the revised figures shows that the excess of revenue which is now anticipated over the original estimate is expected to amount to £686,648, and is made up of:&#x2014;</p>

<table>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>£</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>An excess of Railway Revenue of</p></td>

<td><p>624,646</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>An excess of Harbour Revenue of</p></td>

<td><p>74,973</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p></p></td>

<td><p>699,619</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Less a decrease in Steamships Revenue of</p></td>

<td><p>12,971</p></td>

</tr>

<tr>

<td><p>Or, as stated, an excess of</p></td>

<td><p>686,648</p></td>

</tr>

</table>

<p>The principal excess it will be seen has been obtained from Railways and the sources from which this additional revenue has been earned have been:&#x2014;</p>

<p>Passenger revenue, £164,371 increase over the estimate. Parcels, £2,804. Goods and minerals, £390,032. Coal, £136,766. Miscellaneous, £67,851, making a total increase over the estimate, £761,824.</p>

<p>The earnings from livestock were below the estimate to the extent of £39,354. &#x201C;Other traffic receipts&#x201D; were below the estimate to the extent of £500, £39,854, making the net increase in earnings from the railway main services £721,970.</p>

<p>The revenue from the Railway &#x201C;Subsidiary&#x201D; services is expected to be:&#x2014;</p>

<p>Catering, £8,840 below original estimate. Bookstalls, etc., £13,802 above the original estimate. Bedding equipment of trains, £2,873 above the original estimate. Grain elevators, £193,843 below original estimate. Road motor services, £2,526 below original estimate, making a net decrease of £188,534.</p>

<p>The revised estimated revenue from harbours and lighthouses is, in the aggregate, £74,973 in excess of the original estimate.</p>

<p>Steamships revenue is now expected to be below the original estimate, to the extent of £12,971.</p>

<p>Net revenue receipts are expected to be £91,210 in excess of the original estimate.</p>

<p>It is not necessary to detail further the revised revenue Estimates for 1924-&#x2019;25.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#REVISED_ESTIMATE_OF_EXPENDITURE.&#x2014;1924-&#x2019;25">

<heading>REVISED ESTIMATE OF EXPENDITURE.&#x2014;1924-&#x2019;25.</heading>

<p>I will now briefly review the revised estimated expenditure for last year&#x2014;</p>

<p>Railway Expenditure is now expected to total £22,627,781.</p>

<p>Harbour Expenditure is now expected to total £1,034,043.</p>

<p>Steamships Expenditure is now expected to total £214,393, making the revised Grand Total Expenditure £23,876,217, as compared with the original Grand Total of £23,908,128, or a saving of £31,911.</p>

<p>The Railway Expenditure of £22,627,781 represents an increase over the original estimate of £5,819.</p>

<p>The Harbour Expenditure of £1,034,043 represents a saving on the original estimate of £30,413.</p>

<p>The Steamships Expenditure of £214,393 represents a decrease on the original estimate of £7,317.</p>

<p>It has been shown how the revised estimated revenue exceeds the original estimate by £686,648, and also how the revised estimated expenditure, notwithstanding the additional traffic handled which is represented by that increase in the revenue, will be £31,911 less than originally was provided for.</p>

<p>The sum of this additional revenue and this saving in expenditure, makes the total of £718,559, and represents the amount by which the surplus of £212,148 originally forecasted will be exceeded, thus making the final surplus now expected £930,707.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#year_1925-&#x2019;26">

<heading>YEAR 1925-&#x2019;26.</heading>

<p>Let me, without burdening the House with unnecessary details, direct attention to one or two important points connected with the Estimates submitted to you for the year 1925-&#x2019;26.</p>

<p>Firstly, the Estimates of Expenditure; then the Revenue Estimates; and finally the difference between the estimated expenditure and revenue, that is, the net result anticipated for the year.</p>

<p>The expenditure on Railways, Harbours and Steamships for the year 1925-&#x2019;26 has been estimated at £25,301,143, which, when compared with the estimate framed for 1924-&#x2019;25 shows an increase of £1,393,015.</p>

<p>That comparison is between two sets of original estimates, viz., the original estimate framed for the financial year which has just closed on the 31st March, and the estimate prepared for the current financial year 1925-&#x2019;26.</p>

<p>The House will prefer a comparison between the estimate for the ensuing financial year, and the revised estimate of expenditure for 1924-&#x2019;25. This comparison has been customary, and will be of more assistance to hon. members in grasping the relative expenditure of the two years.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#estimated_expenditure_1925-&#x2019;26">

<heading>ESTIMATED EXPENDITURE, 1925-&#x2019;26.</heading>

<p>The estimated expenditure for 1925-&#x2019;26 then is £25,301,143.</p>

<p>The actual expenditure for 1924-&#x2019;25 is estimated to be £23,876,217, so that an increased expenditure is contemplated of £1,424,926, which is sub-divided as follows:&#x2014;</p>

<p>Railways (increase) £1,299,688; Harbours (increase), £154,233; Steamships (reduction), £28,995; Total increase, £1,424,926.</p>

<p>Broadly, the basis taken for arriving at the 1925-&#x2019;26 Estimate has been the approximate expenditure for 1924-&#x2019;25, increased to provide for the additional tonnage it is expected we shall transport during 1925-&#x2019;26 and the additional mileage of railways to be operated as a result of the opening of new lines.</p>

<p>The total expenditure, however, is inflated by the inclusion of certain items which are exceptional, and to which the special attention of hon. members is directed.</p>

<p>The estimates before the House show that provision has been made for:&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li><span class="col_2065-2066" refersTo="page_1114"/>(1) A contribution towards the deficiency in the Pension Fund of £162,000. This is an increase of £78,300 compared with last year.</li>

<li>(2) A contribution towards the deficiency in the Superannuation Fund of 1912, £100,000. Nothing whatever has been contributed previously towards the deficiency in this Fund.</li>

<li>(3) A contribution of £250,000 towards the reduction of the Administration&#x2019;s interest-bearing capital. This is an entirely new provision, as hon. members know.</li>

</ol>

<p>These three items alone account for £428,300 of the increased expenditure, to which must be added the additional charges for Interest on Loan Capital, which amount to in respect of Railways, £351,228; in respect of Harbours, £86,592; total £437,820; less a saving in respect of Steamships of £4,135, or a net increase of £433,685.</p>

<p>If this additional £433,685 is added to the £428,300, the total of these special items amount to £861,985.</p>

<p>As we have made no provision this year for reducing the value of Stores Stock, the total of £861,985 which has just been mentioned should be reduced by £100,000, which was the provision made last year on that account in order to arrive at the net total of what will be called the extraordinary expenditure included in this year&#x2019;s Estimates, which, therefore, amounts in the aggregate to £761,985.</p>

<p>If from the increase in expenditure already stated of £1,424,926 there is deducted the net total of what has been termed the extraordinary expenditure of £761,985, hon. members will see that a portion of the increase amounting to £662,941 still remains to be explained.</p>

<p>This is the full amount of the increase in ordinary expenditure which Parliament is asked to sanction, and is explained by the following: &#x2014;(1) Maintenance of permanent way, £498,999; (2) increased traffic expenses, £45,257; (3) additional superannuation contributions, £49,597; (4) grain elevators, £59,726; (5) maintenance and upkeep of harbours, £42,159; (6) depreciation of harbours, £28,907; (7) other small increases, totalling £61,194; the total of these seven heads being £785,839; against which has been set savings under various heads totalling £122,898; making the net increase £662,941, which is the amount of the increased expenditure remaining to be explained.</p>

<p>Included in this net increase of £662,941 is provision for increments to the salaried and daily-paid staff to the extent of £208,000, the cost of working an additional 423 miles of new railways £50,000, and the cost of handling the additional tonnage to be conveyed which is estimated to involve approximately 3,000,000 additional train miles.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#pension_and_superannuation_funds">

<heading>Pension and Superannuation Funds.</heading>

<p>Turning for a moment to a consideration of the necessity for the larger increases in expenditure, as hon. members probably know, there are two pension funds in the administration.</p>

<p>We have, firstly, what is known as the Railway and Harbour Pension Fund, consisting of contributors to the pre-Union Cape and Natal Pension Funds, and we have the superannuation fund, constituted under the Railway and Harbour Service Act of 1912, and consisting mainly of contributors who have joined the service since Union.</p>

<p>In my subsequent remarks, I shall refer to the former as the pension fund and to the latter as the superannuation fund.</p>

<p>The financial responsibility for the pension fund rests, under the terms of Act 28 of 1912, as amended by section 5 of Act 33 of 1917, upon the administration, and, since the passing of that Act, the administration has contributed lump sums each year towards the deficiency in that fund, which in 1914 was £824,316 and in 1919 was £1,409,843.</p>

<p>Between the years 1910-&#x2019;11 and 1919-&#x2019;20, the total amount contributed towards extinguishing the deficiency was £396,960. The subsequent contributions have been:&#x2014;1920-&#x2019;21, £48,480; 1921-&#x2019;22, £99,000; 1922-&#x2019;23, £98,220; 1923-&#x2019;24, £98,220; 1924-&#x2019;25, £83,700; or a total since 1910-&#x2019;11 of £824,580.</p>

<p>We have recently received the actuarial valuation of the fund as at 31st March, 1924, and it disclosed that the deficiency which at the 31st March, 1919, stood at £1,409,843 had, in the intervening five years, increased to £1,962,399, or by £552,556. To cope with this position, and without exaggerating it, hon. members will see that it is a serious position&#x2014;we have increased the contribution of £83,700 made last year to £162,000; an increase of £78,300, which is in accordance with the provisions of the Acts mentioned which provides for the deficiency to be liquidated by 1942.</p>

<p>Now let me deal with the position of the Superannuation Fund. There is a fundamental difference between this fund and the Pension Fund so far as the Government&#x2019;s legal financial responsibilities are concerned. Whereas we are liable for any deficiency in the Pension Fund, there is no such statutory liability at the moment upon the administration in regard to the Superannuation Fund.</p>

<p>What the administration&#x2019;s liability is can, perhaps, best be explained by quoting the relative provision in the Service Act of 1912. Section 60 (2) provides&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">But if the actuary&#x2019;s valuation disclose a deficiency, the deficiency shall be met, if necessary, in such fair and equitable manner as may appear to the Minister to be reasonable &#x2026;</block>

<p>So that the Government could either ignore the deficiency; or look to the members of the fund to meet it entirely or in part; or could itself shoulder the deficiency.</p>

<p>On a previous occasion, it was indicated to the House that the Government has decided that the responsibility for the deficiency in the fund shall be assumed entirely by the administration and at the moment, beyond saying that in the opinion of the Government no other decision equitably could be come to, if not proposed to enter into that aspect of the matter, as in the New Superannuation Bill, <span class="col_2067-2068" refersTo="page_1115"/>which it is hoped to introduce at an early date, the subject will be fully dealt with.</p>

<p>To-day, it is proposed only to review the financial responsibilities which this decision involves, and hon. members will agree that it is unfortunate that the grave financial position of this fund was not taken in hand and provided for earlier.</p>

<p>The actuarial valuation of the fund as at 31st March, 1919, disclosed a deficiency of £1,854,160. On the 31st March, 1924, the deficiency has increased to £1,944,600. To ensure that the actuarial results should be beyond question, my predecessor devided&#x2014;and let me add wisely decided&#x2014;that an independent actuary should be associated with the administration&#x2019;s actuaries in the next actuarial valuation of the fund.</p>

<p>The reports received are characterised by entire unanimity, so that there can be no question as to the accuracy of the results arrived at, and which, as I have said, reveal a deficiency of nearly £2,000,000.</p>

<p>Having decided to assume entire financial responsibility for that deficiency, provision has been made in the estimates for a contribution of £100,000 as a first instalment towards extinguishing it, in anticipation of the legislative provision which will be contained in the new Bill.</p>

<p>From the figures placed before hon. members, it will be seen that the combined deficiency in the administration&#x2019;s two pension funds is:&#x2014;</p>

<p>Railway and Harbour Pension Fund, £1,962,399.</p>

<p>Superannuation Fund, £1,944,600.</p>

<p>Total, £3,906,999.</p>

<p>Towards the extinguishing of which we are this year going to contribute £262,000, or £107,000 more than at any time previously has been contributed in any one year and £178,300 in excess of last year&#x2019;s contribution.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#Contribution_from_Revenue_to_Reduce_Interest_Bearing_Capital">

<heading>CONTRIBUTION FROM REVENUE TO REDUCE INTEREST BEARING CAPITAL.</heading>

<p>The next item which will be dealt with is the contribution of £250,000 towards reducing the interest-bearing capital of the administration.</p>

<p>In this case, also, it will be necessary during this session to bring forward a measure to legalize the position because, as hon. members know, the Act of Union provides that the total earnings of the administration shall not be more than are sufficient to meet the necessary outlays for working, maintenance, betterment, depreciation and the payment of interest on capital.</p>

<p>The only reserve funds therein contemplated were the Rates Equalization Fund, the Renewals of Depreciation Fund and the Betterment Fund. The first makes provision for maintaining uniformity of rates by making good losses in working on any one year through granting reduction of rates. The second provides for the replacement of wasting assets, and the last for the improvement or extension of existing assets.</p>

<p>Neither of these funds, however, enables any provision to be made for reducing the total interest-bearing capital of the administration, the growth of which is a matter for serious consideration.</p>

<p>In consequence of this, the Government has decided that something&#x2014;however modest it may be at the outset&#x2014;shall be contributed out of the administration&#x2019;s revenue towards reducing the interest-bearing capital.</p>

<p>There is nothing particularly unique in this. Sinking funds form an integral part in the economy of many transportation businesses and, although it is not, at any rate at this stage, proposed to establish a sinking fund, the course to be followed of utilizing these contributions in reduction of the amount of loan money which otherwise would require to be raised, will achieve the same object, and will enable the administration to employ the contributions to greater advantage than by crediting the moneys to a sinking fund.</p>

<p>These contributions will, of course, figure in the administration&#x2019;s capital account under the head of non-interest-bearing capital, and will reflect for all time what has been done to prevent the Railways and Harbours from becoming overburdened with capital debt and interest thereon.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#capital_expenditure_and_interest">

<heading>CAPITAL EXPENDITURE AND INTEREST.</heading>

<p>It will be convenient if the general question of the capital account and interest charges is now dealt with.</p>

<p>The total capital expenditure on open lines (railways) at the 31st December, 1924, was £117,143,734. The total capital expenditure on harbours and lighthouses at the 31st December, 1924, was £13,003,432.</p>

<p>The combined railway and harbour capital expenditure at the 31st December, 1924, therefore, was £130,147,166, an increase as compared with the 31st December, 1923, of: Railways, £5,833,362; harbours, £588,479; total increase of £6,421,841.</p>

<p>It is interesting to note that of the gross capital expenditure of £130,147,166, the amount on which no interest is paid by the administration by reason of the moneys having been contributed out of revenue, is £8,134,706, leaving the actual debt so far as the administration&#x2019;s liability to the public debt is concerned at £122,012,460.</p>

<p>The interest charges on the administration&#x2019;s loan capital involves the payment of £4,495,835 on the railway portion of the debt, and £465,845 on the harbour portion of the debt; or, in all, £4,961,680, which is £433,685 more than had to be provided last year.</p>

<p>The magnitude of this standing charge, which requires £13,594 daily, demands very careful consideration.</p>

<p>Fifteen years ago, at the time of Union, the capital invested in the railways and harbours which now comprise the administration was £87,263,366.</p>

<p>This sum included £75,863,842 in respect of the 7,041 miles of railway and its equipment <span class="col_2069-2070" refersTo="page_1116"/>which existed at Union, equal to £10,775 per mile.</p>

<p>To-day the railway capital is £117,143,734, represented by 11,533 miles of railway and its equipment, or £10,157 per mile, so that, on a purely mileage basis and notwithstanding that much of the railway extension since Union has been carried on during a period of exceptionally high costs, the capital cost per mile is nearly £600 less than at the time of Union.</p>

<p>But this is not all. Improvements have been effected since Union in relaying, strengthening, reducing gradients, eliminating curvature, installing up-to-date signal arrangements, and so forth.</p>

<p>At the end of 1911 there were 1,393 engines in service with average tractive force of 20,673 lbs.; at the 31st March, 1924, there were 1,796 engines in service with average tractive force of 25,625 lbs.; and whereas at Union the total value of the administration&#x2019;s locomotives was under five million pounds, to-day the value is over twelve million pounds.</p>

<p>Let me carry the comparison a little further. The value of the coaching stock and dining cars at Union was under 2¼ million pounds, while to-day the value of our coaching stock is nearly eight million pounds.</p>

<p>So also in the case of our goods stock, of which at Union we had nearly six million pounds&#x2019; worth, to-day we possess stock which has cost more than double that sum and which is of greatly improved types.</p>

<p>In the year 1910 we conveyed 12,414,839 tons of goods and minerals and 33,700,849 passengers. During the year 1923-&#x2019;24 we conveyed 22,664,421 tons of goods and minerals and 65,811,610 passengers, an increase of 83 per cent. and 96 per cent. respectively.</p>

<p>All this greatly increased traffic was moved more expeditiously, and, so far as the passengers are concerned, also with greater safety and comfort than was experienced 15 years ago.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#new_graving_dock_durban">

<heading>NEW GRAVING DOCK: DURBAN.</heading>

<p>The completion of the new graving dock at Durban has necessitated provision being made in the Harbour Estimates of Expenditure for the cost of working the dock and for interest and depreciation charges on its capital cost.</p>

<p>All hon. members should have in their possession a copy of the brochure which was prepared and distributed for the purpose of disseminating information regarding this great work, which has cost the Union £1,300,000 to construct and equip&#x2014;a cost below what originally was estimated would be the final cost of the work.</p>

<p>The opening of this dock&#x2014;and the official opening we hope will be made by his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales during his forthcoming visit to us&#x2014;will involve an annual charge of £76,134 for its working, maintenance and for interest and depreciation charges.</p>

<p>The earnings of this dock are not likely&#x2014;at least for many years to come&#x2014;to amount to more than a small proportion of the annual cost which its working, maintenance, etc., will involve. That was not, and is not, expected. The construction of this dock and its maintenance constitutes evidence of the recognition by the Union of its responsibilities as a self-governing nation.</p>

<p>This dock ranks second to none in the world in point of length and depth so far as graving docks for purely mercantile shipping purposes are concerned. It is 1,150 feet in length; its breadth at entrance is 110 feet; and the depth at sill at high water ordinary spring tide is 41 feet.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#estimated_expenditure&#x2014;1925-&#x2019;26">

<heading>ESTIMATED EXPENDITURE&#x2014;1925-&#x2019;26.</heading>

<p>In so far as the estimated expenditure for 1925-&#x2019;26 is concerned, what has been termed the extraordinary items of increases which account for £761,985 has so far been dealt with.</p>

<p>It has been indicated that the balance of the increase is accounted for by the increase of 423 miles of new lines to be operated and the additional 3,000,000 train and engine miles to be run.</p>

<p>The effects of the provision made for the opening of the 423 miles of new lines and the additional train miles is reflected in most of the working heads of the Estimates in the hands of hon. members, and, where such is not the entire explanation for the increase, as in the case of the maintenance of Permanent Way (head 2), and maintenance of Rolling Stock (head 3) and Running Expenses (head 4), the additional expenditure is due to the fact that works which in the interests of economy have in past years been left in abeyance, must now be carried out and paid for&#x2014;there being a limit to which economy can wisely be exercised where the interests and welfare of the users of the railways are concerned. My hon. predecessor will acknowledge this.</p>

<p>There still remain several matters to which more than passing reference must be made.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#depreciation">

<heading>DEPRECIATION.</heading>

<p>Hon. members will see that provision has been made for a contribution to the renewals fund of £1,500,000, which corresponds with the amount set aside for that purpose last year.</p>

<p>It will be recalled that last year, when introducing the Main Estimates, it was explained that the basis which my predecessor had adopted of basing the contribution to the renewals fund upon 7 per cent. of the revenue had been dropped because such a basis bore no true relationship to the depreciation which occurred&#x2014;rather might such depreciation be in the inverse ratio to the earnings&#x2014;and it was submitted that, pending finality in regard to this vexed question, the amount contributed out of revenue to this fund should be the amount which, in the opinion of the administration&#x2019;s officers, was reasonably adequate.</p>

<p>I am assured that in setting aside £1,500,000 we err&#x2014;if we err at all&#x2014;on the side of safety.</p>

<p>It had been hoped, as intimated last year, to have been possible to lay before hon. members to-day definite proposals for establishing a final and lasting basis for determining the <span class="col_2071-2072" refersTo="page_1117"/>amount to be provided annually to cover the depreciation of railway assets.</p>

<p>The subject bristles with difficulties. The incidence of expenditure to provide for which the fund was created is not regular, nor is it yet possible to determine accurately the respective ages of the different class of the administration&#x2019;s assets.</p>

<p>Investigations are still being made by the administration, and it is hoped to be able to arrive at a sound basis upon which to fix the yearly contribution to this fund.</p>

<p>There are one or two phases of this matter which should be touched upon, but let me first give the House the approximate position of the fund as at the 31st January, 1925.</p>

<p>Between the date of Union and that date the total contributions to the fund amount to £23,969,141; the total disbursements amount to £21,861,820, leaving a credit balance as at 31st January, 1925, of £2,107,321.</p>

<p>Against this credit balance of over 2 millions there are, of course, commitments which amount to £1,719,957, thus leaving an uncommitted balance of £387,364, but as these commitments will not in many instances be expended until the end of this year, by which time further contributions will have been made out of this year&#x2019;s revenue, the position of the fund cannot be regarded as other than very satisfactory.</p>

<p>The contribution of 1½ million pounds out of railway revenue for 1925-26 covers the permanent way and rolling stock of the railways. Other assets such as harbours, workshops, machinery, etc., contribute on the fixed basis of 2.86 per cent. of the capital cost.</p>

<p>It has been contended that the expenditure out of the Renewals Fund on account of rolling stock has of recent years been excessive, reference being made in particular to the purchase of certain new electric locomotives and special grain trucks out of the Renewals Fund.</p>

<p>While there would appear to be something in the contention that the expenditure from the fund on account of rolling stock has been greater than what a pro rata allocation of the contributions made in respect of rolling stock and permanent way would show, the House will appreciate that the intention of the administration in consolidating the two big sections of the railway assets and making one contribution to cover both, was to enable the balances of the fund to be utilized according to sound business principles.</p>

<p>Provided only that the purchase of new rolling stock&#x2014;locomotives, wagons, or whatever the type may be&#x2014;from Renewals Fund is not in excess of the accrued depreciation of such assets, the use of monies contributed in respect of other assets, but which is not at the moment required, is sound.</p>

<p>We have thereby avoided increasing our loan capital carrying interest in perpetuity, which would have involved a material curtailment of the development programme which has been carried out since Union.</p>

<p>The alternative was to have limited the expenditure on rolling stock to a strict pro rata share of the contributions made in respect of those assets; and to have allowed large balances to remain dormant, as they would not, during this period, have been required for permanent way renewals.</p>

<p>I am sure hon. members will agree that the policy in this matter has been productive of the best possible results for the users of the railways and the railways as a whole.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#betterment_fund">

<heading>BETTERMENT FUND.</heading>

<p>It is estimated that the position of the Betterment Fund at the 31st March, 1925, will be as follows:-</p>

<p>Credit balance at 31st March, 1924, £251,595; Receipts during 1924-25, £250,000; total, £501,595, less estimated expenditure during 1924-25, £248,000; approximate credit balance at 31st March, 1925, £253,595.</p>

<p>The contemplated contribution from revenue for the year 1925-26 is £250,000, so that during 1925-26 there will be available to meet proposals for works involving expenditure out of betterment £503,595.</p>

<p>The commitments against the fund at 31st March, 1925, are estimated to amount to £450,000, so that the net balance available for subsequent expenditure will be £53,595.</p>

<p>It is not necessary to comment further upon the position of this fund, which is perfectly sound.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#writing_down_stores_stock_value">

<heading>WRITING DOWN STORES STOCK VALUE.</heading>

<p>Before passing on to deal with the two main causes of the increased estimated expenditure, I wish to explain to hon. members that the absence of any provision for writing down the value of the administration&#x2019;s stores stock is due to the fact that, in the opinion of the administration, sufficient has already been done in that direction.</p>

<p>Since the first contribution was made in the financial year 1922-&#x2019;23, the total amount appropriated from revenue for this purpose amounts to £850,000.</p>

<p>It is generally conceded by the officers of the department that the provision of that sum has had the effect of reducing the value of stores on hand to present-day prices, and, therefore, that no further contribution is necessary.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#opening_of_new_lines">

<heading>OPENING OF NEW LINES.</heading>

<p>The new lines under construction which will be opened for traffic during 1925-&#x2019;26 total, as previously mentioned, 423 miles.</p>

<p>I will now enumerate the new lines and give mileage and the respective dates it is anticipated they will be opened. They are:&#x2014; Hercules-Magdliesburg (2nd portion), 33, April, 1925; Touws River-Ladismith (2nd portion). 21, April, 1925; Ermelo-Lothair, 31, April, 1925; Matubatuba-Pongola River (1st portion), 70, June, 1925; Senekal-Marquard, 32, July, 1925; Fort Beaufort-Balfour, 23, August, 1925; Upington-Kakamas, 53, August, 1925; Frankfort-Grootvlei, 39, September, 1925; Nylstroom-Vaalwater, 44, October, 1925; Harrismith-Warden, 36, November, 1925; Touws River-Ladismith (3rd portion), 23, December, 1925; <span class="col_2073-2074" refersTo="page_1118"/>Matubatuba-Pongola (2nd portion), 18, March, 1926.</p>

<p>The completion of these 423 miles of railway will increase the total open mileage from 11,533 to 11,956, and, so far as the new lines authorized by the 1922 programme are concerned, will leave to be completed only 42 miles, represented by the George-Knysna line, the opening of which will take place after the 31st March, 1926. It is not yet possible to fix the date. Work on the line has been commenced.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#train_and_engine_mileage">

<heading>TRAIN AND ENGINE MILEAGE.</heading>

<p>The estimated train and engine mileage last year was 46,330,749; for this year, we have provided for 49,332,928, an increase of 3,002,179, or 6.48 per cent.</p>

<p>This increased estimate has been framed mainly to provide for the very considerable increase in the maize crop, which we expect to have to transport and which we confidently hope to handle efficiently.</p>

<p>Actual figures are not, of course, available, but it is expected that the Union crop of maize will be approximately 24,000,000 bags and that the quantity available for export will be not less than 10 million bags.</p>

<p>While this accounts for the bulk of the increase in the estimated train mileage, due provision has been made for all other classes of traffic which are expected to expand during the financial year we have just entered upon.</p>

<p>A study of the department&#x2019;s statistics illustrates not only the expansion which is going on in all parts of the Union, but forcibly brings home the fact that the higher rated traffic is steadily decreasing and that the bulk of the administration&#x2019;s traffic is of the lower-rated commodities&#x2014;due in the main to the ever-increasing production in the Union of numerous articles previously imported from overseas.</p>

<p>Were it not that it is not desired to burden hon. members this afternoon with too much detail other aspects, which a close analysis of the administration&#x2019;s statistics reveal, would be placed before you and would show how, amongst other things, the disparity which may have existed at one time between the respective proportions of the administration&#x2019;s revenue contributed by the inland residents and those in the coastal areas is rapidly disappearing&#x2014;a fact which it will be generally conceded is to the advantage of the whole community.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railway_rates">

<heading>RAILWAY RATES.</heading>

<p>This leads me to the subject of railway rates, in regard to which the Government has been urged to make further reductions, and it has been represented both in this House and outside that the administration&#x2019;s finances admit of further reductions.</p>

<p>It is realized that, notwithstanding that revenue has been remitted to the extent of £4,476,265 per annum since 1920, of which £2,433,250 is in respect of coal rates, £1,356,000 is in respect of goods rates, and £500,000 is in respect of passenger fares, totalling £4,289,250, our tariffs are still on an average 33 per cent. above pre-war levels, and that the whole industry of the Union is dependent upon efficient and cheap railway transportation.</p>

<p>As indicated, the administration is making provision for meeting extraordinary expenditure which simply must be incurred to put matters right, and cannot at the present time, therefore, introduce lower rates.</p>

<p>Immediately the outlook is sufficiently clear to enable the administration with confidence to sacrifice further revenue, it will be done.</p>

<p>Before leaving this subject of railway tariffs, hon. members will be interested to know that although much still remains to be done to lighten the burden of the cost of rail transport upon the whole community, we still may console ourselves upon the fact that our tariffs compare favourably with those of the outside railway world.</p>

<p>As compared with British railways, our local coal rates are, in almost every instance, below the corresponding British rates. The difference is not large, but it is in our favour.</p>

<p>We are all agreed upon the vital importance of cheap rates for agricultural produce and the requirements of the agricultural industry, such as machinery, implements, seeds, fertilizers, etc.</p>

<p>When the rates for these commodities are compared some astonishing figures are obtained:&#x2014;</p>

<p>Butter reaches the London markets from all parts of Great Britain, and the railway rates are from 7s. 2d. per ton to as high as 12s: 6d. per ton more than the corresponding Union tariff. Glasgow is, in certain cases, even more disadvantageously placed. The railage from certain of its sources of supply is as much as 21s. 1d. per ton higher than the South African Railways rate for the same mileage (450miles).</p>

<p>Cheese pays in Great Britain even higher rates, and these are in excess of ours from 3s. to 21s. 10d. per ton.</p>

<p>Milk in many cases is also conveyed at lower rates on our lines. In fact, if allowance is made for the fact that we convey the empty milk cans back free, our charges are generally lower.</p>

<p>Eggs in all cases are charged less on the Union than on the British railways&#x2014;our rates in certain cases being over £3 per ton lower.</p>

<p>Meat is also more favourably treated by us, our rates being in certain instances as much as £3 10s. per ton lower than those of the British railways.</p>

<p>What has been said in regard to butter, cheese, milk eggs and meat also applies in the case of fruit, vegetables, flour and such like commodities, while in the case of agricultural machinery, lime, etc., our farmers are also most favourably situated.</p>

<p>The inference should not be drawn from these comparisons that further reductions of our tariffs are not urgently necessary. They are.</p>

<p>It is solely a question of the opportune moment for making such reductions, and it is hoped that that moment will arrive in the not too distant future.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#electrification">

<heading>ELECTRIFICATION.</heading>

<p><span class="col_2075-2076" refersTo="page_1119"/>Reference to Head No. 4&#x2014;Railway Expenses&#x2014;will show that several increased items on account of electrified working are provided for. It is only right that hon. members should know the position of the work of electrifying the Maritzburg-Glencoe section of the Natal main line.</p>

<p>Most, if not all, hon. members know that electrified working has been under test since October last. It is, however, hoped to have the several sections of the electrified track in full working order during the current year. That between Daimana and Mooi River at the end of April; the section from Daimana to Glencoe at the end of June; and the third section, Mooi River to Pietermaritzburg at the end of November.</p>

<p>Considerable difficulties have been encountered during the course of the work, and those difficulties have been accentuated by the abnormal rains and floods.</p>

<p>Of the 78 electric locomotives required, 66 have arrived in South Africa, and of these 50 have been completely erected at the administration&#x2019;s workshops at Maritzburg by our staff under the supervision of the consulting engineers.</p>

<p>The completion of this large work will bring much-needed relief to the Natal main line, and the fact that, notwithstanding the increase of over 3,000,000 train miles, the running expenses for 1925-26 actually are less than the 1924-25 corresponding costs is due in no small measure to the economies we expect as a result of the electrified working.</p>

<p>The position in regard to the Cape Town-Simonstown, Sea Point and Dock lines is that the preliminary layout of the track has been practically completed. Contracts have been placed for the electrical equipment of the coaching stock and for the bogies of the new motor coaches, etc.</p>

<p>The entire work will be regulated so as to enable the electrified services to be introduced as soon as the Electricity Supply Commission is in a position to supply the current from the new power station at Salt River.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#road_motor_services">

<heading>ROAD MOTOR SERVICES.</heading>

<p>Seven road motor services are established in the Union, covering a total mileage of 309¾ miles.</p>

<p>For the year ended 3lst December, 1924, the services were worked at a profit of £1,770.</p>

<p>On page 3 of the printed estimates, the new road motor services which are to be introduced have been detailed and which involve an increase under this heading of £10,547. The administration is continuously occupied considering the expansion of the system.</p>

<p>Most of these services it is hoped will be self supporting, but it is the Government&#x2019;s policy that these services shall be introduced and continued even if an: initial loss is sustained.</p>

<p>Provided there is justification for the introduction of such feeder services; that the districts served by them are sufficiently developed and that the local authority will provide and maintain the roads in a reasonable condition, the Government is prepared to link up the outlying districts by such services.</p>

<p>It is confidently expected that these feeders, being found to be a material factor in opening up and developing the outlying districts of the Union, will be the forerunners of branch lines in due course.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#civilized_labour">

<heading>CIVILIZED LABOUR.</heading>

<p>The question of the civilized labour policy of the administration has been so frequently and so exhaustively discussed recently in this House that it is unnecessary again to go over the whole question.</p>

<p>It is right, however, that the attention of hon. members should be drawn to the fact that the additional cost of employing the civilized labourers who are engaged on work which previously was performed by natives is estimated at £160,000.</p>

<p>That is the price which this policy costs the administration at the moment, and I am satisfied that, as the largest employer of labour in the State, it is a price rightly paid by the administration.</p>

<p>This amount of £160,000 is really not all additional, because it has been clearly demonstrated that, particularly in certain classes of work, the superior intelligence of these labourers over the natives makes for greater efficiency and economy.</p>

<p>It should be added that the responsible officers of the administration are satisfied that the policy being followed is the right policy and that the ultimate interests of the administration as a business concern are wrapped up in the satisfactory solution of the problem of finding work for the civilized section of the community in South Africa.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#grain_elevators">

<heading>GRAIN ELEVATORS.</heading>

<p>The 34 country elevators and the Cape Town terminal elevator are not only completed but have been tested under actual working conditions. The experience which has been gained with the comparatively small turnover handled last season will be invaluable, and provided the loyal co-operation of growers, dealers and shippers is secured, the system should prove of the very greatest assistance in fostering the industry. In order to prepare the elevators for the reception of the new season&#x2019;s crops, it will be necessary to require the owners of last season&#x2019;s maize now stored in the elevators to remove such maize from the elevators not later than the 15th June, 1925.</p>

<p>The total quantity of maize which passed through the elevators up to the 31st December. 1924, was 900,000 bags, and the quantity shipped through the Cape Town elevator up to the 31st March, 1925, was 45,630 tons. These quantities are much below the average we expected to handle, which is due, of course to the partial failure of last year&#x2019;s crops which has adversely affected the financial results of working, which are expected to show a total revenue of £50,912 as against a total working expenditure of £130,196 for the year ended 31st March last. <span class="col_2077-2078" refersTo="page_1120"/>There has therefore been a considerable loss of £80,000.</p>

<p>For the current year, we are estimating for a revenue of £170,000, and our estimated expenditure is £189,922. Although this shows a small balance on the wrong side, we can with confidence look forward to the financial results being very much more satisfactory than in the year just ended, while with the completion of the Durban elevator the whole elevator system should prove to be both a revenue earning as well as a very valuable asset to the country in other directions.</p>

<p>The position of the Durban elevator is that the foundations are nearing completion, and it is hoped to make an early start with the superstructure.</p>

<p>The elevators are destined to play a large and important part in the economic life of the Union. Notwithstanding the difficulties and changes which the period of transition following the inauguration of this system involved, it is evident that the agricultural and commercial community already have accommodated themselves to these changes, and that, beyond doubt, a much needed want has been filled. Already, demands are being made for the erection of elevators at other country stations in the maize belt. These representations will receive most careful consideration, but it is too early yet to embark upon any general scheme for constructing additional elevators. I would like, first, to have some experience of the system.</p>

<p>The Estimates of Expenditure for 1925-&#x2019;26, which have now been fully reviewed and which indicate a total estimated expenditure being required of £25,301,143, are in excess of the revised expenditure for 1924-&#x2019;25 to the extent of £1,424,926.</p>

<p>It has been made clear to the House that this increase is made up of (a) extraordinary expenditure of £761,985, and (b) ordinary expenditure of £662,941.</p>

<p>If hon. members will bear these amounts in mind, they will readily appreciate the justification for these increases when considering the traffic to be dealt with in 1925-&#x2019;26 and the revenue therefrom.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#gross_revenue&#x2014;1925-&#x2019;26">

<heading>GROSS REVENUE&#x2014;1925-&#x2019;26.</heading>

<p>I will now briefly review the estimated revenue for 1925-&#x2019;26, and in a few words may state that the gross revenue from railways, harbours and steamships is estimated to be £25,341,838, made up of railways £23,770,890, harbours £1,364,048, steamships £206,900.</p>

<p>This amount represents an increase of £534,914 over the revenue anticipated for 1924-&#x2019;25, and is made up of an increase from railways of £574,074, a decrease from harbours of £23,008, and a decrease from steamships of £16,152&#x2014;£39,160, or a total net increase, as already stated, of £534,914.</p>

<p>Particulars of the estimated revenue for 1925-&#x2019;26 and of the revised estimated revenue for 1924-&#x2019;25 under the various heads will be found in the Green Book, which will be distributed to hon. members this afternoon.</p>

<p>In order, however, that the House may readily understand the position anticipated from the revenue of 1925-26, I will now give a few of the outstanding features.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railway_revenue_1925-26">

<heading>RAILWAY REVENUE, 1925-26.</heading>

<p>Taking railways first, the total revenue from the various services for 1925-26 is estimated to be £23,770,890, this amount being made up of: Main services, £22,168,450; subsidiary services, i.e., catering, bookstalls, grain elevators, etc., £1,029,515; interest on investments and miscellaneous, £572,925; or a total of £23,770,890.</p>

<p>In the case of the main services, it is anticipated that, compared with 1924-25, the revenue to be derived during 1925-26 will show an increase of £451,970.</p>

<p>The reason for anticipating this substantial increase in railway revenue is due principally to the exceptional traffic that is anticipated in maize, and in a lesser degree to the additional revenue to be obtained from the opening of new railways.</p>

<p>It is to be remembered also that, with effect from the 1st of January of this year, reductions have been made in the rates, involving a surrender of revenue of approximately £500,000 per annum, or, roughly, £10,000 per week.</p>

<p>The average weekly revenue for the year which has just closed has amounted to approximately £418,000.</p>

<p>It is anticipated that after allowing for the sacrifice of revenue by these rate reductions and taking into account the additional revenue that will be received from the exceptional maize crop, and also the opening of new lines, that revenue to the extent of at least £425,000 per week may be reasonably anticipated, and the estimate of revenue has accordingly been based upon this figure.</p>

<p>The healthy state of the wool industry, notwithstanding the recent fall in prices, the development which is going on in the fruit growing areas, the more prosperous outlook in the sugar cane industry, and the confidence which is reflected in the mining industry, all point to a substantial increase in the activities of the railways and in consequence, in budgeting for an increase in revenue for main services alone of roughly £451,000 the administration is erring on the safe side.</p>

<p>Passenger traffic is the slowest to respond to the development which is expected to result from reduced tariffs, and for this reason it is not anticipated that the substantial reductions in passenger fares made in January last will justify any substantial increase in the revenue being expected.</p>

<p>With regard to subsidiary services (railways), the total revenue for the year is estimated at £1.029,515.</p>

<p>Compared with the revised estimate of revenue for the year just closed (1924-25), this revenue shows an advance of £117.359, and is almost entirely due to the anticipated additional revenue to be obtained from the grain elevators (£119,088).</p>

<p><span class="col_2079-2080" refersTo="page_1121"/>This increase, of course, is due to the elevators being now in full commission, as compared with part commission only during last year.</p>

<p>Interest on investments and miscellaneous receipts are estimated to amount to £572,925, or an increase of £4,745, which is mainly due to the increased amount of monies that will be available for investment on behalf of the Superannuation and Pensions Funds.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#harbour_revenue_1925-26">

<heading>HARBOUR REVENUE, 1925-26.</heading>

<p>In the case of harbours, the total revenue from main services is estimated to amount to £1,330,000 which, compared with 1924-25, shows a decrease of £22,811.</p>

<p>For the period 1st April, 1924, to the 21st March, 1925, i.e., practically the whole of the last financial year, the average weekly revenue for harbours has been £26,073 and the estimate for 1925-26 has accordingly been based on a similar amount, the actual figure being £25,500 per week, the slight reduction being due to abnormal shipping experienced during 1924-25, on the one hand, which it is not anticipated will recur in 1925-26.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#steamships_revenue">

<heading>STEAMSHIPS REVENUE.</heading>

<p>The revenue from steamships is estimated to be £206,900, or a decrease, as compared with the previous year, of £16,152.</p>

<p>During last year it was necessary to charter three extra steamers to transport the administration&#x2019;s supplies of sleepers. It is not anticipated that charters of the same extent will require to be made during 1925-&#x2019;26, and on account of this a reduction in the revenue must be provided for.</p>

<p>During 1924-&#x2019;25 the administration&#x2019;s three steamers and the vessels chartered brought to South Africa 18 full cargoes of sleepers, while the former transported from the Union to India and the East 16 cargoes of South African coal.</p>

<p>It has been the administration&#x2019;s policy to debit the steamships account with full charges for all services rendered and for dues, etc., incurred, so as to make the steamships account accord with the costs which would be incurred by privately-owned vessels.</p>

<p>The revenue credited to the steamships account, however, has been slightly below the ascertained market rate of freight, so that the published earnings have not been inflated by the adoption of artificial freights.</p>

<p>In 1924-&#x2019;25 we made on this basis a profit of £8,659. On the same basis, we anticipate to make during 1925-&#x2019;26 a profit of £21,502.</p>

<p>All of our steamship requirements are purchased in South Africa as far as practicable. All repairs are carried out at Union ports and the crews of all three vessels come under Union articles. Every possible penny of the steamship expenditure is, therefore, expended in the Union. Were the material transported by the administration&#x2019;s vessels carried by ordinary freighters, very little of the money paid for freight&#x2014;and it would be more than we incur by carrying our own freight&#x2014;would be spent in South Africa.</p>

<p>The deck hands required for the Government ships are, by arrangement with the Board of Control of the training ship &#x201C;General Botha,&#x2019; drawn from boys who have successfully completed a two years&#x2019; course on the training ship. So far, 22 boys have been started in a practical way in a career which is not a blind alley, but offers reasonable scope for progress. We hope that, in time, the deck ratings on all our ships will be filled by South African-trained seamen.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#surplus&#x2014;1925-&#x2019;26">

<heading>SURPLUS&#x2014;1925-&#x2019;26.</heading>

<p>The Estimates of Expenditure and Revenue for 1925-&#x2019;26 have now been dealt with, and the various aspects and details of the Estimates in the order in which they arose have been discussed, from which hon. members will have learned that the outstanding amounts are:&#x2014; Revenue: Railways, £23,770,890; harbours, £1,364,048; steamships, £206,900; total, £25,341,838. Expenditure: Railways, £23,927,469; harbours, £1,188,276; steamships, £185,398; total, £25,301,143. In consequence it is anticipated there will be a deficit on railways of £156,579, a surplus on harbours of £175,772, a surplus on steamships of £21,502. making in the aggregate a net surplus of £40,695.</p>

<p>If the revised Estimates for 1924-&#x2019;25 are realized, we shall have from that year also a surplus of £160,463, after paying off the whole of the balance of the accumulated deficits which on the 31st March, 1924, stood at £770,244, so that on the basis of the Estimates now before the House there would be an estimated total surplus at the 31st March, 1926, of £201,158.</p>

<p>It will be necessary later, in consequence of the unexpected damage caused by the abnormal washaways, to submit to the House certain Supplementary Estimates. By that time, it will be possible to state definitely the actual surplus for last year.</p>

<p>Earlier in my remarks it was stated that the House would be advised how it was proposed to deal with the surplus.</p>

<p>Well, briefly, we propose to apply the surplus first in writing off £250,000 of the loss sustained on the Durban elevator foundations, and second, in writing off a sum of £42.662, which represents the amount of the capital of the Sea Point Railway which is not represented by any real asset, being what was paid for the running rights acquired when that railway was taken over in 1905.</p>

<p>Few, if any, will question the wisdom of this course. It is true that the total sum required to carry out these proposals is £292,662, as compared with the total surplus of £201,158 which is forecasted, but it is hoped that the final figures for 1924-&#x2019;25 may yet disclose a surplus even higher than at the moment is included in the estimates.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#service_bill">

<heading>SERVICE BILL.</heading>

<p>Except to the extent necessary to explain the expenditure estimates, all reference to staff matters has been left over. I will, therefore, <span class="col_2081-2082" refersTo="page_1122"/>now give a few of the interesting features connected therewith.</p>

<p>Before doing so, however, I desire to inform hon. members that in the beginning of this year the Government decided to accord South-West Africa territory advisory representation on the Railway and Harbour Board when questions affecting that territory are under consideration. With this object in view arrangements have been made whereby the Hon. G. R. Hofmeyr will attend meetings of the Railway Board in the capacity of an advisor when subjects connected with South-West Africa are under discussion. He has already given valuable advice in that capacity.</p>

<p>A new Service Bill has been introduced today. It is not necessary at this stage to deal with the subject except to say that the labours of the Conciliation Board, which, in many important respects have fashioned the lines of that Bill, will go far to facilitate its passage through this House.</p>

<p>Amongst other provisions that Bill will give to the Conciliation Board a statutory status, and thereby meet what has long been held, both by the members of the board and the Railway and Harbour Service generally, to be weakness which gave rise to uncertainty and suspicion.</p>

<p>During the last twelve months, the administration has accepted practically every unanimous recommendation of the board, and as the board has been generally unanimous&#x2014;which is a striking tribute to the spirit which characterizes the work of both the elected and nominated members&#x2014;it will be evident that the practical value of the Conciliation Board&#x2019;s work has been inestimable.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#cost_of_living_allowance&#x2014;durban">

<heading>COST OF LIVING ALLOWANCE.&#x2014;DURBAN.</heading>

<p>In accordance with the promise given by the administration the Durban special cost of living allowance was reviewed at the end of July last in the light of the conditions then obtaining. It was found that an increased allowance was justified, and it accordingly was granted the basic point allowance being raised from £12 to £18 per annum.</p>

<p>As a result of a recommendation from the Conciliation Board a modified form of allowance also was applied to the Durban artisans who were in receipt of the old rates of pay.</p>

<p>On the 17th November last, short time working in the mechanical shops, which had been introduced in August, 1921, was abolished, and since then the entire staff of the workshops have been working full time.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#hours_of_duty_committee">

<heading>HOURS OF DUTY COMMITTEE.</heading>

<p>During the year, an Hours of Duty Committee, consisting of two officers and two representatives of the staff, elected by and from the elected members of the Conciliation Board was appointed by the administration with a view to determining whether any reduction of working hours is justified.</p>

<p>That committee is actively engaged in pursuing its investigations, and has been urged to complete its work as early as possible.</p>

<p>The committee&#x2019;s investigations must necessarily cover a very wide field and, until its general report is received, no decision can be come to, but when that report is received the committee&#x2019;s recommendations will be most carefully and sympathetically considered by the administration.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#workshops_commission">

<heading>WORKSHOPS COMMISSION.</heading>

<p>At the close of last session of Parliament, it was decided to appoint a commission to investigate the capabilities of the existing workshops as they exist at present to deal with the repair and manufacturing work required for the administration&#x2019;s own needs, and also to report as to the desirability of extending the existing workshops to undertake additional repair and manufacturing work and other relevant matters.</p>

<p>The commission has also been asked to report as to the best means of manufacturing the requirements of the administration in preference to importing such in future, and whether this can best be accomplished by the erection of an entirely new workshop or extensions to the existing shops.</p>

<p>The commission met in October and have been engaged on the work unintermittently ever since.</p>

<p>I am reliably informed that the commission has practically completed its investigations and that the report will be presented some time during this month.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#staff_employed">

<heading>STAFF EMPLOYED.</heading>

<p>The total number of staff employed on the South African railways and harbours, open lines and construction (including South-West Africa). as at 31st December, 1924, was 86,481. In addition to this 1,561 convicts were employed.</p>

<p>At 31st December, 1923, that is the end of the previous year, the number employed was 80,088, with 1,759 convicts, so that there has been an increase of 6,393, but a decrease in convicts of 198.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#housing_of_staff">

<heading>HOUSING OF STAFF.</heading>

<p>Last year an amount of £106,807 was included in the estimates for the provision of quarters for the staff throughout the Union, and 81 houses were erected during 1923.</p>

<p>From the date of Union to the 31st December, 1924, the number of houses erected was 3,303, while the number demolished was 435, leaving a net increase of 2,868.</p>

<p>At the present time there are 75 houses in course of erection, or waiting to be commenced.</p>

<p>The number of houses belonging to the administration now totals 10,211, of which 6,753 are let to the staff and 3,458 are provided as free quarters.</p>

<p>Very considerable improvements have been made in recent years in the types of houses, and in the accommodation provided. European labourers&#x2019; houses have also been much improved and the number of rooms increased.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#appreciation_of_staff">

<heading>APPRECIATION OF STAFF.</heading>

<p>Last year, when addressing this House, I appealed to every servant of the administration <span class="col_2083-2084" refersTo="page_1123"/>to render at all times courteous, conscientious and prompt service to the public, whose servants we are. That appeal was not made in vain.</p>

<p>I was confident that the highest traditions of the service would be maintained, and it is with a deep feeling of appreciation that I record, on behalf of the Government, the loyal service which has been rendered by every one of the thousands of officers and employees, from the general manager downwards who comprise the staff of our railways, harbours and steamships. During the year a staff and labour inspector was appointed, by whom good work has already been done. It is hoped that this appointment will help greatly to foster a feeling of contentment amongst the staff.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#passenger_traffic">

<heading>PASSENGER TRAFFIC.</heading>

<p>In order that hon. members may realize the magnitude of the growth of traffic, the following figures are given. The number of passengers carried on the South African Railways during the year 1924, as compared with the number carried during 1923, was: 1924, 69,631,252; 1923, 64,442,041; increase (number), 5,189,211; increase (per cent.), 8.05.</p>

<p>The number of passengers conveyed during 1924 constitutes a record in the history of the South African railways, the total of 69,631,252 representing an increase of 5,175,765 journeys over the previous highest figure of 64,455,467 in 1920.</p>

<p>Compared with 1923, the number of suburban area passengers Carried in 1924 increased by 5,122,350, while the number of passengers carried other than in suburban areas increased by 66,861.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#commercial_seaborne_traffic_to_the_competitive_area">

<heading>COMMERCIAL SEABORNE TRAFFIC TO THE COMPETITIVE AREA.</heading>

<p>The tonnage and percentage of total tonnage of commercial seaborne traffic passing through the ports to the competitive area during the years 1923 and 1924 were:&#x2014;Cape Ports (1924), 51,716: Durban, 139.644; Delagoa Bay, 200,160; total, 391.520; (1923) 45.186: 141,904; 168.686: total, 355,776; (1924) 13.21; 35.67; 51.12; (1923) 12.70; 39.89; 47.41.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#rolling_stock">

<heading>ROLLING STOCK.</heading>

<p>Quantities.&#x2014;The entire equipment of the railways in rolling stock at the 31st December, 1924, was:&#x2014;Locomotives, 1,888; coaches, 3,147; goods stock, 34,092; total, 39,127.</p>

<p>The new additional stock brought into service during 1924 was:&#x2014;Locomotives, 34; coaches, 81; goods stock, 1,277; total, 1,392; while the stock scrapped or sold was:&#x2014;Locomotives, 13; coaches, 9; goods stock, 56; total 78.</p>

<p>Improvements were effected during the year by converting one class into another and by fitting stock with additional conveniences and more up-to-date appliances.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#expenditure">

<heading>EXPENDITURE.</heading>

<p>The expenditure out of Loan Funds in equip ping the railways with rolling stock at the 31st December, 1924, was £18,954,677, or an increase of £458,509, compared with the corresponding date of the previous year.</p>

<p>In addition to the capital expenditure a sum of £1,204,496 out of Renewals Fund was spent on rolling stock during 1924 to make good depreciation on stock at present in service.</p>

<p>The gross expenditure on rolling stock during the year was, therefore, £1,663,005, and the total original cost of engines and rolling stock in service at the 31st December, 1924, financed from all sources was £31,772,109.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#loan_estimates">

<heading>LOAN ESTIMATES.</heading>

<p>The estimated expenditure to be incurred by the administration during 1925-26 out of Loan and Betterment Funds on new capital works and works which were in progress at 31st March last are at the present moment under consideration.</p>

<p>Present indications point to the fact that an expenditure of approximately £6,000.000 will be required out of Loan Funds. This sum will be augmented by funds to be derived from other sources such as betterment, capital credits, and the special contribution towards the reduction of interest-bearing capital.</p>

<p>Altogether, it is expected that there will be available a total of £7,300,000 towards meeting the cost of new works during 1925-26.</p>

<p>As already mentioned, these works are now under consideration. As soon as possible the Brown Book embodying full details of the expenditure out of Loan and Betterment Funds will be submitted to this House.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#conclusion">

<heading>CONCLUSION.</heading>

<p>In conclusion I only desire to say that the prospects of the railways, harbours and steamships, for the year upon which we have now entered are exceedingly bright, and if all our expectations as to traffic are realized the railways and harbours will be called upon to deal with a volume of traffic which will constitute a record in the history of our railways. We have faith in our country, our People and our staff, and are going forward with a stout heart.</p>

<speech by="#jagger">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">JAGGER</person>:</from>

<p>We are indebted to both Ministers for the very full statements they have given us in regard to the financial position of the country and of the railways. The country is to be congratulated on the very good financial position in which it stands at the present moment. We have had an excess in the estimates in both cases, both in general revenue and also the railways, and a surplus also. One of £800,000 and the other of £900,000.I think, however, the taxpayers will be profoundly disappointed when they come to read the speeches of the Ministers that there is no relief from the burden of taxation in this country. Notwithstanding the extremely good financial position in which the country stands, there is no relief. In fact it is just the opposite, and the tendency is to increase the taxation. There can be no question about that. We shall have a discussion later on, and I suppose we shall have to take both budgets together under the rules for discussion at the <span class="col_2085-2086" refersTo="page_1124"/>same time. For most of us that will be a formidable task. These budgets involve a total expenditure of £51,500,000, and there is a total increase on the actual expenditure of last year of something like £3,000,000. Under these circumstances I think it would be premature to discuss it just now, but I do say this, that it behoves this House to pay the most careful attention to the estimates. They involve vast sums for a country like this with a comparatively small population. I want to allude to two points. There are very great changes involved in the Budget which must also be carefully considered. The first is preference. There will be wide differences of opinion in regard to this matter. Many will think that the Government has taken a narrow view, some that they have taken a very narrow view. I would like to ask the hon. Minister of Finance a question. We have a schedule giving preference to British goods. Supposing he negotiates an agreement with Germany so as to give a certain preference to German goods? Are those preferences to apply to British goods as well under the favoured nation&#x2019;s scheme? That is a very important thing, and we should have information regarding it. If that was not done We should have certain goods coming from Germany at lower rates than Great Britain, the country that takes our goods absolutely free. We have an absolutely free market in Great Britain and have never had 6d. to pay. There is another point I wish to call attention to. I would earnestly ask my hon. friend that before we start discussion of the Budget, he should lay on the Table the Bill under which he proposes to regulate the financial relation of the provinces. This has a strong bearing on the Budget now before, the House. It is suggested by the hon. Minister that we should give the provinces a further grant amounting to close on a million. That involves extra taxation. Is my hon. friend under these circumstances going to follow the other recommendations of the Baxter Commission? The commission recommended that the grant to the provinces should be on a fixed basis. That my friend has followed. They also recommended that the taxing powers of the provinces should be very considerably reduced. Is he going to do that? If he will lay the Bill on the Table at the earliest possible moment before we start discussion, these points will be cleared up. I think these two points will occupy a good deal of discussion and attention. I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the debate be adjourned,</block>

<p>Agreed to; to be resumed on 20th April.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#railways_and_harbours_estimates">

<heading>RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS ESTIMATES.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF RAILWAY AND HARBOURS laid upon the Table&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote"> Statements of Estimated Revenue and Expenditure of the South African Railways and Harbours for the financial year ending 31st March, 1926, also statements of the original and revised Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the year ending 31st March, 1925. [U.G. 11&#x2014;&#x2019;25.]</block>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#business_of_the_house">

<heading>BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE.</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Order of the Day No. II stand over until after Order No. III has been disposed of.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#oost">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">OOST</person></from>

<p>seconded.</p>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#great_stock_brands_bill">

<heading>GREAT STOCK BRANDS BILL.</heading>

<p>Third Order read: Second reading, Great Stock Brands Bill.</p>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the Bill be now read a second time.</block>

<p>Hon. members seem anxious to go home, therefore I shall try to deal with this Bill as shortly as possible. In various provinces there are various Brands Acts, but they are not general and uniform. In Natal, for instance, there is no Brands Act, and it is necessary that in Natal also such an Act should be in force, especially where we have to deal with East Coast fever. When a Brands Act is proclaimed in a certain district, then the stock cannot be so easily driven about from one place to another and this helps us to exercise proper control over cattle diseases. Therefore I am very anxious to get this Bill through during the resent session.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person></from>

<p>drew attention at 4.18 p.m. to the fact that there was not a quorum present.</p>

<p>House counted, and Mr. Speaker declared that a quorum was present.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>In the Cape Province the following Brands Acts exist: Act No. 12 of 1890, 18 of 1892, and 10 of 1897. But the Acts are not in a definite form, each fixes its own brands, and this does not give us proper control. In the Free State there is Ordinance 15 of 1903, but that does not give sufficient control either, and in the Transvaal there is Act No 5 of 1910. This Act is based upon that in Australia and Queensland, and has given very great satisfaction so that the Bill now before us is practically identical with that Act, except for some small alterations. The Acts in the various provinces are very unsatisfactory and, therefore, this uniform Bill is introduced. I have great pleasure in introducing this legislation, because it is necessary that such a law should be on the statute book, and apply over the whole Union. The Bill only makes provisions applicable to great stock, not to small stock. There are two kinds of brands, viz., two letters and a numeral, or two numerals and a letter. The numerals and letters must be clear and of uniform size. This will be of great importance in case of cattle being lost, stolen or otherwise, in order to remove them, because butchers will have to duly enter in a book the brands of <span class="col_2087-2088" refersTo="page_1125"/>each beast slaughtered by them and the books must be exhibited on the request of a policeman. The auctioneer also must see that the beasts that are sold carry the proper mark of the owner of them who must hand in a certificate so that one prevents cattle being brought from another place and unlawfully sold. The Bill, just as other Bills introduced by me, is half obligatory and half Voluntary. If the Divisional Council in the Cape Province wants the cattle to be branded in a certain district or ward, then they notify me of such a decision and then according to this Bill the branding of the cattle can be made obligatory. In the Transvaal the same action is taken as under the Fencing Act, which provides that if twelve persons apply to the magistrate then the Act can be made obligatory in a certain area. Then notice is given thereof that branding in such a district is obligatory. It will be of great importance in connection with East Coast fever and other cattle diseases that, according to this Bill, the Minister can apply it to the removal of cattle in any district. It is of importance in fighting East Coast fever and other diseases. The method of branding must be fixed by regulation. In this respect a difference exists from the old Transvaal Act, because in respect of the place for the mark great objections exist as it is said that the place where the brand must be put under the Transvaal Act injures the skin. It is alleged that farmers suffer no less than £200,000 damage per annum by the burning of brands, and about 6s. per skin. Enquiry is now being made into a certain kind of paint which appears to be entirely suited for the purpose, and which will not damage the skin. If it turns out that it is successful then I shall be glad, because this will very much simplify the work and remove the objections of the farmers. To small stock, as I have already said, the Bill does not apply, but the Bill prohibits the cutting off of ears in order to prevent theft. It is, therefore, prohibited to cut off the ears of goats and sheep. The branding iron will be approved upon application to the magistrate upon payment of a registration fee of 5s. That iron can be taken over by some other person, if the first possessor stops farming, against payment of a fee of 10s. The magistrate can then register such branding iron to the new owner. No brand of which the registration has been cancelled or which his been given back shall be again granted before the lapse of a period of five years. Then the Act provides various penalties for contravention. In 1923 there was an intention of introducing such a Bill. I found it in my office. My predecessor will probably again say that the Bill I am now introducing is the same as that which was drafted five years ago, but I may say that the Bill I am now proposing does not apply to small stock in contra-distinction with the old Bill. But, unhappily, some people have she habit of reading two things as precisely the same, although a world wide distinction exists, such as the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) for example. I think that he is possibly imbued with the same spirit as the &#x201C;Cape Times&#x201D; which also has the habit. With reference to the election at Graaff Reinet, e.g., he says that the Nationalist party majority had become about 725 votes less&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. Minister must confine himself to the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, I will not go further into that, I only refer to it in passing to show how the hon. member for Fort Beaufort, just as the &#x201C;Cape Times&#x201D; reads things wrongly. I will now shortly deal with the section. From these it will be seen that the provision apply also to natives and native locations. Section 1 makes provision for the appointment of a Registrar of Brands. Section 2 that the magistrates must keep the district registers. Section 3 that after the coming into force of this Bill no brand may be placed upon great stock except in accordance with the provisions of the Act. Section 4. Every registered brand shall consist of three characters, either of two letters and one numeral, or two numerals and one letter. The Governor-General can prescribe distinguishing characters for the brands issued in each province. Only one brand may be allotted in any district to one or more owner. The size of the characters may not be less than ¼ of an inch. Section 5. Every person (except natives in locations) who wants a brand sends in an application to the magistrate of the district in which the brand is required, together with 5s. registration fee. The form of application is given in the schedule of the Act. Section 6. When the application is in order, a registration certificate is granted to the applicant. Section 7. Brands may be allotted by the magistrate to a native location or reserve. The first character of such brand must be a dagger (&#x2020;) and the remaining characters a numeral and a letter. Section 8 The magistrate can allot brands to head of native families who do not reside in native locations. The magistrate may allot a distinguishing mark to a family in a native location when a brand is registered in the name of such location. Such brand shall prima facie be a proof of ownership and may not be used for cattle who are not marked with registered brands. Section 10. The registrar must allot a brand to each Government department, such brand must as its first character have the letter &#x201C;D.&#x201D; Section 11. Each magistrate shall allot to each public pound in his district a brand, one character thereof must be a diamond and the other characters (a) the distinguishing character of a district, and (b) a numeral. On the sale of any impounded cattle the pound master must provide them with such brands. Section 12. (1) The branding of great stock is obligatory in every district where such brands have been declared obligatory by the Governor-General by proclamation in the Government Gazette. (2) The branding of great stock can be made obligatory in any area or part thereof where a divisional council has jurisdiction if such divisional council passes and submits a resolution <span class="col_2089-2090" refersTo="page_1126"/>in which this is requested; (3) when a district is divided into wards, then the Governor-General declares the branding of great stock in a ward obligatory if the magistrate submits to the Minister a resolution taken by the majority of owners present at a meeting called at the written request of not less than twelve owners in which it is recommended that branding shall be obligatory in the said ward. (4) Whenever any district wherein no divisional council has jurisdiction, or which is not divided into wards, an agreed resolution as above is submitted by the magistrate, then the Governor-General will declare the branding of great stock obligatory. Section 13. Owners of registered brands can make their own branding irons on condition that a diagram thereof is submitted for approval to the Registrar. Section 14. The owner of any brand registered under any law, after the doming into force of the Act, is not obliged to brand his cattle with a brand registered under this Act, but he may not brand with it after the coming into force of the Act. The owner of such brand can apply to the magistrate to have such brand replaced by a brand under this Act; for these new brands no fee shall be charged. If such existing brands are not in conflict with a provision of this Act, then they can be regarded as registered under the provisions of the Act. Section 15. At the end of every quarter the Registrar shall publish a return in the Government Gazette of all brands registered during such quarter. Section 16. An annual and quin-quennial brands directory shall be prepared. Section 17. A person who wishes to transfer a registered brand, and the person to whom it is to be made over, must sign a document in the form provided in the Act and send it with a fee of 10s. to the magistrate. If the application is in order, a transfer certificate may be issued. The ownership of all cattle bearing the brand passes thereby to the cessionary. Section 18. The owner of a registered brand can cancel it upon notice to the magistrate. Section 19. When a registered brand is not in use the magistrate can cancel the registration. Section 20. Such a cancelled brand can only be allotted afresh after the expiry of five years. Section 21. A record must be kept by the magistrate of cancelled or surrendered brands, and the Registrar must publish this in the Government Gazette. Section 22. The magistrates, police and other officials must keep copies of the annual and quarterly statements of brands and permit inspection thereof upon payment of a fee of 1s. for each inspection. Section 23. Every butcher, poundmaster, marketmaster, and auctioneer, must keep a book in which he registers the brand marks of every animal slaughtered, exchanged, impounded or sold. Section 24. Before sale the auctioneer or market master must satisfy himself that the seller of the cattle is the owner thereof or that he is authorized to sell it. Section 25. Every butcher, poundmaster, marketmaster or auctioneer who slaughters or sells an animal on which a brand has been altered, or appears to be blotched, must report it to the nearest police station. Section 26. Inspectors appointed under this Act and the police may go to the place where cattle are kept and inspect and seize great stock, hides, or a branding iron in such place in connection with which there is reason to think that a breach of the law had taken place. Section 27. An inspector or policeman may impound cattle which have a brand that he has reason to think has been wilfully altered, blotched or made illegible. Section 28. When branded cattle are in the pound, the poundmaster must notify their owners. Section 29. Declares the manner of giving notice prescribed by the Act or the regulations. Section 30. At the prosecution of persons for theft of stock or hides, or a portion thereof, evidence may be given who the registered owner of the brand is. Section 31. A person who uses or has in his possession a branding iron not in accordance with this law can be fined not exceeding £50. Section 32. A person who obstructs the inspectors or the police in their duties can be punished by a fine not exceeding £50 or imprisonment. Section 33. Any person who wilfully places his brand or mark on cattle of which he is not the owner is punishable by a fine not exceeding £100. Section 34, Any person who marks or assists in the marking of great stock not in accordance with this Act shall be punishable by fine not exceeding £50. Section 35. Any person who wilfully blotches, defaces or renders illegible a brand shall be punishable with a fine not exceeding £50. Section 36. Any person who cuts down the natural length of the ear of a sheep, goat or pig is punishable by fine not exceeding £50. Section 37. Any person who makes or permits to be made false entries in documents relating to brand directories, etc., or unlawfully uses brands or marks of other persons, is punishable by imprisonment not exceeding three years. These are the most important points. It will be clear that the Bill is very important and necessary. I propose the second reading.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I am sorry if I have been the innocent cause, through a remark of mine regarding the Graaff Reinet election, of the Minister of Agriculture being called to order. He seems to feel these things very much, but when he is a little older, and has got more used to the criticisms of this House, then he will accept them in a manner in which he does not seem to be inclined to do now. He will facilitate business if he accepts these criticisms in the good spirit in which they are made. They are not made with a desire unnecessarily to irritate the Minister, but entirely with the intention of improving the Minister, thereby allowing him to become a better servant of the farming community. A young member like myself gets rather disconcerted when the Minister loses his temper under criticism of this sort, and while we are anxious to take part in discussion, we are to a large extent terrorized from doing so by the attitude the Minister adopts. If there are any members of the House who have not <span class="col_2091-2092" refersTo="page_1127"/>carefully studied the provisions of the Bill. I would advise them to read a very interesting bulletin dealing with the measure reprinted from the &#x201C;Agricultural Journal&#x201D; of October, 1923. It was written by Mr. Goldman, Registrar of Brands. The Bill, I think, is a good one, and I hope it will receive the approval of the House. I endeavoured to deal with the branding of small stock, but I doubt if it is possible under existing conditions to get that sanctioned by the House, and therefore I think the Minister has done a wise course by dealing first with the branding of large stock. The manner in which stock are branded, even in districts where the Branding Act is in force, is not of a suitable character, and if it is desired to brand all stock, the three-piece system must be adopted, for which provision is made in the Bill. Mr. Goldman, who, I may say, is an excellent officer, has found that the three-piece system is the only one which can be practically applied to every district in the Union, and under this system there will be no two brands alike. I would like to see branding made compulsory for all stock, but that will be difficult at the present time. The Bill I think will be adopted by many districts and it will be of great assistance in the tracing of stolen stock; in fact, I think it will be one of the greatest deterrents to stock thefts that you could possibly have. It would be equally useful in this respect so far as small stock are concerned. I welcome the measure, and I earnestly suggest to the Minister of Agriculture and the Prime Minister that they should seriously consider during the recess whether it might not be possible to extend the scope of the Bill so as to make it applicable to small, as well as to large, stock. It may be necessary to move certain amendments in committee, but the Bill will be exceedingly beneficial to the farmers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRUBEN</person>:</from>

<p>I intend to give my support to this Bill. I hope what I have to say will not be looked upon as carping criticism, because I want to support what Sir Thomas Smartt has said. If it is possible, I think you should include small stock, and if you did, you would have the backing of progressive farmers in the country. This question was discussed at recent meetings of the Cape Province Agricultural Association and the South African Agricultural Union, both of which take great interest in the matter, and speak with authority on farming subjects. Progressive sheep farmers demand that there should be a registration of brands for sheep, as well as for cattle. It is more necessary for sheep than for cattle, in view of the greater case and frequency of sheep stealing. The stock thief of to-day is not the stock thief of years ago. They used to steal for the pot; they now steal to acquire stock. They are now stealing in hundreds, and are running them across the borders where they cannot be got at. In Basutoland, if animals are found roaming on the land they become the property of the local chief, and some chiefs are making up to 1,000 bead of sheep per year as their perquisites. They are stolen, run across the border, shorn, turned loose and then become the property of the local chief, by native custom. A little while ago there was a pitso in Basutoland, where the chiefs discussed this question, and drastic suggestions were then made, such as hanging a man, branding him, or at any rate killing him in some way for his second or third offence. We don&#x2019;t want anything so drastic as that! The importance and feasibility of branding sheep is well-known to men who have had experience in Australia, where they have branding. One at least of our Commissioners of Police has a first-hand and extensive knowledge of this subject, and I think that his evidence should be called before a final decision is made on this Bill. Before this Bill is put through, I earnestly appeal to the Minister to deal in some way with this question of providing for small stock to be included in the provisions of the Bill. Before this present Government came in, it was difficult to get support from the Opposition for the drastic measures we should have liked to have taken on many agricultural matters. I assure the Minister that he will have the full support of the farmers of this side of the House in any measures for the real benefit of the agricultural industry which he may take. We will not allow our party feeling to blind us as his followers did in the past. The question of sheep stealing is undoubtedly more serious than the stealing of large cattle. Another thing which is making it difficult for sheep farmers is the wholesale theft from jackal netted farms, a great amount of the benefit of which has been thereby lost. It is true this Bill is the first step, and I hope it points towards the branding of sheep in the future. But why not do it now? Most progressive sheep famers ask that sheep shall be included under the provisions of the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>The hon. member must not go too far into the question relating to sheep, because that does not fall within the scope of the Bill. If the hon. member wants to discuss that question, he can move an instruction later on to bring it within the scope of the Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#struben">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STRUBEN</person>:</from>

<p>Perhaps I wander, but I wanted to convince the Minister. If it is confined to great stock, we know the benefit of it. I saw it in the Transvaal, where I was one of the first to apply under the branding regulations. I welcome it whole-heartedly. It is a step in the right direction. But I hope the Minister will include sheep.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#steytler">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">STEYTLER</person>:</from>

<p>I welcome this Bill. I agree with everything that has been said here by the hon. member for Albany (Mr. Struben). The great difficulty we have is not the theft of great stock, but of sheep. I can assure the House that with the new system of jackal-proof fencing the danger of theft of stock is very great. When the sheep were shepherded we always had somebody there. The sheep were counted every day. Now days pass without their being counted, and in the meanwhile the wire is cut and fifty or a hundred sheep are <span class="col_2093-2094" refersTo="page_1128"/>stolen. My experience is that the danger of theft is very great, and, if it is possible, I should be very glad if the Minister will make the Bill apply to sheep.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#minister_of_agriculture">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE</person>:</from>

<p>I am very pleased that this Bill is welcomed on both sides of the House and that hon. members think that it should be accepted. The only objection made is that the Bill does not go far enough, and the view is that sheep also should be included. I am not so certain that the public will support that. The hon. member for Albert (Mr. Steytler) has said that the system of jackal-proof fencing will increase theft. I shall be very sorry if that is the case. I thought that would make the people be more precise in seeing that the wire was not broken. However this may be, I will give consideration to the matter and get into touch with the Farmers&#x2019; Association. We can then see what can be done at the committee stage. At the moment I fear that we cannot go so far, but if it is possible I shall be very glad.</p>

<p>Motion put and agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a second time; House to go into committee on 15th April.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>*The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>I think that the feeling of the House is that we should not go on with any further business, and I move, therefore&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That the House do now adjourn.</block>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</speech>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1925-04-09T16:45:00">4.45 p.m.</recordedTime> until Wednesday, 15th April.</p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection></debateSection>

