---
title: 'House of Assembly: Vol3 - FRIDAY 3 APRIL 1925'
layout: debate
year: 1925
month: APRIL
month_slug: Apr
categories: hoa debates
---

<debateSection name="#opening">

<heading>FRIDAY, 3rd APRIL, 1925.</heading>

<prayers>

<narrative>Mr. SPEAKER took the Chair at <recordedTime time="1925-04-03T14:23:00">2.23 p.m.</recordedTime></narrative>

</prayers>

<debateSection name="#questions">

<heading>QUESTIONS.</heading>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Post Officials and Pre-Union Barriers.</heading>

<question by="#van_der_merwe" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>I.</num>

<from>Dr. VAN DER MERWE</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware that in 1913 a circular was issued to post and telegraph officials, in which it was announced that the Government had approved of general body assistants, who had suffered waits at the various pre-Union barriers, being given credit therefor up to a maximum of three years in connection with the waiting period anterior to progressing on the Union relief scale;</li>

<li>(2) whether he is aware that certain officials in the Orange Free State have been placed at a disadvantage owing to the fact that before becoming eligible to advance on the relief scale the Public Service Commission of Enquiry’s 5th Report adjustment occurred and the relief scale disappeared, with the result that the advantages which these officers expected never materialized, and that in some cases they are to-day in positions inferior to men who should really be their juniors; and</li>

<li>(3) whether the Minister will take immediate steps towards redressing these grievances?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#van_der_merwe">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:&#x2014;</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) Yes.</li>

<li>(2) and (3) The Government is not aware of the circumstances referred to, but if the officers concerned will make their representations fully through the usual channels, I will go into the matter.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railways and New European Appointments.</heading>

<question by="#strachan" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>II.</num>

<from>Mr. STRACHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) What is the total number of Europeans under the age of 21 years who have obtained employment on the Union railways and harbours since the present Government took office;</li>

<li>(2) to what branches of the services have these new entrants been admitted, giving separate figures for administrative, transportation and maintenance (a) skilled, (b) semi-skilled, (c) unskilled; and</li>

<li>(3) how many European youths of the age stated remain on the various waiting lists, and what are the present or future prospects of their being employed in the different departments?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#strachan">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>The information is being obtained and will be supplied as early as practicable.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Tenant-Farmers and Right of Purchase.</heading>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_labour">

<num>III.</num>

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON (for Mr. Marwick)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Labour:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many farmers have agreed to take tenant-farmers on to their farms under the scheme outlined by the Department of Labour, and in what district or districts are such farmers resident;</li>

<li>(2) how many of such tenant-farmers have the right of purchase of the land at present in their use ;</li>

<li>(3) what is the acreage, variety, and estimated value of the crops that have been grown by the tenant-farmers;</li>

<li>(4) what amounts have been (a) expended in payments of subsidies to tenant-farmers, (b) advanced to landowners or tenant farmers for purchase of livestock, implements, erection of dwellings, etc., (c) expended by the Department in the purchase of livestock, implements, etc., for tenant-farmers; and</li>

<li>(5) whether the Minister will lay upon the Table a copy of the conditions under which tenant-farmers are placed with farmers?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_labour" to="#byron">

<from><span class="col_1857-1858" refersTo="page_1010"/>The MINISTER OF LABOUR:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) One hundred and eighty farmers in the districts of Pretoria, Potchefstroom, Rustenburg, Marico, Middelburg (Transvaal), Waterberg, Potgietersrust, Zoutpansberg, Lydenburg, Krugersdorp, Heidelberg (Transvaal) Pietersburg, Johannesburg, Bloemfontein, Humansdorp, Knysna, George, Willowmore and Uniondale have agreed to take tenant-farmers. Three hundred and eighty-three tenant-farmers have been placed. A further two hundred applications have been received, of which some have not yet been completed, and some have been set aside.</li>

<li>(2) Nil.</li>

<li>(3) Two thousand morgen of irrigable land and seven thousand morgen of dry land have been allotted to three hundred and eighty-three tenant-farmers. The crops being grown include wheat, lucerne, potatoes, vegetables, fruit, tobacco, oats, cotton, etc. It is not possible to estimate the value of these crops.</li>

<li>(4) (a) £4,245 since the scheme was inaugurated; (b) (i) advances approved to owners £22,878; (ii) advances approved to tenant-farmers £8,263. The final statement of actual payments by the Land Bank is not yet available, (c) The cost (not yet ascertained) of replacing 29 oxen which died.</li>

<li>(5) Yes.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Bilingualism and pee-Union Officials.</heading>

<question by="#duncan" to="#prime_minister">

<num>IV.</num>

<from>Mr. DUNCAN</from>

<p>asked the Prime Minister whether it is the intention of the Government to withhold promotion from pre-Union officials who have not a thorough knowledge of both official languages?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#prime_minister" to="#duncan">

<from>The PRIME MINISTER:</from>

<p>Where the Government considers that the bilingual qualification is essential for the efficient performance of the duties attaching to a post the answer is in the affirmative, otherwise the answer is in the negative.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Umfolosi Sugar Mill, Government Money in.</heading>

<question by="#reyburn" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>V.</num>

<from>Mr. REYBURN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) How much money has the Government in the Umfolosi Sugar Mill;</li>

<li>(2) under what conditions was this money lent; and</li>

<li>(3) whether it is intended to put any more money into this concern?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#reyburn">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>I must ask the hon. member to allow the question to stand over.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Defence Force and Elections of Officers.</heading>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_defence">

<num>VI.</num>

<from>Mr. NATHAN</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Defence:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether officers for the Defence Force are elected by popular vote of the men in a corps; if so,</li>

<li>(2) whether he appoints the person so elected as an officer in the Defence Force;</li>

<li>(3) whether he has done so in every instance; if not,</li>

<li>(4) what are the reasons for such departure; and</li>

<li>(5) whether he will lay upon the Table of the House a return of the names where there has been such a departure, together with the names of the officers appointed in the place of those elected?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#nathan">

<from>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>In replying to an exactly similar question on the 6th March last, I overlooked the fact that it related to officers of the Defence Force generally and not to officers of Defence Rifle Associations specially. The reply to (1) whether officers for the Defence Force are elected by popular vote of the men in a corps is in the negative. The remainder of the question, therefore, falls away.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railway Service to Strand.</heading>

<question by="#stals" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>VII.</num>

<from>Dr. STALS (for the Rev. Mr. Hattingh)</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether he is aware that the express train from Strand which should arrive at Cape Town at 9 a.m. is very often late, thereby causing the travelling public, especially those who are employed in the city, great inconvenience and at times loss; and</li>

<li>(2) whether he will take steps to remove the causes of such delay and to ensure an invariably punctual service?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#stals">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) The train in question has on occasions been late, due to the comparatively large number of trains requiring to be accommodated on the single track between Eerste River and Bellville between the hours of 8 and 9 a.m. The late arrival of the train during the month of March averaged 4.1 minutes, while during February the average delay was 3 minutes.</li>

<li>(2) The solution of the difficulty is the doubling of the line between Eerste River and Bellville, and if it is possible to provide funds during this financial year, the work will be carried; out.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railway Artisans Conference.</heading>

<question by="#snow" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>VIII.</num>

<from>Mr. SNOW</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours whether the Administration has arrived at any decision with regard to the recommendations submitted by the Artisans Conference held in December, 1924 if so, why no information has been given to the staff concerned; and if not, what is the reason for the delay in arriving at such decision?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#snow">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS:</from>

<p>Decisions have already been; given on the principal matters discussed at the Artisans&#x2019; Conference held in December last. A large number of questions of lesser importance were also raised and a reply covering the majority of such items will be given in the course of the next few days. The items on the agenda covered a very wide field and any delay that has arisen has been due to the necessity for carefully examining and considering the matters submitted.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading><span class="col_1859-1860" refersTo="page_1011"/>Weekly Sub. System in Cafe Town Goods Yard.</heading>

<question by="#snow" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<num>IX.</num>

<from>Mr. SNOW</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Railways and Harbours&#x2014;</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether (a) the carriage and wagon examination staff, (b) the steamshed staff, (c) the electrician staff, and (d) the, shunting staff at the Cape Town Docks, are on what is known as the weekly sub. system;</li>

<li>(2) whether the shunters in the Cape Town goods yards who have to deal intimately with all the before mentioned staffs have made application to responsible officials and also to the Minister to extend such weekly sub. system to them, and whether such applications have been refused ;</li>

<li>(3) whether the ground for such refusal is that it is not proposed to extend the system of weekly subs. ;</li>

<li>(4) how the Minister reconciles this differentiation between the employees who are in such intimate daily relationship; and</li>

<li>(5) whether the Minister is aware that the Cape Town goods shunters, their wives and families, are greatly inconvenienced by such decision, which forces them to buy on credit, with the result that they have to purchase the necessaries of life in the dearest market, more particularly in view of the fact that the cost of living in and around Cape Town, as disclosed by the official returns, is on the upgrade?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#snow">

<from>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS&#x2014;</from>

<ol>

<li>(1) (a), (b), (c) and (d). Yes.</li>

<li>(2) Yes.</li>

<li>(3) The matter has been considered by the Administration but on the grounds of expense and general difficulties of working, it has been decided not to extend the system of weekly subs.</li>

<li>(4) Such differentiation as exists is due to the fact that the staff referred to in (1) have enjoyed such facilities as may exist under the subbing system from a date prior to Union and it is not considered equitable to make any change.</li>

<li>(5) I am not aware of any such cases.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Settlement Lands, Revaluation of.</heading>

<question by="#de_villiers" to="#minister_of_lands">

<num>X.</num>

<from>Mr. W. B. DE VILLIERS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Lands whether, in view of the fact that the Transvaal Land Board has revalued the settlement lands under its jurisdiction, he is prepared to recommend to the Land Board of the Orange Free State to revalue the settlement lands under its jurisdiction?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#de_villiers">

<from>The MINISTER OF LANDS:</from>

<p>I must ask the hon. member to allow the question to stand over.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Alluvial Diamond Diggers and Income Tax.</heading>

<question by="#de_villiers" to="#minister_of_finance">

<num>XI.</num>

<from>Mr. W. B. DE VILLIERS</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Finance whether he is prepared to take the necessary steps during the present session of Parliament to have the law regarding income tax amended so as to extend the period of payment of income tax by alluvial diamond diggers from one year to five years?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_finance" to="#de_villiers">

<from>The MINISTER OF FINANCE:</from>

<p>The hon. member must await my Budget statement.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Wireless Service to England.</heading>

<question by="#william_macintosh" to="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs">

<num>XII.</num>

<from>Sir WILLIAM MACINTOSH</from>

<p>asked the Minister of Posts and Telegraphs:</p>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether it is a fact that the establishment of the wireless service between South Africa and England is being delayed by the failure of the British Post Office to make the necessary arrangements; and</li>

<li>(2) what are the prospects of such service being established at an early date?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_posts_and_telegraphs" to="#william_macintosh">

<from>The MINISTER OF POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS:</from>

<p>Last August the Union Government granted an extension of time to the extent of six months to the South African Marconi Wireless Company for the erection of their superstation in order that they might have an opportunity of trying out what is known as the Beam system. The company has been proceeding with the work of erection of the Beam station. The work is going on rapidly at Klipheuvel, and it is expected that in about three months&#x2019; time the South African Beam station will be ready to operate. But it cannot operate without a corresponding Beam station in Great Britain or some other Dominion, and we were under the impression that at the same time as we were erecting our Beam station, a Beam station was going to be erected in Great Britain. But much to our surprise I saw that the British Postmaster-General stated in the House of Commons that there has been some delay in erecting a Beam station on account of inability to settle a site. But it was hoped then that the site would be fixed on in the near future and that the work of constructing the Beam station would be proceeded with. The Postmaster-General also mentioned that he was in touch with the Dominions on this matter, and this came as a surprise to us, because in the first place we took the action we did on the understanding that the British Post Office was doing likewise at the same time. I have cabled to the British Post Office asking what is the position exactly, and when they expect to be ready with their Beam station; I also pointed out that South Africa is going on with her&#x2019;s, and it will be ready in a few months&#x2019; time. That was a fortnight ago, and I have had no reply yet. I will be sending another cable to remind them, and ask them to let us know what exactly is the position.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Sheep and Wool Experts.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE replied to Question IV, by Mr. Struben, standing over from 31st March.</p>

<question by="#struben" to="#minister_of_agriculture">

<heading><span class="col_1861-1862" refersTo="page_1012"/>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many sheep and wool experts were employed by the Government as at the 1st July, 1924, and how many are at present so employed;</li>

<li>(2) what was the nature of their employment on the 1st July, 1924, and at what are they now employed;</li>

<li>(3) what were the areas under the supervision of each such expert at the 1st July, 1924, and what are they at present ;</li>

<li>(4) at what places were such experts stationed on the 1st July, 1924, and where are they stationed at the present time;</li>

<li>(5) what alterations have been made, or are in contemplation, by the Minister or by his department, and what are the reasons therefor, in regard to (a) the number of sheep and wool experts employed by the Agricultural Department, (<i>b</i>) the nature of their employment, (<i>c</i>) the areas allotted to the said experts, and (<i>d</i>) the headquarters of such experts?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_agriculture" to="#struben">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) 12 sheep and wool experts were so employed as at the 1st July, 1924, 12 such officers being employed at present.</li>

<li>(2) Classing of sheep for farmers, advice and instruction on all matters relating to wool and sheep, including the, purchase of rams, assistance in the formation of wool growers&#x2019; associations, judging at shows, giving of demonstrations and lectures, and, so far as sheep and wool courses at agricultural schools are concerned, giving instruction at those schools.</li>

<li>(3), (4) and (5) A statement is laid on the Table&#x2014;</li>

</ol>

<p>[Statement of sheep and wool experts, showing their headquarters and the areas under their supervision as at 1st July, 1924, and at present, and alterations now decided on in regard thereto.]</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Keysers River, Bed and Banks of.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF LANDS replied to Question II. by Sir Drummond Chaplin, standing over from 24th March.</p>

<question by="#drummond_chaplin" to="#minister_of_lands">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<p>Whether his department accepts responsibility for the control of the bed and banks of the Keysers River running from Tokai to Zand Vlei; if not, with what authority such responsibility lies?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_lands" to="#drummond_chaplin">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<p>I would state for the information of the hon. member that, after considerable research and investigation in the Surveyor-General&#x2019;s office, it is not possible to determine with accuracy the exact boundaries of the respective farms along the course of Keysers River from Tokai to Zandvlei, though it appears to be clear that in a number of cases, at any rate, the boundary extends to midstream. My department accepts such responsibility for the control of the bed and banks of the river, as may be imposed on it as the owner of any land in the bed or along the course of such river. So far as that section of the river between the main road and the Zandvlei is concerned, such ownership as at one time vested in the Government was vested in Municipality by Act No. 26 of 1897 (Cape).</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Defence Force Lieutenant Sentenced.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE replied to Question VIII. by Mr. Marwick, standing over</p>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_defence">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<p>Whether he will inform the House of the crime or offence in respect of which the person who was appointed by the Minister of Defence as a lieutenant in the Melville Rifle Association, Witwatersrand, on the 11th December, 1924 was convicted when he was sentenced to imprisonment for a period of ten years?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#marwick">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<p>Three lieutenants were appointed to the Melville Defence Rifle Association on the 11th December, 1924. It is presumed the question refers to Lieut. R. P. Erasmus, who on the 25th July, 1922, was convicted of high treason and sentenced to 10 years&#x2019; imprisonment. He was, however, released on the 19th May, 1924 and the remainder of the sentence was remitted.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Defence Corps Commandant Sentenced.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF DEFENCE replied to Question IX. by Mr. Marwick, standing over from 31st March.</p>

<question by="#marwick" to="#minister_of_defence">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) Whether the offence in respect of which the person, recently appointed by the Minister of Defence as Commandant of the Central Rand Commando, was convicted and served two months in prison was that of shooting an iron missile from a catapult at the driver of a passenger train in motion;</li>

<li>(2) whether this is the person who subsequently confessed to being one of four who derailed the Rhodesian mail train at Boons on the 9th February, 1922, and was used as King&#x2019;s evidence against his fellow accused;</li>

<li>(3) whether the District Staff Officer, Johannesburg, recommended this appointment; and</li>

<li>(4) whether officers and members of rifle associations are refusing to acknowledge this appointment, and have been known to walk away from the range upon the Commandant&#x2019;s appearance?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#marwick">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol>

<li>The answers to questions (1) and (2) are in the negative.</li>

<li>(3) It is not desirable that confidential recommendations should be disclosed.</li>

<li>(4) I have no information.</li>

</ol>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Arising out of the answer to Question No. VIII, I would ask the <span class="col_1863-1864" refersTo="page_1013"/>Minister of Defence if the_ Commissioner of Police or the Criminal Investigation Department was consulted as to the advisability of appointing this person in charge of an armed unit of the Defence Force?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>I am not in the habit of consulting the Commissioner of Police or the Criminal Investigation Department as to the appointments in the Defence Force. I may inform the hon. member that on certain allegations being made, I obtained from the C.I.D. a report, and on receipt of that report I proposed to take certain action, but I fortunately delayed that action for fresh enquiry when I found the individual referred to in that report was not the same individual.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#van_zyl" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Maj. G. B. VAN ZYL:</from>

<p>May I ask the Minister whether he consulted the District Staff Officer, and whether the District Staff Officer made any report?</p>

</question>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>Arising out of that answer which the Minister gave, I would like to get his opinion on the following.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>Is it in order when a reply has gone by, Mr. Speaker, to raise supplementary questions?</p>

</answer>

<question by="#speaker" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>It is quite in order to ask supplementary questions arising out of the reply of the Minister.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>At the time, sir?</p>

</answer>

<question by="#nathan" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Mr. NATHAN:</from>

<p>I am sure that with his usual courtesy the Minister will be pleased to answer this question. In cases in which persons have been convicted of offences akin to treason or public violence, in recent years, is it desirable to appoint such persons in charge of armed units of the citizen force?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#nathan">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>Whether it is desirable or not depends upon the circumstances, and upon the view of the person who has to exercise responsibility.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Arising out of the Minister&#x2019;s reply to Question No. VIII, might I ask why he appointed as an officer in the citizen force a man where citizenship has been suspended by reason of a sentence by a judge?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>If the hon. member will place his question on paper it will be answered.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#ballantine" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Maj. BALLANTINE:</from>

<p>Arising out of Question No. IX, I wish to ask the Minister of Defence whether a commandant of a rifle association is entitled to draw ammunition from members of the association under his command?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#ballantine">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>If the hon. member will put his question on the paper, it will be replied to.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>Arising out of Question No. VIII, I wish to ask whether the Minister is aware that the judge-president, in passing sentence on the officer referred to, said.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#anderson">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member is now trying to give information and not to seek it.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#anderson" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Mr. ANDERSON:</from>

<p>The judge-president found that the officer in question took a leading part in the attack on the Newlands police station.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#ballantine">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>I understand that the usual custom is that when a Minister states that he desires notice of a question arising out of a question on the paper, the chain of questions ceases.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#hon_members" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>HON. MEMBERS:</from>

<p>Oh no.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#hon_members">

<from>&#x2020;The MINISTER OF DEFENCE:</from>

<p>Oh yes. Hon. members know nothing about it. I was the first person to ask a supplementary question in this Parliament. If the hon. member will place his question on the paper it will be dealt with in the ordinary way.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Inadvertently, the Minister has conveyed a wrong impression to the House. The practice of asking questions arising out of another question was the practice in the old Cape Parliament, arising out of the practice in the House of Commons.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_defence" to="#hon_members">

<from>HON. MEMBERS:</from>

<p>Order.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#thomas_smartt" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Sir THOMAS SMARTT:</from>

<p>Does the Minister know that the procedure is laid down in this House?</p>

</question>

<question by="#alexander" to="#minister_of_defence">

<from>Mr. ALEXANDER:</from>

<p>Is the hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) endeavouring to make a speech under the guise of a question?</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) is not entitled to make a speech.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#speaker">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>Arising out of the Minister&#x2019;s reply&#x2014;</p>

</question>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#byron">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>I think after the Minister&#x2019;s statement that he wishes questions to be placed on the paper, hon. members should abide by that.</p>

</answer>

<question by="#byron" to="#speaker">

<from>Brig.-Gen. BYRON:</from>

<p>With all due deference to your ruling this is a question which the Minister can answer at once.</p>

</question>

<answer by="#hon_members" to="#byron">

<from>HON. MEMBERS:</from>

<p>Order.</p>

</answer>

<answer by="#speaker" to="#hon_members">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. SPEAKER:</from>

<p>The Minister has already indicated that he will answer all questions put on the paper, and I think hon. members should abide by that.</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

<oralStatements>

<heading>Railway Officers and Ultra Vires Promotions.</heading>

<p>The MINISTER OF RAILWAYS AND HARBOURS replied to Question VI, by Mr. Munnik, standing over from 3rd March.</p>

<question by="#byron" to="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours">

<heading>Question:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) How many officers have been promoted in the Railways and Harbours services in conflict with section 6 of Act No. 28 of 1912;</li>

<li>(2) how much money has been spent on such unauthorized expenditure;</li>

<li><span class="col_1865-1866" refersTo="page_1014"/>(3) whether the Minister will lay a list upon the Table of the House giving (<i>a</i>) the names of such persons unlawfully promoted, (<i>b</i>) their place of birth, (c) their age, and (<i>d</i>) their present salaries; and</li>

<li>(4) what steps have been taken to prevent any further of these ultra vires promotions?</li>

</ol>

</question>

<answer by="#minister_of_railways_and_harbours" to="#byron">

<heading>Reply:</heading>

<ol>

<li>(1) 195.</li>

<li>(2) Approximately £46,500.</li>

<li>(3) I now lay upon the Table a statement containing the information asked for.</li>

<li>(4) Section 6 of Act 28 of 1912 became effective as from 1st October, 1917. During the period of the war entirely abnormal conditions prevailed. Many members of the staff affected by section 6 were on active service, and it was found difficult to strictly apply the terms of that section without prejudicing the position of such men. In August, 1921, however, instructions were given that the terms of section 6 of the Service Act should be strictly adhered to, and these instructions have been repeated from time to time. The terms of the law are now being properly carried out.</li>

</ol>

<p>[Return of officers who have been promoted before complying with the provisions of the Railways and Harbours Service Act, 1912, relating to language qualifications. ]</p>

</answer>

</oralStatements>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#intestates&#x2019;_estates_bill">

<heading>INTESTATES&#x2019; ESTATES BILL.</heading>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">That Order of the Day No. IV, for to-day &#x2014;second reading, Intestates&#x2019; Estates Bill&#x2014;be discharged and set down for Friday, the 17th instant.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#sampson">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SAMPSON</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#the_rehoboth_disturbances_in_south-west_africa">

<heading>THE REHOBOTH DISTURBANCES IN SOUTH-WEST AFRICA.</heading>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>As requested by the right hon. member for Fort Beaufort (Sir Thomas Smartt) last night, and by the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander), I wish to make a statement this afternoon in respect of the Rehoboths, and what has taken place in South-West Africa. I think it as well to make a fairly full statement because, although at the present moment I have no reason to anticipate that anything very serious is going to occur, one never knows, and it is just as well that the country should know the whole question. The Rehoboth agreement was signed on 17th August, 1923. Although the mandate confers on the mandatory power full power of administration and legislation over the whole territory, the agreement gives extensive privileges to the Rehoboth community and they enjoy a substantial measure of self-government. A large section of the community was opposed to the agreement, alleging that it surrendered the independence which they previously possessed. It was hoped this would disappear. On the contrary, the rift widened. In January, 1924, the old Raad endeavoured to hold an election in accordance with the constitution of the community which requires the elections for the Raad to be held not later than 14th January in each year. The action of the anti-agreement section prevented the election. In April, 1924, the anti-agreement section held an election from which the members of the old Raad and their supporters were precluded from participating. The members of the old Raad, without being given any opportunity of defending themselves, were summarily disfranchized, and declared ineligible for re-election. An acting Kapitein, a Volksraad and a Parliamentsraad (the latter not provided for by the constitution) were elected. The old Raad protested against the election on the ground of irregularity. Both Raads were invited to interview the administrator at Windhoek. The old Raad accepted, but the new Raad refused point blank. As the old Raad made it clear that the election was unconstitutional and was therefore inconsistent with the Rehoboth agreement, Proclamation No. 13 of 1924 was passed, declaring the election void, ordering a new election to be held not later than 16th June, 1924, and meantime recognizing the old Raad as the lawful Raad of the community. An election was held on 16th June, 1924. Every possible effort was made to induce the new Raad to participate, and, in fact, a number of the leading members of their party were nominated for election by the old Raad, which, as the constitutional body, conducted the elections. The new Raad and, at their instigation, their supporters, resolutely declined to take part, their contention being that they were the lawfully elected Raad of the community. They, moreover, argued that participation in the election would be an acknowledgment of the Rehoboth agreement, which they repudiated. The result was that out of 500 burgers only about 80, all supporters of the old Raad, voted, and the members of the old Raad were reelected. The new Raad continued to function, so that two Raads existed simultaneously. The old Raad, while the de jure Government, represented the minority of the voters and was impotent. The new Raad was the de facto government. In July. 1924, the new Raad sent a petition to his Excellency the Governor-General asking for recognition, and a deputation was invited to interview the Prime Minister. The deputation proceeded to Cape Town and the interview took place early in August, 1924, when the Prime Minister undertook to recommend to the Union Government the recognition of the new Raad subject to certain conditions, which were set out in writing and were accepted by the deputation. They returned to Rehoboth, suppressed the contents of the Prime Minister&#x2019;s letter, and informed the burgers that they had got all they wanted; that the Prime Minister had recognised them as the Raad, and that they no longer had anything to do with the administration. They also telegraphed to the Prime Minister that the majority of the people desired the recognition of the new Raad and asked that he now fulfil his promise. They were reminded that written proof was required, <span class="col_1867-1868" refersTo="page_1015"/>and it was suggested that this take the form of a memorial signed by the majority of the burgers. This the new Raad flatly refused to give, and said their assurance should be accepted. On several occasions they went to Windhoek and interviewed the deputy-administrator, who explained again and again what was required of them. They took up the position that they could give nothing in writing, and although the powers given to the administration under the mandate were made so clear to them that there could be no misunderstanding, they made it quite evident that nothing would satisfy them except the immediate expulsion of the old Raad, the cancellation of the Rehoboth agreement, which they repudiated, and the grant of virtual independence. It was simply futile to reason with them. The old Raad also registered an emphatic protest, and declined to resign, and the Prime Minister personally addressed a long letter to the community through the deputy-administrator, copies of which were distributed throughout the Gebiet, but this had no effect. Matters were, in the circumstances, allowed to stand in abeyance in view of Gen. Hertzog&#x2019;s impending visit to South-West Africa, but in the meantime the attitude of the new Raad towards the administration and even towards the Prime Minister became more insolent and defiant than ever. On 3rd November last the Prime Minister met both Raads and the burghers at Rehoboth railway station, and he impressed upon the new Raad that they would have to act constitutionally before they could be recognized; that they would have to obey such of the laws of the administration as applied to the Gebiet and that the Union Government would see that this was done. Copies of this speech were circulated through the Gebiet. Believing that the Prime Minister&#x2019;s visit had had a good effect, the Administrator invited the two Raads to visit Windhoek with a view to settling various details. Representatives of both Raads came, but those of the new Raad were obstinate, and resolutely declined to consider any compromise with the old Raad. The Administrator suggested a fresh election, the majority of the candidates to be nominated by the new Raad, and undertook to recognize the thus elected body as the constitutional Raad, but this suggestion, like all previous efforts, was treated with contempt. At the end of November the new Raad asked for an interview with the Administrator in connection with certain regulations issued by the old Raad, relative to the export of wood and grass from the Gebiet, and on 1st December they wrote the following letter to the magistrate, Rehoboth, in reply to a message sent them by the Administrator through the magistrate intimating that he was prepared to interview them&#x2014; U geachte brief geadreseerd aan my is tegenwoordige Raad voorgelegt en legt U Edele de antwoord voor zoo als volgt: Tot dus ver hebben wy gedaan wat in ons vermogen was wyl alles niets help ontrekken wy ons vergeheeleenal en zal niet meer U Raad of Advist vragen en ook zelf door zyne Edele de Administrateur aan de hand gegevene brief niet staat is meer te bedienen, en blyven van nu aan total onafhangellyk en blyven wy openlyk zien dat die Magistraat en ook zelf die Administrateur eenmaal daarop blyfstaan om de Volk de dwingen tegen hun willen om te beugen onder die afgestottene Raad, en ook zelf de overeenkomst. Wy als gekosene van de Ryk is plichting van nu aan deze toestand in ons Gebiet te openbaaren in aller Korante tot in Europa. Wyl het voor ons onmogelyk is. Zoo als de handelwyse, die nu aangaan in Rehoboth tottal vrembt is Rehoboths bevolking zal die enigste volk wees die geen recht heef op hun eigendom. Verder legen wy U aan het hart dat wy geen wet van Nels Klarzen die hy uitspreek zal opvolgen. Wy zyn aleenlyk onderstel Raadsheeren te gehoorzamen wetten te gehoorzamen die door die Ryk gekist is wetten of order uit te spreken op Land en Bevolking. Zoo legen wy U aan het hart dat wy ons onttrekken van U. En blyven staan als gekiste Raad en dienen die Vaderlyke wette noch zelfstandig is.</p>

<p><i>Translation</i>&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Your esteemed letter addressed to me has been placed before the present Raad, which replies to your honour as follows: So far we have done what we could, and as nothing is satisfactory we withdraw ourselves altogether and will no longer ask your counsel or advice, and we are no longer able to avail ourselves even of the letter suggested by his honour the Administrator, and from now onwards we remain totally independent of you, as we see clearly that the magistrate, and also even the Administrator, finally adopt the attitude to force the people against their will to bow to the Raad which has been displaced, and also even the agreement. We, as the elected of the empire, from now onwards are in duty bound to make public in all newspapers as far as Europe, what the condition is in our territory. It is impossible for us, as the actions which are taking place at present in Rehoboth are quite strange. The Rehoboth people will be the only nation which has no right to their property. Further, we impress upon you that we shall not obey any law as laid down by Nels Klarzen. We are only bound to obey laws and (sic) those members of the Raad who have been properly elected by the Empire (Ryk) to pass laws for, or give orders to, the country and people. So we solemnly impress upon you that we separate ourselves from you. And we continue as the elected Raad and serve the ancestral laws which are still independent.</block>

<p>On 4th December, 1924, the old Raad addressed the following letter to the magistrate, Rehoboth&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Wees zoo goed en de inhoud dezes schryven aan zyn Edelachtbare de Administrateur van <span class="col_1869-1870" refersTo="page_1016"/>Zuid Wes Afrika te zenden, namelyk, aangezien de wanordelyke toestand in Rehoboth op een punt heerscht die wyze krachten te bovengaat is het my als tydelyke Kapitein en Raads plicht om U edele te kennen geven, niet zonder diepe leedwezen, enn aangezien het my een bekende zaak is wat de gevolgen gewees was en kan worden, als er niet spoedig een einde aan gedaan worde. En aangezien niets by Zyn Edele onbekend is van af de onder handelen van de overeenkomst tot nu. Het is Zyn Edele bekend dat de Leiders van de Oppesisieaf de begin van de Overeenkomst de gemeente met hunne leugens opgehits had tegen de Regering Unie Governement en Raad, en tot nu toe nog met leugens voort gaan en ophits en niet alleen ons gemeente maar te meer de inboorling, achten wy het onze plicht dewyl wy machteloos ben om de toestand te keeren en dewyl de leiders van af de komste van de Eerste Minister en vriendelyke raadgeving van U edele de 17 Nov. j.l. te meer in hunne dwalende is zoo ernstig dat niettegenstaande hunne bespottelyke brieven aan de Raad en Regering zy zich er op beroemen voor de brieven die zy gezond had voortgevende dat de Regering geen recht hadden zich met Rehoboth te bemoeien niet alleen dit alles maar het is zooverre dat sommige van ons Raads in levensgevaar verkeeren daar zy zich openlyk verklaren om de Raad gevangen te nemen en wat kan de gevolg wezen daar niemand van ons ons zal doen laten gevangen nemen. Daarom roep ons de hulp in voorname leiders en Opposisie uit het midden van de Gemeente nemen hoewel wy Zijn Edele niet wil voorschrijven maar omdat ons omstandigheid van de landsbevolking weet verzoek ons zyne Edele om niet lang uitsel te gebruiken maar om spoedig op te treden, dat er een einde kom aan die hachelyke toestand. De Raad als wettige verantwoordelyk voor de belangen van Gemeente leggen U Edele op het hart, dat de wettige Provisionele Kapitein en Raad geweze burgers genoemd worden, door de leiders van de Opposisie, en wy vreezen voor de inboorlingen, daar zy zo opgewonden is, dat het onveilig voor ons partij zoo wel de blanke inwoners van het distrik, wy hadden niets nagelaten die U Edele niet bekend is en die Administrasie kan niet toelaat dat wetteloos heid verder zoo voort gaan. Eindigen in afwachten op een spoedige optreden want de bestimming van alles is de 14 en 15ste dezer, daan zal de besluit platsvinden.</block>

<p><i>Translation</i>&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Be so good as to send the contents of this letter to his honour the Administrator of South-West Africa, namely: Inasmuch as disorder prevails to such an extent in Rehoboth as to be beyond wise powers, it is my duty as temporary captain and member of the Raad to inform your honour, not without deep regret&#x2014;and seeing that it is known to me what the consequences were, and may be, if an end is not soon put to it, and seeing his honour is fully informed regarding the negotiations for the agreement up to the present. His honour knows that the leaders of the Opposition from the commencement of the agreement have stirred up the community against the administration, the Union Government and the Raad, and still continue stirring up with lies, not only our community, but more especially the aborigines, we consider it our duty, as we are powerless to change the position, and as the leaders from the time of the visit of the Prime Minister and the friendly counsel of your honour on 17th November last are going further in their errors, (the position) [words in parenthesis not in original] is so serious that notwithstanding their ridiculous letters to the Raad and the Government, they pride themselves on the letters which they sent representing that the Government had no right to interfere with Rehoboth. Nor is this all, but things have gone so far that some of us members of the Raad are in danger of our lives, as they openly declare that they will capture the members of the Raad, and what may the result not be, as none of us will allow ourselves to be captured and, therefore, we call for the assistance of important leaders and the Opposition in the community. Although we do not desire to dictate what his honour has to do yet, because we know the conditions of the people of the country we request his honour not to delay for a long time, but to take speedy action so that an end may be put to this terrible state of affairs. The Raad being legally responsible for the interests of the community impresses this earnestly upon you: That the lawful provisional captain and the Raad shall be called ex-burghers (sie) (geweze burgers genoemd worden) by the leaders of the Opposition, and we have fears with regard to the aborigines as they are so excited that it is unsafe for our party as well as for the European inhabitants of the district. We have omitted nothing that your honour does not know, and the administration cannot permit lawlessness to continue in this way. We conclude in the hope of speedy action being taken, because everything is arranged for the 14th and 15th instant, as the resolution will then be taken.</block>

<p>The following telegram was sent by the new Raad to the secretary for South-West Africa at Windhoek on the 30th ultimo&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Verhouding vanaf Woensdag zeer ernstig en hoog bied ernstig geen geweld uitvoeren ganse burgerryk weiger brandyster aan te nemen onder die overeenkomst wijl wij die overeenkomst niet aangenomen had bied onderdanigs dat Magistraat geen verdere stappen nemen raad en Burgers weiger gevangenisneming.</block>

<p><i>Translation</i>&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">The position from and after Wednesday was very serious and critical; pray earnestly to use no force; whole community citizens refuse <span class="col_1871-1872" refersTo="page_1017"/>accept branding-iron under agreement. As we have not accepted the agreement, humbly pray that magistrate take no further step. Raad and citizens refuse arrest.</block>

<p>To this the following reply was sent&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">U telegram vandag inhoud genoteer. Magistraat reporteer dat sekere persone wat die gewone wette van Suid Wes Afrika oortree het en vir die arrestasie van wie derhalwe lasbriewe deur sy hof uitgereik is deur u gemeente beskerm word teen sodanige arrestasie. U sal dit wel waardeer dat die wette van die land gehoorsaam moet word deur al die onderdane afgesien van rang stand of kleur en ek vertrou dus dat u gemeente sal realiseer hoe gevaarlik die gevolge sal wees van teenstand teen die uitvoer van die wette en dat hulle wyser raad sal volg. Ek verstaan van U magistraat dat u een telegram aan die Goewerneur-generaal gestuur het waarop u antwoord verlang en dat hy ten uwe behoewe per telegram gevra het dat antwoord sal bespoedig word.</block>

<p><i>Translation</i>&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Your telegram to-day contents noted. Magistrate reports that certain persons who have contravened the common laws of South-West Africa and for whose arrest warrants have been issued by his court, are being protected by your community against such arrest. You will certainly appreciate that the laws of the land must be obeyed by all the subjects, irrespective of rank, position or colour, and I trust, therefore, that your community will realize how dangerous will be the results of opposition to the execution of the laws, and that they will follow wiser counsel. I understand from your magistrate that you have sent a telegram to the Governor-General to which you desire an answer, and that he on your behalf has asked by telegraph that the reply be expedited.</block>

<p>On the instructions of the Prime Minister, the following message was telegraphed on 30th March, 1925, to the magistrate, Rehoboth, for delivery to the new Raad in reply to the telegram to the Governor-General&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In naam van die Regering moet ek u mee deel dat aan u versoek om verder ondersoek geen gevolg kan gegee word nie. Die Regering het reeds die uiterste mate van geduld en lankmoedigheid met die Volk van Rehoboth betoon ten einde hul tot besef te breng van die onverstandigheid van hul handelwyse en in die hoop dat hul tot besinning sou kom en sig sou onderwerp aan Wet en orde. Daar hul in stede van gehoor te gee aan die goeie raad van die Regering meer en meer toon daarop uit te wees om wetteloosheid en ordeloosheid in die hand te werk kan die Regering nou nie anders dan om bevel te gee dat die Wet sal uitgevoer en handhaaf word en dat waar dit nie geskied die skuldige dadelilc sal tereg gestel en gestraf word. Die Volk van Rehoboth moet of gehoorsaam of hy sal die nodige straf moet ondergaan. Die keuse lê by jullie en jullie sal verantwoordelik gehou word vir elk druppel bloed wat daar mag val.</block>

<p><i>Translation</i>&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">In the name of the Government, I must inform you that your request for further investigation cannot be acceded to. The Government has already shown the greatest possible amount of patience and long suffering with the people of Rehoboth in order to get them to see the stupidity of their action and in the hope that they will come to their senses and submit themselves to law and order. As, instead of listening to the good advice of the Government, they show that they are out more and more to create lawlessness and disorder, the Government can at present do nothing else than give orders that the law shall take its course and be maintained, and that where it is not obeyed, the guilty ones shall be at once brought before the court and punished. The people of Rehoboth must either obey or undergo the necessary punishment. The choice lies with you, and you will be held responsible for every drop of blood which may be shed.</block>

<p>On 31st March, the magistrate of Rehoboth telegraphed the reply of the new Raad, which was as follows&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Deel mee aan Eerste Minister dat wy blyf staan onveranderlyk op ons rechten. Wetten van die overeenkomst nemen wy niet aan dat is ons standpunt en besluit die wy u voorleggen.</block>

<p><i>Translation</i>&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Inform Prime Minister that we insist unalterably on our rights. We do not accept the laws of the agreement. That is our standpoint and resolution which we place before you.</block>

<p>The present position is that there are about 400 Rehoboth burghers in the village of Rehoboth, with about 200 Hereros, who are openly defying the administration. The Rehoboth burghers possess modern rifles. Practically all of them received a military training under the German regime, when they were obliged to furnish a considerable number of men annually for training and service. About 150 police are at Rehoboth, and a portion of the burgher force has been called out. The mobilization is proceeding well, although it is being hampered by scarcity of horses owing to an abnormal epidemic of horse sickness, the long distances, and the state of the country as a result of heavy rains. It may added that these causes prevented a more rapid concentration of the police in the first instance. The Administrator has gone to Rehoboth, where he is due to-day. Three aeroplanes, under the command of Col. Sir Pierre van Rypevelt, are also on their way to South-West Africa. As far as these aeroplanes are concerned, and the horse sickness, the trouble is that we don&#x2019;t know how far the agitation may enter into the minds of the natives on the outlying farms. I therefore <span class="col_1873-1874" refersTo="page_1018"/>asked my friend the hon. Minister of Defence to send over three aeroplanes to help the police. The most serious aspect of the attitude of the opposition party in Rehoboth during the past 18 months has been the effect on the natives, who have apparently come to regard the Gebiet as a sort of haven where no law exists, the laws of the administration being repudiated by the new Raad, and the laws of the community, although nominally operative in the Gebiet, not being enforced. When the police patrol visited the Gebiet in December last the attitude of the natives, incited by the opposition section, was openly hostile, and now 200 Hereros have joined the recalcitrants in Rehoboth. It follows that the natives do not wish to see our laws enforced in the Gebiet. The manner in which the opposition party has defied the administration has made the natives defiant too. The position in the Gebiet is being very closely watched by the natives throughout the territory and an initial disaster might have widespread results. It has therefore been deemed advisable to wait until we are strong enough to act sately&#x2014;a step which also has the advantage that it may overawe resistance. In conclusion, may be emphasized that the present trouble is not due merely to the failure of the Rehoboth people to comply with the branding law. They have no objection to the branding law in principle&#x2014;no more objection to it than any other law, but as they have made abundantly clear, they object to all the laws of the administration applied to the Gebiet under the Rehoboth agreement, which they have definitely repudiated. The branding law was merely selected by the administration as the most convenient for bringing the matter to an issue. The following telegram has just been received from the Administrator&#x2014;</p>

<block name="quote">Just arrived here (Rehoboth). Do not expect news for a few days.</block>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>I should like to take this opportunity of thanking the Prime Minister for the full statement he has given to the House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>It is not usual to discuss Ministerial statements.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#thomas_smartt">

<from>Sir <person refersTo="hansard_za">THOMAS SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>May I be allowed to say, sir, that in a case of this sort, of such great importance, I think the hon. the Prime Minister can rely upon the non-party support of every section of this House. We hope that a state of order will be established without any loss of life. We appreciate the statement made by the Prime Minister, and he has the sympathy of all sections of the House in dealing with an extremely difficult situation.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>May I ask the Prime Minister a question on this matter?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Is there any objection to the hon. member for Benoni asking a question? There being no objection, the hon. member may ask his question.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I want to ask the Prime Minister if he will be good enough to tell us in view of the far-reaching importance of the statement he has made, and the conditions that are obtaining up there, whether he is prepared to have appointed a commission of inquiry of independent men, not your Native Affairs Commission or anybody that is in being, but some independent person or persons, to inquire into the whole of the circumstances? This is not the first time, and I hope the Prime Minister will be prepared to accede to that request.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>May I just supplement that question?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>Is there any objection? There being no objection, the hon. member may proceed.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>May I ask the Prime Minister whether it is not a fact that these people have actually sent a protest to the League of Nations in regard to their grievances, and whether that does not make the request of the hon. member (Mr. Madeley) a necessary one, because at the same time that steps are taken to safeguard law and order, would it not be as well to take steps so that the grievances referred to in that communication should be investigated, not in Europe, but here, by some impartial person appointed by the Government?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>May I just say this, that they sent a petition to the League of Nations, but it is not a petition for redress of grievances. It is really a petition in which they make certain claims&#x2014;the claim of independence and the claim to a further extension of territory. They are legal claims. So the hon. member (Mr. Madeley) can understand that, as far as that is concerned, no commission can be instituted. You cannot appoint a commission to inquire into legal claims. I might say, however, that a little more than a year ago a commission was appointed to inquire into this claim of theirs for an extension of territory. The commission reported adversely to that. It is an old claim which they had made under the German Government.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Wasn&#x2019;t it a protest against restriction? Were they not taking some of their territory away?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#prime_minister">

<from><span class="col_1875-1876" refersTo="page_1019"/>The <person refersTo="hansard_za">PRIME MINISTER</person>:</from>

<p>That is what they aver. They said that we, as the Germans had done before us, had taken territory which belonged to them. In regard to that an investigation was held, and the report came out that it was not so. In regard to that, I may say that Mr. Hofmeyr even went so far as to offer&#x2014;and that offer still stands open to them&#x2014;that if they would only come to peace amongst one another, he was prepared to buy up eight farms which they had sold to white people and make them a present of these. He had actually bought four or five farms of the eight. Two or three people would not sell, and that in regard to those cases he said he would give these people £5,000 in addition. My hon. friend can understand that the Government could not think of sending to-day a commission to go and inquire, because, before you can inquire, you must have obedience to the orders of the authorities. If a commission will satisfy them, when once that is done, if necessary I shall go on the commission myself, but at the moment I cannot think of it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Will you consider it?</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#south_african_association_incorporation_act_1906_(cape)_amendment_(private)_bill">

<heading>SOUTH AFRICAN ASSOCIATION INCORPORATION ACT, 1906 (CAPE), AMENDMENT (PRIVATE) BILL.</heading>

<block name="quote">First Order read: Second reading, South African Association Incorporation Act, 1906 (Cape), Amendment (Private) Bill.</block>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>This is a motion for the second reading of a small private Bill promoted by the South African Association, a company established with unlimited liability to undertake the administration of estates and other business, such as these trust associations that we are familiar with generally undertake. It was constituted by an Act of the Cape Legislature in 1835, so that it goes back to nearly one hundred years. Since then various Acts have been passed amending the constitution. The capital has been raised from £7,875, with which it started to £29,000, at which it stands now. The constitution, as I have said, has been laid down from time to time in private Acts of the Cape Legislature, and, consequently, the company has to come to this Parliament when it requires an amendment of its constitution, as it does now. It will be seen from the balance-sheet of the association that it carries on business on a very considerable scale. It has a reserve fund, according to the last balance-sheet of £112,500, it has trust funds belonging to wards and other persons of £305,000, and it has funds in hand amounting to nearly £3,000,000, representing trusts which are separately administered entirely from its own business and kept separately from its own funds. The charges which it makes for carrying on its business are also regulated by its statutes. The purpose of this small Bill is to enable the association to divide its shares into shares of smaller denomination. Under the existing constitution its shares are of the nominal value of £175.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Are there any fresh shares to be created?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>No. The reason for asking for this change is that the business is a prosperous one and a well-managed one, and the result is that the value of the shares, nominally £175, has risen until it is now £850, and it is felt by the shareholders of the association and by the directors that this is too large an amount to enable the public freely to acquire these shares and hold them, and that to reduce the value of the shares by splitting them would enable a larger number of the public to take up shares and buy them than is now possible. The result is that the shareholders in general meeting have agreed to the proposal embodied in this Bill, under which each share of the nominal value of £175 will be divided into five shares of £35 each.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>The same value?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>Exactly, simply putting five shares for one. It is merely dividing each of the existing shares into five, without any increase of the nominal value or in any other way. There are one or two consequential provisions which are required owing to this division. The existing constitution provides that no person shall be capable of holding more than one share. This Act will alter that to three shares, in view of the fact that the shares are being divided, but it preserves the rights of existing shareholders at the commencement of the Act. Then an alteration is made in regard to the qualifications of the directors. The present qualification is that a director shall hold one share. In consequence of the division of the value of the share, the Bill provides that he must hold three shares. These are all the provisions of this Bill. I do not think I need take up the time of the House in explaining it at any length, although I shall be glad to answer any questions that may be raised in so far as my information enables me to do so. The Bill has been before a select committee, and the report of that committee is on the Table. The Select Committee found that the preamble was proved, and reported the Bill to this House without amendment, and I, therefore, move the second reading. I move&#x2014;</p>

<p>That the Bill be now read a second time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>It is a very simple business transaction. This is a well-established company. The hon. member has put the facts very clearly before the House, and it is a simple matter which is not going to add to the capital in any way. The capital is just under £30,000. The association has pursued a useful career.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pearce">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PEARCE</person>:</from>

<p>I am not against the alteration in the deeds, but what I want to emphasize is that in some instances these things are not wholly to the benefit of the original shareholders. I would like to take a parallel in the case of a certain company where you have the original shares divided by five. The shares were then sold, and the persons who purchased them at a high figure wanted a larger profit. <span class="col_1877-1878" refersTo="page_1020"/>The result was that the profit had to be met by fictitious methods. I should like to have an assurance from the mover that this is not the method, I hope, whereby in years to come the profits will not be legitimately shown on balance sheets. I should also like to know that on subsequent balance sheets the shares will be shown at their right value, and that there will be no question of misleading the public as to the legitimate value of the shares. While the capital is less than £30,000 they have a reserve fund of £112,500. This House must safeguard not only the persons who have the money, but also those persons who have to provide the money. I want not only the shareholders to be safeguarded, but the people to be safeguarded as well. If, under the present system it is possible for an individual or a company to make tremendous profits, we should not do anything to prohibit them from doing it when they conform to the laws of the land, but there should be some safeguard when they come to us to alter shares. We should be also assured of the fact that in time to come not only they but all people would know the true value of the shares, and that it would not be used to cover up the tremendous profits which they have been making.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>May I say to my hon. friend who has just sat down that the preamble states that one of the objects is to safeguard people who are connected with the concern. What he worries about is probably safeguarding those whose money is held in trust for them. They say, frankly, that they want to alter the shares so as to rope in morel of the public in order that they may have something to fall back upon in the event of a bad time. While I recognize that, and while I am not going to oppose the second reading, I do not see the overwhelming necessity of our granting this. By splitting the shares up there is no fresh capital brought in. The original capital is there, but they stand on the market at a tremendous premium of 5 to 1. Roughly speaking, each share, according to the preamble, is worth five times its par value. That in itself shows the company to be in a remarkably strong position, I am forced to this conclusion&#x2014;that the whole object of this proposal is not so much to safeguard the position of the company by spreading this unlimited liability over a larger portion of the public, but to make it a more easily and negotiable concern. I do not think the idea is to cover up the profits. You always have on record that at some time or another these shares were so split. There is very little possibility of the real profits being hidden by this means. What I fear is that the whole object is to make them more easily negotiable. I am convinced that the main object is that they may buy and sell more easily. They could force up the price of the market. Surely we make take these people as honest people. The hon. mover (Mr. Duncan) is, I am sure, an honourable man, and I am sure he would not lend himself to anything dishonourable. We have a right to assume that some of the public are asking for these shares, and in turn, there are holders of these shares desirous of selling them, feeling that it is a quid pro quo for his money. Don&#x2019;t you see that immediately that lends itself to trafficking in those shares? I am not going to oppose the Bill because I do not understand much about it, but we have had so much experience of the way shares are wangled that we have got to be remarkably careful. I would like the member to tell us. The hon. member for Liesbeek has rightly stated that here you have an original capital of £30,000. That is the money that has built up this enormous value of shares, with a reserve of £112,000. The company are administering huge sums of money. In regard to the point made by the hon. mover of the motion that they spread their unlimited liability among a larger number of the public, if that is the real object, I suggest why should you stop at 125? Why not split them up into 175 to one and make the price of the shares £5 in value? Then you reach a wider public and your unlimited liability becomes more limited because you are in-roping a larger number of the public in order to meet that liability.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#hay">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">HAY</person>:</from>

<p>If it is dangerous, why bring in more people?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I am not suggesting that that should be done, I am merely dealing with the argument. I see in this merely a desire to make it possible to make money by making the shares much more negotiable. I hope the hon. member, when he replies, will give information on that point.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>May I point out that this company is incorporated by an Act of Parliament. An ordinary company can, in the Cape Province, effect this kind of change under section 50 of the Company&#x2019;s Act of 1922, but this company cannot, and that is the reason for coming to the House. This company is an old company which originally started with 21 members, and they used their capital to help people to administer estates, and to-day they have under administration millions of pounds. The hon. member asks why not make the shares £1? But in terms of the Act, an hon. member could not become a shareholder if the other shareholders objected. A man buying a share in this company becomes a member of a partnership, and therefore he has to be approved of by the other shareholders, and that is why the company doesn&#x2019;t want to make the nominal value of the shares too small. If you make it £1 you would have to get the consent of 29.000 people. In addition to that there is the additional safeguard that if my hon. friend were to place money on deposit with this company or make them executors in his will, if the number of shareholders is increased, every man or institution doing business with the company will have the additional security of the assets of the new shareholders. A man dies in Cape Town having one share in his estate. You cannot always find a man who will pay up £840 to become a shareholder in an unlimited concern. It was originally a partnership which was <span class="col_1879-1880" refersTo="page_1021"/>sanctioned by Parliament, and I think it is in the interests not only of the shareholders, but everybody doing business with the company to allow the shares to be split up. We have four of these unlimited companies in Cape Town that administer estates.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>They are all in a pretty healthy position.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>Yes, and if you go to any one of them and put your money with them, you can be certain you will never lose that money, because every shareholder is liable to an unlimited extent. This company has done good in the past when money was scarce in the Free State. It was the first Cape Trust Company that lent money on bond in the Free State. It has been instrumental in developing the country.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#duncan">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">DUNCAN</person>:</from>

<p>I would like to answer one or two points raised by hon. members. The hon. member for Liesbeek (Mr. Pearce) said he regarded this with some suspicion because it might lead to the association having to make larger profits in order to satisfy a greater number of shareholders who would come in, and he based his argument on the analogy of the Cement Company. The charges that this association makes for the work it does are laid down by Act of Parliament. It cannot raise its charges. I do not think the two cases are at all analogous, and as regards profits they are shown quite clearly in the balance-sheet. I cannot give the hon. member the guarantee he asks for that these balance-sheets will always be drawn up as clearly as they are now, but his best guarantee is what has always been done in the past. Now with regard to the reserve fund, the Act under which the company works at present requires the directors to create a reserve fund out of profits, and distribution is restricted until this reserve fund is at least £100.000. That amount has been exceeded, and that of course lends additional security to the persons whose funds are entrusted to the association. The hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) raised a point which has been answered by the hon. member for Ceres (Mr. Roux). The splitting of the shares makes it more easy to dispose of them. I see nothing in that. I know there have been cases where the splitting of shares has been done for speculative purposes to create a market, but that consideration cannot apply to these shares, which carry unlimited liability, and the shareholders have to see that a new shareholder is a man of sufficient financial standing. To that extent the broadening of the basis of the shareholding increases the security.</p>

<p>The motion was agreed to.</p>

<p>Bill read a second time; House to go into Committee now.</p>

<p>House in Committee:</p>

<p>The clauses, preamble and title of the Bill having been agreed to.</p>

<p>House Resumed:</p>

<p>Bill reported without amendment, and real a third time.</p>

</speech>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#admission_of_attorneys_bill">

<heading>ADMISSION OF ATTORNEYS BILL.</heading>

<p>Second Order read; second reading,&#x2014;Admission of Attorneys Bill.</p>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. M. BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<p>That the Bill be now read a second time.</p>

<p>In moving the second reading of this Bill, I wish to state that in 1916 a committee of this House sat upon the private Bill of the Cape of Good Hope Law Society. I happened to be a member of that committee, and it was the general opinion that the period of training for attorneys was too short. It was urged that there was going to be a consolidating Bill dealing with the matter. I understand that such a Bill has been in the pigeon-holes of the Government, but after waiting nine years, I have ventured to bring this matter forward. It has received the approbation of every one to whom I have spoken about it. There was a time, forty years ago, when attorneys were very scarce, and the period of articles was reduced from five years to three. I do not think the same applies now, nor do I think you could name any profession where the period of articles is as low as three years. I he period of apprenticeship in Natal is five years. Not a single objection has been raised to the Bill, and the consensus of opinion is in its favour. No person, who has entered into articles of apprenticeship before the Bill becomes law will be affected, so there is no interference with vested interests.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the hon. member will forgive me if I move the adjournment of the debate, for I would like to see a fuller attendance of legal members, so that we can have the benefit of their advice.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#snow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SNOW</person>:</from>

<p>I second. I think it advisable that we should take the evidence of people who may be affected by the Bill. In some cases, three years may be sufficient in which to turn out a smart lawyer, but in other cases five years may not be enough.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I think the hon. member would be wise to accept the proposal, for the Bill is of a far-reaching character. The extension of the period of articles from three years to five might press very hardly on the poorer section of the community. We should have a statement in writing from the law societies with regard to the Bill, and the general public should have an opportunity of putting their case before a select committee. After the second reading has been taken, I hone the hon. member in charge of the Bill will agree to the measure going to a select committee. I sympathize with the wish of the mover to raise the standard of the profession, but it would be unwise to rush the matter.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#pirow">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">PIROW</person>:</from>

<p>I hope the hon. member for Benoni (Mr. Madeley) will not press his motion for the adjournment of the debate. It is quite obvious that the contents of the Bill have been known to the legal profession and the general public for a considerable time. The Bill was published as far back as two months ago, and <span class="col_1881-1882" refersTo="page_1022"/>copies were sent to the various law societies. I know that the Transvaal Law Society is fully acquainted with all the details of the Bill. If the debate is adjourned there is very small possibility of the Bill becoming law this session. Undoubtedly there is a certain urgency in the matter, as for years past there has been an agitation to extend the period of apprenticeship to five years.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>Owing to the urgent representations of my hon. friend, I will withdraw the amendment, with the leave of the House.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#werth">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WERTH</person>:</from>

<p>I am very glad that the hon. member for Three Rivers (Mr. D. M. Brown) has introduced this Bill. Not that I feel very strongly for the amendment he wishes to make, but because I think that the time has come for Parliament to consider whether the qualifications which are laid down for persons wishing to become attorneys actually meet the requirements of our country to-day. According to my personal view the qualifications we demand of attorneys to-day are not sufficiently high. I would like the House to remember one things namely, that attorneys in our villages in South Africa are influential men. The attorney is a man of especially great influence and weight. Many of your attorneys are members of Parliament for the constituency where they are practising. Moreover, we know that the attorney is often also a member of the School Board, school committees, etc. The attorney is often mayor of the town and in every respect he plays a leading part in the South African villages.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>What has the training of clerks to do with it?</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#werth">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WERTH</person>:</from>

<p>I think that for the reasons I have mentioned your attorney in South Africa must be a man of higher education than the standard demanded to-day. To-day the requirements are only the matriculation certificate and three years&#x2019; service of articles in an attorney&#x2019;s office. I do not approve of an extension to five years. That is not sufficient. We know what happens in large towns. The articled clerk learns only a department of the work.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#roux">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ROUX</person>:</from>

<p>He doesn&#x2019;t even learn how to prepare bills of costs.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#werth">

<from>&#x2020;*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">WERTH</person>:</from>

<p>I do not think much of the extension of the articles, but the academic qualifications must be raised from matriculation to B.A. I want an attorney to be a man who has a degree and who will afterwards serve a certain probation in an attorney&#x2019;s office. If we fix the standard of B.A., then he will be three years at the university and later acquire certain practical experience in an attorney&#x2019;s office, then he will be in a position to play a leading role in our villages and our social life where his lot is cast. Therefore I am prepared to vote for the second reading, because that only means that we are sending the principle to the Select Committee to inquire whether an amendment should not be made with respect to the qualification for admission as an attorney. The Select Committee will have to see how the qualification must be varied, and if the hon. member is prepared to agree that the Bill shall be referred after the second reading to a Select Committee, I am prepared to vote for the second reading.</p>

<p>Motion agreed to; Bill read a second time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<p>That the Bill be referred to a Select Committee for inquiry and report.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. M. BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>I am willing to accept that, but I think it is going to serve no purpose. The thing has been well known and it has been notified in the public press, but if it relieves the mind of hon. members I will accept it.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>I may say that the hon. member for Hanover Street (Mr. Alexander) should not move that the Bill be referred to a Select Committee. The Bill is under the care of the hon. member for Three Rivers (Mr. D. M. Brown), and, if he does not move for a Select Committee, the hon. member for Hanover Street can do so by way of amendment.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#brown">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">D. M. BROWN</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<p>That the Bill be referred to a Select Committee for consideration and report, the committee to have power to take evidence and call for papers.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#alexander">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">ALEXANDER</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#speaker">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SPEAKER</person>:</from>

<p>That puts it in order.</p>

</speech>

<p>The motion was agreed to.</p>

</debateSection>

<debateSection name="#magistrates&#x2019;_courts_act_1917_further_amendment_bill">

<heading>MAGISTRATES&#x2019; COURTS ACT 1917, FURTHER AMENDMENT BILL.</heading>

<p>Third Order read: Second reading, Magistrates&#x2019; Courts Act, 1917, Further Amendment Bill.</p>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<p>That the Bill be now read a second time.</p>

<p>This is a small amendment to section 28 of the Magistrates&#x2019; Court Act. In that section the magistrate has jurisdiction where a cause of action has wholly arisen. The amendment is to give the magistrate jurisdiction where a debt or claim has wholly or in part arisen. Under the old Natal Magistrates&#x2019; Court Act the amendment referred to was embodied in the Bill, namely, that the magistrate had jurisdiction where a debt or claim had wholly or in part arisen in his district. There is also a similar provision in the English County Court Act, and I would like to read that portion of the Act which gives this jurisdiction to a magistrate.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#reyburn">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">REYBURN</person>:</from>

<p>On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, there appears to be no quorum.</p>

<p>House counted, and Mr. Speaker declared that a quorum was present.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>I want to refer to; the County Courts Act in England, where a similar provision is made. Section 74 of the County Courts Act of 1888 provides for jurisdiction &#x201C;in a district in which the cause of action or claim wholly or in part arises.&#x201D; The Natal Act of 1896 had almost an exactly similar provision <span class="col_1883-1884" refersTo="page_1023"/>in section 48, which provided that the magistrate may grant leave to sue where the debt or claim has wholly or in part been contracted or arisen within his district. That section of the Natal Act operated from 1896 until the Magistrates&#x2019; Court Act of the Union was passed in 1917. As you know, Mr. Speaker, the provision under the old Natal Magistrates Court Act which gave the right to sue where a debt had been wholly or in part contracted was of very great advantage and worked very satisfactorily in Natal. Difficulties have arisen as to the interpretation of what &#x201C;a cause of action&#x201D; means, but the courts have laid down finally that every fact which is material to be proved to entitle a plaintiff to succeed, and every fact that a defendant would have a right to traverse, forms an essential part of the cause of action, and the cause of action can only be said to arise within a district where all such material facts arose. In the amending Bill now under discussion the words &#x201C;cause of action&#x201D; have been struck out and the words &#x201C;claim or debt&#x201D; substituted in place thereof. The latter follows the words which were embodied in the Natal Act. Under the present Act the cause of action must wholly arise within the district in which the claim is made, but the Bill now submitted substitutes the words &#x201C;cause of action&#x201D; by the words debt or claim,&#x201D; and says that if the debt or claim has partly or wholly arisen&#x2014;</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#madeley">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">MADELEY</person>:</from>

<p>On a point of order, I regret to have to call your attention, Mr. Speaker, to the fact that there is no quorum.</p>

<p>House counted, and Mr. Speaker declared that a quorum was present.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>I do not intend to unnecessarily weary the House, and I now move the second reading of this Bill.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#swart">

<from>*Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SWART</person>:</from>

<p>I do not wish to go into the matter. I only want to ask the hon. member whether he is prepared that we should refer this Bill to a Select Committee. It can go to the same Select Committee as the previous Bill. I think that it has been rather loosely drafted, and I think that it will be a good thing to refer it to a Select Committee, which need not sit long. There the matter can be put in order.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>&#x2020;Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>I am quite prepared to accept the proposal made by the hon. member for Ladybrand (Mr. Swart).</p>

<p>Motion agreed to; Bill read a second time.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#nel">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">NEL</person>:</from>

<p>I move&#x2014;</p>

<p>That the Bill be referred to the Select Committee on the Admission of Attorneys Bill for consideration and report.</p>

</speech>

<speech by="#smartt">

<from>Mr. <person refersTo="hansard_za">SMARTT</person>:</from>

<p>seconded.</p>

</speech>

<p>Agreed to.</p>

<adjournment>

<p>The House adjourned at <recordedTime time="1925-04-03T16:30:00">4.30 p.m.</recordedTime></p>

</adjournment>

</debateSection>

</debateSection>

